

I


ALMOST all literary roads lead back to Greece.  Obscure as still remains
the origin of that _genre_ of romance to which the tales before us
belong, there is little doubt that their models, if not their originals,
were once extant at Constantinople.  Though in no single instance has the
Greek original been discovered of any of these romances, the mere name of
their heroes would be in most cases sufficient to prove their Hellenic or
Byzantine origin.  Heracles, Athis, Porphirias, Parthenopeus, Hippomedon,
Protesilaus, Cliges, Cleomades, Clarus, Berinus—names such as these can
come but from one quarter of Europe, and it is as easy to guess how and
when they came as whence.  The first two crusades brought the flower of
European chivalry to Constantinople and restored that spiritual union
between Eastern and Western Christendom that had been interrupted by the
great schism of the Greek and Roman Churches.  The crusaders came mostly
from the Lands of Romance.  Permanent bonds of culture began to be formed
between the extreme East and the extreme West of Europe by intermarriage,
by commerce, by the admission of the nobles of Byzantium within the
orders of chivalry.  These ties went on increasing throughout the twelfth
century till they culminated at its close with the foundation of the
Latin kingdom of Constantinople.  In European literature these historic
events are represented by the class of romances represented in this
volume, which all trace back to versions in verse of the twelfth century,
though they were done into prose somewhere in Picardy during the course
of the next century.  Daphnis and Chloe, one might say, had revived after
a sleep of 700 years, and donned the garb and spoke the tongue of
Romance.



II


The very first of our tales illustrates admirably the general course of
their history.  It is, in effect, a folk etymology of the name of the
great capital of the Eastern Empire.  Constantinople, so runs the tale,
received that name instead of Byzantium, because of the remarkable career
of one of its former rulers, Coustans.  M. Wesselovsky has published in
_Romania_ (vi. 1. seq.) the _Dit de l’empereur Constant_, the verse
original of the story before us, and in this occur the lines—

   Pour ce que si _nobles_ estoit
   Et que nobles œvres faisoit
   L’appielloient _Constant le noble_
   Et pour çou ot _Constantinnoble_
   Li cytés de Bissence a non.

From which it would appear that we are mistaken in thinking of the
capital of Turkey as the “City of Constantine,” whereas it is rather
Constant the Noble, and the name Coustant is further explained as
“costing” too much.  Constantinople, therefore, is the city that costs
too much, according to the prophetic etymology of the folk.

The only historic personage with whom this Coustant can be identified is
Constantius Chlorus, the father of Constantine the Great and the husband
of St. Helena, to whom legend ascribes the discovery of the Holy Rood.
But the Coustans of our story never lived or ruled on land or sea, and
his predecessor, Muselinus, is altogether unknown to Byzantine annals,
while their interlaced history reads more like a page of the _Arabian
Nights_ than of Gibbon.

But such a legend could scarcely have arisen elsewhere than at
Constantinople.  It is one of those fables that the disinherited folk
have at all times invented to solace themselves for their disinherison.
The sudden and fated rise of one of the folk to the heights of power
occurs sufficiently often to afford material for the day dreams of
ambitious youth.  There is even a popular tendency to attribute a lowly
origin to all favourites of fortune, as witness the legends that have
grown up about the early careers of Beckett, Whittington, Wolsey, none of
whom was as ill-born as popular tradition asserts.  Yet such legends
invariably grow up in the country of their heroes, which is the only one
sufficiently interested in their career, so far as the common people are
concerned.  Hence the very nature of our story would cause us to locate
its origin on the banks of the Bosphorus.

But once originated in this manner, there is no limit to the travels it
may take.  Curiously enough, the very legend before us in all its details
has found a home among the English peasantry.  The Rev. S. Baring-Gould
collected in Yorkshire a story which he contributed to Henderson’s
_Folklore of the Northern Counties_, and entitled _The Fish and the
Ring_. {2}  In this legend a girl comes as the unwelcome sixth of the
family of a very poor man who lived under the shadow of York Minster.  A
Knight, riding by on the day of her birth, discovers, by consultation of
the Book of Fate, that she was destined to marry his son.  He offers to
adopt her, and throws her into the River Ouse.  A fisherman saves her,
and she is again discovered after many years by the Knight, who learns
what Fate has still in store for his son.  He sends her to his brother at
Scarborough with a fatal letter, ordering him to put her to death.  But
on the way she is seized by a band of robbers, who read the letter and
replace it by one ordering the Baron’s son to be married to her
immediately on her arrival.

When the Baron discovers that he has not been able to evade the decree of
fate he still persists in his persecution, and taking a ring from his
finger throws it into the sea, saying that the girl shall never live with
his son till she can show him that ring.  She wanders about and becomes a
scullery-maid at a great castle, and one day when the Baron is dining at
the castle, while cleaning a great fish she finds his ring, and all ends
happily.

Now on the east wall of the chancel of Stepney Church there is a monument
erected to Dame Rebecca Berry, wife of Thomas Elton, of Stratford, Bow,
and relict of Sir John Berry, 1696.  The arms on the monument are thus
blazoned by heralds . . . .  “Paly of six on a bend three mullets (Elton)
impaling a fish, and in the dexter chief point an annulet between two
bends wavy.”  The reference in the impalement of the blazon is obvious.
A local tradition confidently identifies Dame Berry as the heroine of the
Yorkshire legend, though of course it is ignorant of her connection with
the etymology of Constantinople.

Now this tale, or the first half of it, is but a Yorkshire variant of one
spread throughout Europe.  The opening of the twenty-ninth story of the
collection of the Brothers Grimm, and entitled _The Devil with the Three
Golden Hairs_, is exactly the same, and in their Notes they give
references to many similar European folk-tales.  The story is found in
Modern Greece (Von Hahn, No. XX.), and it is, therefore, possible that
the story of King Coustans is the adaptation of a Greek folk-tale for the
purposes of a Folk Etymology.  But the letter, “On delivery, please kill
bearer,” is scarcely likely to have occurred twice to the popular
imagination, and one is almost brought to the conclusion that the romance
before us was itself either directly or indirectly the source of all the
European Folk-tales in which the letter “To kill bearer” occurs.  And as
we have before traced the Romance back to Constantinople, one is further
tempted to trace back the Letter itself to a reminiscence of Homer’s
σηματα λυγρά.

I have said above that no Greek original of any of these Romances has
hitherto been discovered.  But in the case of King Coustans we can at any
rate get within appreciable distance of it.  As recently as 1895 a
learned Teuton, Dr. Ernst Kuhn, pointed out, appropriately enough in the
_Byzantinische Zeitschrift_, the existence of an Ethiopic and of an
Arabic version of the legend.  He found in one of Mr. Quaritch’s
catalogues a description of an illuminated Ethiopic MS., once belonging
to King Theodore of Magdala fame, which from the account given of several
of the illustrations he was enabled to identify as the story of “The Man
born to be King.”  His name in the Ethiopic version is Thalassion, or
Ethiopic words to that effect, and the Greek _provenance_ of the story is
thereby established.  Dr. Kuhn was also successful in finding an Arabic
version done by a Coptic Christian.  In both these versions the story is
told as a miracle due to the interference of the Angel Michael; and it is
a curious coincidence that in Mr. Morris’ poetical version of our story
in the “Earthly Paradise” he calls his hero Michael.  Unless some steps
are taken to prevent the misunderstanding, it is probable that some
Teutonic investigator of the next century will, on the strength of this
identity of names, bring Mr. Morris in guilty of a knowledge of Ethiopic.

But for the name of the hero one might have suspected these Oriental
versions of being derived, not from a Greek, but from an Indian original.
Mr. Tawney has described a variant found in the _Kathākosa_ {3} which
resembles our tale much more closely than any of the European folk-tales
in the interesting point that the predestined bride herself finds the
fatal letter and makes the satisfactory substitution.  In the Indian tale
this is done with considerable ingenuity and _vraisemblance_.  The girl’s
name is Visha, and the operative clause of the fatal letter is:

   “Before this man has washed his feet, do thou with speed
   Give him poison (_visham_), and free my heart from care.”

The lady thinks (or wishes) that her father is a bad orthographist, and
corrects his spelling by omitting the final _m_, so that the letter reads
“Give him Visha,” with results more satisfactory to the young lady than
to her father.  This variant is so very close to our tale, while the
letter incident in it is so much more naturally developed than in the
romance that one might almost suspect it of having been the original.
But we must know more about the _Kathākosa_ and about the communication
between Byzantium and India before we can decisively determine which came
first.



III


Amis and Amil were the David and Jonathan, the Orestes and Pylades, of
the mediæval world.  Dr. Hofmann, who has edited the earliest French
verse account of the Legend, enumerates nearly thirty other versions of
it in almost all the tongues of Western and Northern Europe, not to
mention various versions which have crept into different collections of
the Lives of the Saints.  For their peerless friendship raised them to
the ranks of the martyrs, at any rate, at Mortara and Novara, where,
according to the Legend, they died.  The earliest of all these forms is a
set of Latin Hexameters by one Radulfus Tortarius, born at Fleury, 1063,
lived in Normandy, and died some time after 1122.  It was, therefore,
possible that the story had come back with the first crusaders, and the
Grimms attribute to it a Greek original.  But in its earliest as well as
in its present form, it is definitely located on Romance soil, while the
names of the heroes are clearly Latin (Amicus and Æmilius).  It was,
however, only at a later stage that the story was affiliated to the Epic
Cycle of Charlemagne.  On the face of it there is clearly stamped the
impress of popular tradition.  Heads are not so easily replaced, except
by a freak of the Folk imagination.  It is probably for this reason that
M. Gaston Paris attributes an Oriental origin to the latter part of the
tale, and for the same reason the Benedictine Fathers have had serious
doubts about admitting it into the _Acta Sanctorum_.  On the other hand,
the editors of the French text, the translation of which we have before
us, go so far as to conjecture that there is a historic germ for the
whole Legend in certain incidents of the War of Charlemagne against
Didier.  But as the whole connection of the Legend with the Charlemagne
Cycle is late, we need not attribute much importance to, indeed, we may
at once dismiss their conjecture.

These disputes of the pundits cannot destroy the charm of the Legend.
Never, even in antiquity, have the claims of friendship been urged with
such a passionate emphasis.  The very resemblance of the two heroes is
symbolic of their similarity of character; the very name of one of them
is Friend pure and simple.  The world is well lost for friendship’s sake
on the one side, on the other nearest and dearest are willingly and
literally sacrificed on the altar of friendship.  One of the most
charming of the _Fioretti_ tells how St. Francis overcame in himself the
mediæval dread at the touch of a leper, and washed and tended one of the
poor unfortunates.  He was but following the example of Amil, who was not
deterred by the dreaded sound of the “tartavelle”—the clapper or rattle
which announced the approach of the leper {4}—from tending his friend.

Here again romance has points of contact with the folk tale.  The end of
the Grimms’ tale of _Faithful John_ is clearly the same as that of _Amis
and Amile_. {5}  Once more we are led to believe in some dependence of
the Folk-Tale on Romance, or, _vice versa_, since an incident like that
of resuscitation by the sacrifice of a child is not likely to occur
independently to two different tellers of tales.  The tale also contains
the curious incident of the unsheathed sword in bed, which, both in
romances and folk-tales, is regarded as a complete bar to any divorce
court proceedings.  It is probable that the sword was considered as a
living person, so that the principle _publico_ was applied, and the sword
was regarded as a kind of chaperon. {6}  It is noteworthy that the
incident occurs in _Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp_, which is a late
interpolation into the _Arabian Nights_, and may be due there to European
influence.  But another incident in the romance suggests that it was
derived from a folk-tale rather than the reverse.  The two bowls of wood
given to the heroes at baptism are clearly a modification of that
familiar incident in folk-tales, where one of a pair leaves with the
other a “Lifetoken” {7} which will sympathetically indicate his state of
health.  As this has been considerably attenuated in our romance, we are
led to the conclusion that it is itself an adaptation of a folk-tale.



IV


The tale of _King Florus_—the gem of the book—recalls the early part of
Shakespeare’s _Cymbeline_ and the bet about a wife’s virtue, which forms
the subject of many romances, not a few folk-tales, and at least one
folk-song.  _The Romance of the Violet_, by Gerbert de Montruil, _circa_
1225, derives its name from the mother’s mark of the heroine, which
causes her husband to lose his bet.  This was probably the source of
Boccaccio’s novel (ii. 9), from which Shakespeare’s more immediately
grew.  The Gaelic version of this incident, collected by Campbell (_The
Chest_, No. ii.), is clearly not of folk origin, but derived directly or
indirectly from Boccaccio, in whom alone the Chest is found.  Yet it is
curious that, practically, the same story as the _Romance of the Violet_
is found among folk-songs in modern Greece and in Modern Scotland.  In
Passow’s collection of Romaic Folk Songs there is one entitled _Maurianos
and the King_, which is in substance our story; and it is probably the
existence of this folk-song which causes M. Gaston Paris to place our
tale among the romances derived from Byzantium.  Yet Motherwell in his
_Minstrelsy_ has a ballad entitled _Reedisdale and Wise William_, which
has the bet as its motive.  Here again, then, we have a connection
between our romance and the story-store of European folk, and at the same
time some slight link with Byzantium.



V


The tale of “Oversea” has immediate connection with the Crusades, since
its heroine is represented to be no other than the great grandmother of
Saladin.  But her adventures resemble those of Boccaccio’s Princess of
Babylon (ii. 7), who was herself taken from one of the Greek romances by
Xenophon of Ephesus.  Here again, then, we can trace back to Greek
influence reaching Western Europe in the twelfth century through the
medium of the Crusades.  But the tale finds no echo among the folk, so
far as I am aware, and is thus purely and simply a romance of adventure.

This, however, is not the only story connected with the Crusades in which
the Soudan loves a lady of the Franks.  Saladin is credited by the chatty
Chronicle of Rheims with having gained the love of Eleanor, wife of Louis
VII., when they were in Palestine on the Second Crusade.  As Saladin did
not ascend the throne till twenty years later, chronology is enabled to
clear his memory of this piece of scandal.  But its existence chimes in
with such relations between Moslem and Christian as is represented in our
story, which were clearly not regarded at the time with any particular
aversion by the folk; they agree with Cardinal Mazarin on this point.



VI


So much for the origin of our tales.  Yet who cares for origins nowadays?
We are all democrats now, and a tale, like a man, is welcomed for its
merits and not for its pedigree.  Yet even democracy must own, that
pedigree often leaves its trace in style and manner, and certainly the
tales before us owe some of their charm to their lineage.  “Out of
Byzantium by Old France” is a good strain by which to produce
thoroughbred romance.

Certainly we breathe the very air of romance in these stories.  There is
none of your modern priggish care for the state of your soul.  Men take
rank according to their might, women are valued for their beauty alone.
Adventures are to the adventurous, and the world is full of them.  Every
place but that in which one is born is equally strange and wondrous.
Once beyond the bounds of the city walls and none knows what may happen.
We have stepped forth into the Land of Faerie, but at least we are in the
open air.

Mr. Pater seems to regard our stories as being a premonition of the
freedom and gaiety of the Renaissance rather than as especially
characteristic of the times of Romance.  All that one need remark upon
such misconception is that it only proves that Mr. Pater knew less of
Romance Literature than he did of his favourite subject.  The freshness,
the gaiety, the direct outlook into life are peculiar neither to Romance
nor Renaissance; their real source was the _esprit Gaulois_.  But the
unquestioning, if somewhat external, piety, the immutability of the caste
system, the spirit of adventure, the frankly physical love of woman, the
large childlike wonder, these are of the essence of Romance, and they are
fully represented in the tales before us.  Wonder and reverence, are not
these the parents of Romance?  Intelligent curiosity and intellectual
doubt—those are what the Renaissance brought.  Without indulging in
invidious comparisons between the relative value of these gifts, I would
turn back to our stories with the remark that much of the wonder which
they exhibit is due to the vague localisation which runs through them.
Rome, Paris, Byzantium, form spots of light on the mediæval map, but all
between is in the dim obscure where anything may occur, and the brave man
moves about with his life in his hands.

We thus obtain that absence or localisation which helps to give the
characteristic tone to mediæval romance.  Events happen in a sort of
sublime No Man’s Land.  They happen, as it were, at the root of the
mountains, on the glittering plain, and in short, we get news from
Nowhere.  It seems, therefore, peculiarly appropriate that they should be
done into English in the same style and by the same hand that has already
written the annals of those countries of romance.  Writing here, in front
of Mr. Morris’s versions, I am speaking, as it were, before his face, and
must not say all that I should like in praise of the style in which he
has clothed them, and of its appropriateness for its present purpose.  I
should merely like to recall the fact that it was used by him in his
versions of the Sagas as long ago as 1869.  Since then it has been
adopted by all who desire to give an appropriate English dress to their
versions of classic or mediæval masterpieces of a romantic character.  We
may take it, I think, that this style has established itself as the only
one suitable for a romantic version, and who shall use it with ease and
grace if not its original inventor?

If their style suits Mr. Morris, there is little doubt that their subject
is equally congenial.  I cannot claim to be in his confidence on the
point, but it is not difficult, I fancy, to guess what has attracted him
to them.  Nearly all of them, we have seen, are on the borderland between
folk-tale and romance.  It is tales such as these that Mr. Morris wishes
to see told in tapestry on the walls of the Moot-Hall of the Hammersmith
of Nowhere.  It was by tales such as these that he first won a hearing
from all lovers of English literature.  The story of Jason is but a Greek
setting of a folk-tale known among the Gaels as the _Battle of the
Birds_, and in Norse as the _Master Maid_.  Many of the tales which the
travellers told one another in the _Earthly Paradise_, such as _The Man
Born to be King_ (itself derived from the first of our stories), _The
Land East of the Sun and West of the Moon_, and _The Ring given to
Venus_, are, on the face of them, folk-tales.  Need I give any stronger
recommendation of this book to English readers than to ask them to regard
it as a sort of outhouse to that goodly fabric so appropriately known to
us all as _The Earthly Paradise_?

                                                            JOSEPH JACOBS.




The Tale of King Coustans the Emperor


THIS tale telleth us that there was erewhile an Emperor of Byzance, which
as now is called Constantinople; but anciently it was called Byzance.
There was in the said city an Emperor; pagan he was, and was held for
wise as of his law.  He knew well enough of a science that is called
Astronomy, and he knew withal of the course of the stars, and the
planets, and the moon: and he saw well in the stars many marvels, and he
knew much of other things wherein the paynims much study, and in the lots
they trow, and the answers of the Evil One, that is to say, the Enemy.
This Emperor had to name Musselin; he knew much of lore and of sorceries,
as many a pagan doth even yet.

Now it befell on a time that the Emperor Musselin went his ways a
night-tide, he and a knight of his alone together, amidst of the city
which is now called Constantinople, and the moon shone full clear.

And so far they went, till they heard a Christian woman who travailed in
child-bed in a certain house whereby they went.  There was the husband of
the said woman aloft in a high solar, and was praying to God one while
that she might be delivered, and then again another while that she might
not be delivered.

When the Emperor had hearkened this a great while, he said to the knight:
“Hast thou heard it of yonder churl how he prayeth that his wife may be
delivered of her child, and another while prayeth that she may not be
delivered?  Certes, he is worser than a thief.  For every man ought to
have pity of women, more especially of them that be sick of childing.
And now, so help me Mahoume and Termagaunt! if I do not hang him, if he
betake him not to telling me reason wherefore he doeth it!  Come we now
unto him.”

They went within, and said the Emperor: “Now churl, tell me of a sooth
wherefore thou prayedst thy God thus for thy wife, one while that she
might be delivered, and another while that she might be delivered not.
This have I will to wot.”

“Sir,” said he, “I will tell thee well.  Sooth it is that I be a clerk,
and know mickle of a science which men call Astronomy.  Withal I wot of
the course of the stars and of the planets; therefore saw I well that if
my wife were delivered at the point and the hour whereas I prayed God
that she might not be delivered, that if she were delivered at that hour,
the child would go the way of perdition, and that needs must he be
burned, or hanged, or drowned.  But whenas I saw that it was good hour
and good point, then prayed I to God that she might be delivered.  And so
sore have I prayed God, that he hath hearkened my prayer of his mercy,
and that she is delivered in good point.  God be heried and thanked!”

“Well me now,” said the Emperor, “in what good point is the child born?”

“Sir,” said he, “of a good will; know sir, for sooth, that this child,
which here is born, shall have to wife the daughter of the emperor of
this city, who was born but scarce eight days ago; and he shall be
emperor withal, and lord of this city, and of all the earth.”  “Churl,”
said the Emperor, “this which thou sayest can never come to pass.”
“Sir,” said he, “it is all sooth, and thus it behoveth it to be.”
“Certes,” quoth the Emperor, “’tis a mighty matter to trow in.”

But the Emperor and the Knight departed thence, and the Emperor bade the
Knight go bear off the child in such wise, if he might, that none should
see him therein.  The Knight went and found there two women, who were all
busied in arraying the woman who had been brought to bed.  The child was
wrapped in linen clothes, and they had laid him on a chair.  Thereto came
the Knight, and took the child and laid him on a board, and brought him
to the Emperor, in such wise that none of the women wotted thereof.  The
Emperor did do slit the belly of him with a knife from the breast down to
the navel, and said withal to the Knight, that never should the son of
that churl have to wife his daughter, nor be emperor after him.

Therewithal would the Emperor do the Knight to put forth his hand to the
belly, to seek out the heart; but the Knight said to him: “Ah, sir,
a-God’s mercy, what wouldst thou do?  It is nought meet to thee, and if
folk were to wot thereof, great reproach wouldst thou get thee.  Let him
be at this present, for he is more than dead.  And if it please thee that
that one trouble more about the matter, I will bear him down to the sea
to drown him.”  “Yea,” quoth the Emperor, “bear him away thither, for
right sore do I hate him.”

So the Knight took the child, and wrapped him in a cover-point of silk,
and bore him down toward the sea.  But therewith had he pity of the
child, and said that by him should he never be drowned; so he left him,
all wrapped up as he was, on a midden before the gate of a certain abbey
of monks, who at that very nick of time were singing their matins.

When the monks had done singing their matins, they heard the child
crying, and they bore him before the Lord Abbot.  And the Abbot saw that
the child was fair, and said that he would do it to be nourished.
Therewith he did do unwrap it, and saw that it had the belly cloven from
the breast down to the navel.

The Abbot, so soon as it was day, bade come leeches, and asked of them
for how much they would heal the child and they craved for the healing of
him an hundred of bezants.  But he said that it would be more than
enough, for overmuch would the child be costing.  And so much did the
Abbot, that he made market with the surgeons for four-score bezants.  And
thereafter the Abbot did do baptize the child, and gave him to name
Coustans, because him-seemed that he costed exceeding much for the
healing of him.

The leeches went so much about with child, that he was made whole and the
Abbot sought him a good nurse, and got the child to suckle, and he was
healed full soon; whereas the flesh of him was soft and tender, and grew
together swiftly one to the other, but ever after showed the mark.

Much speedily waxed the child in great beauty; when he was seven years
old the Abbot did him to go to the school, and he learned so well, that
he over-passed all his fellows in subtilty and science.  When he was of
twelve years, he was a child exceeding goodly; so it might nought avail
to seek a goodlier.  And whenas the Abbot saw him to be a child so goodly
and gentle, he did him to ride abroad with him.

Now so it fell out, that the Abbot had to speak with the Emperor of a
wrong which his bailiffs had done to the abbey.  The Abbot made him a
goodly gift, whereas the abbey and convent were subject unto him, for the
Emperor was a Saracen.  When the Abbot had given him his goodly gift, the
Emperor gave him day for the third day thence, whenas he should be at a
castle of his, three leagues from the city of Byzance.

The Abbot abode the day: when he saw the time at point to go to the
Emperor, he mounted a-horseback, and his chaplain, and esquire, and his
folk; and with him was Coustans, who was so well fashioned that all
praised his great beauty, and each one said that he seemed well to be
come of high kindred, and that he would come to great good.

So when the Abbot was come before the castle whereas the Emperor should
be, he came before him and spake to and greeted him: and the Emperor said
to him that he should come into the castle, and he would speak with him
of his matter: the Abbot made him obeisance, and said to him: “Sir,
a-God’s name!”  Then the Abbot called to him Coustans, who was holding of
his hat while he spake unto the Emperor; and the Emperor looked on the
lad, and saw him so fair and gentle as never before had he seen the like
fair person.  So he asked of the Abbot what he was; and the Abbot said
him that he wotted not, save that he was of his folk, and that he had
bred him up from a little child.  “And if I had leisure with thee, I
would tell thee thereof fine marvels.”  “Yea,” said the Emperor; “come ye
into the castle, and therein shalt thou say me the sooth.”

The Emperor came into the castle, and the Abbot was ever beside him, as
one who had his business to do; and he did it to the best that he might,
as he who was subject unto him.  The Emperor forgat in nowise the great
beauty of the lad, and said unto the Abbot that he should cause him come
before him, and the Abbot sent for the lad, who came straightway.

When the child was before the Emperor, he seemed unto him right fair; and
he said unto the Abbot, that great damage it was that so fair a lad was
Christian.  But the Abbot said that it was great joy thereof, whereas he
would render unto God a fair soul.  When the Emperor heard that, he fell
a-laughing, and said to the Abbot that the Christian law was of no
account, and that all they were lost who trowed therein.  When the Abbot
heard him so say, he was sore grieved; but he durst not make answer as he
would, so he said much humbly: “Sir, if God please, who can all things,
they are not lost; for God will have mercy of his sinners.”

Then the Emperor asked of him whence that fair child was come; and the
Abbot said that it was fifteen years gone since he had been found before
their gate, on a midden, all of a night-tide.  “And our monks heard him
a-crying whenas they had but just said matins; and they went to seek the
child, and brought him to me; and I looked on the babe, and beheld him
much fair, and I said that I would do him to be nourished and baptized.
I unwrapped him, for the babe was wrapped up in a cover-point of vermil
sendel; and when he was unwrapped, I saw that he had the belly slit from
the breast to the navel.  Then I sent for leeches and surgeons, and made
market with them to heal him for four-score bezants; and thereafter he
was baptized, and I gave him to name Coustans, because he costed so much
of goods to heal.  So was the babe presently made whole: but never
sithence might it be that the mark appeared not on his belly.”

When the Emperor heard that, he knew that it was the child whose belly he
had slit to draw the heart out of him.  So he said to the Abbot that he
should give him the lad.  And the Abbot said that he would speak thereof
to his convent, and that he should have him with their good-will.  The
Emperor held his peace, and answered never a word.  But the Abbot took
leave of him, and came to his abbey, and his monks, and told them that
the Emperor had craved Coustans of him.  “But I answered that I would
speak to you if ye will yea-say it.  Say, now, what ye would praise of my
doing herein.”

“What!” said the wisest of the convent; “by our faith, evil hast thou
done, whereas thou gavest him not presently, even as he demanded of thee.
We counsel thee send him straightway, lest the Emperor be wrath against
us, for speedily may we have scathe of him.”

Thereto was their counsel fast, that Coustans should be sent to the
Emperor.  So the Abbot commanded the Prior to lead Coustans thereto; and
the Prior said: “A-God’s name!”

So he mounted, and led with him Coustans, and came unto the Emperor, and
greeted him on behalf of the Abbot and the convent; and then he took
Coustans by the hand, and, on the said behalf, gave him to the Emperor,
who received him as one who was much wrath that such a runagate and
beggar churl should have his daughter to wife.  But he thought in his
heart that he would play him the turn.

When the Emperor had gotten Coustans, he was in sore imagination how he
should be slain in such wise that none might wot word thereof.  And it
fell out so that the Emperor had matters on hand at the outer marches of
his land, much long aloof thence, well a twelve days’ journey.  So the
Emperor betook him to going thither, and had Coustans thither with him,
and thought what wise he might to do slay him, till at last he let write
a letter to his Burgreve of Byzance.

“I Emperor of Byzance and Lord of Greece, do thee to wit who abidest duly
in my place for the warding of my land; and so soon as thou seest this
letter thou shalt slay or let slay him who this letter shall bear to
thee, so soon as he hast delivered the said letter to thee, without
longer tarrying.  As thou holdest dear thine own proper body, do
straightway my commandment herein.”

Even such was the letter which the fair child Coustans bore, and knew not
that he bore his own death.  The lad took the letter, which was close,
and betook him to the road, and did so much by his journeys that he came
in less than fifteen days to Byzance, which is nowadays called
Constantinople.

When the lad entered into the city, it was the hour of dinner; so, as God
would have it, he thought that he would not go his errand at that nick of
time, but would tarry till folk had done dinner: and exceeding hot was
the weather, as is wont about St. John’s-mass.  So he entered into the
garden all a-horseback.  Great and long was the garden; so the lad took
the bridle from off his horse and unlaced the saddle-girths, and let him
graze; and thereafter he went into the nook of a tree; and full pleasant
was the place, so that presently he fell asleep.

Now so it fell out, that when the fair daughter of the Emperor had eaten,
she went into the garden with three of her maidens; and they fell to
chasing each other about, as whiles is the wont of maidens to play; until
at the last the fair Emperor’s daughter came under the tree whereas
Coustans lay a-sleeping, and he was all vermil as the rose.  And when the
damsel saw him, she beheld him with a right good will, and she said to
herself that never on a day had she seen so fair a fashion of man.  Then
she called to her that one of her fellows in whom she had the most
affiance, and the others she made to go forth from out of the garden.

Then the fair maiden, daughter of the Emperor, took her fellow by the
hand, and led her to look on the lovely lad whereas he lay a-sleeping;
and she spake thus: “Fair fellow, here is a rich treasure.  Lo thou! the
most fairest fashion of a man that ever mine eyes have seen on any day of
my life.  And he beareth a letter, and well I would see what it sayeth.”

So the two maidens drew nigh to the lad, and took from him the letter,
and the daughter of the Emperor read the same; and when she had read it,
she fell a-lamenting full sore, and said to her fellow: “Certes here is a
great grief!”  “Ha, my Lady!” said the other one, “tell me what it is.”
“Of a surety,” said the Maiden, “might I but trow in thee I would do away
that sorrow!”  “Ha, Lady,” said she, “hardily mayest thou trow in me,
whereas for nought would I uncover that thing which thou wouldst have
hid.”

Then the Maiden, the daughter of the Emperor, took oath of her according
to the paynim law; and thereafter she told her what the letter said; and
the damsel answered her: “Lady, and what wouldest thou do?”  “I will tell
thee well,” said the daughter of the Emperor; “I will put in his pouch
another letter, wherein the Emperor, my father, biddeth his Burgreve to
give me to wife to this fair child here, and that he make great feast at
the doing of the wedding unto all the folk of this land; whereas he is to
wot well that the lad is a high man and a loyal.”

When the damsel had heard that, she said that would be good to do.  “But,
Lady, how wilt thou have the seal of thy father?”  “Full well,” said the
Maiden, “for my father delivered to me four pair of scrolls, sealed of
his seal thereon; he hath written nought therein; and I will write all
that I will.”  “Lady,” said she, “thou hast said full well; but do it
speedily, and haste thee ere he awakeneth.”  “So will I,” said the
Maiden.

Then the fair Maiden, the daughter of the Emperor, went to her coffers,
and drew thereout one of the said scrolls sealed, which her father had
left her, that she might borrow moneys thereby, if so she would.  For
ever was the Emperor and his folk in war, whereas he had neighbours right
felon, and exceeding mighty, whose land marched upon his.  So the Maiden
wrote the letter in this wise:

“I King Musselin, Emperor of Greece and of Byzance the city, to my
Burgreve of Byzance greeting.  I command thee that the bearer of this
letter ye give to my fair daughter in marriage according to our law;
whereas I have heard and wot soothly that he is a high person, and well
worthy to have my daughter.  And thereto make ye great joy and great
feast to all them of my city and of all my land.”

In such wise wrote and said the letter of the fair daughter of the
Emperor; and when she had written the said letter, she went back to the
garden, she and her fellow together, and found that one yet asleep, and
they put the letter into his pouch.  And then they began to sing and make
noise to awaken him.  So he awoke anon, and was all astonied at the fair
Maiden, the daughter of the Emperor, and the other one her fellow, who
came before him; and the fair Maiden, daughter of the Emperor, greeted
him; and he greeted her again right debonairly.  Then she asked of him
what he was, and whither he went; and he said that he bore a letter to
the Burgreve, which the Emperor sent by him; and the Maiden said that she
would bring him straightway whereas was the Burgreve.  Therewith she took
him by the hand, and brought him to the palace, where there was much
folk, who all rose against the Maiden, as to her who was their Lady.

Now the Maiden demanded the Burgreve, and they told her that he was in a
chamber; so thither she led the lad, and the lad delivered the letter,
and said that the Emperor greeted him.  But the Burgreve made great joy
of the lad, and kissed the hand of him.  The Maiden opened the pouch, and
fell a-kissing the letter and the seal of her father for joy’s sake,
whereas she had not heard tidings of him a great while.

Thereafter she said to the Burgreve that she would hearken the letter in
privy council, even as if she wotted nought thereof; and the Burgreve
said that that were good to do.  Then went the Burgreve and the Maiden
into a chamber, and the Maiden unfolded the letter and read it to the
Burgreve, and made semblance of wondering exceedingly; and the Burgreve
said to her, “Lady, it behoveth to do the will of my lord thy father, for
otherwise we shall be blamed exceedingly.”  The Maiden answered him: “And
how can this be, that I should be wedded without my lord my father?  A
strange thing it would be, and I will do it in no manner.”

“Ha, Lady!” said the Burgreve, “what is that thou sayest?  Thy father has
bidden thus by his letter, and it behoveth not to gainsay.”

“Sir,” said the Maiden, (unto whom it was late till the thing were done)
“thou shalt speak unto the barons and mighty men of this realm, and take
counsel thereof.  And if they be of accord thereto, I am she who will not
go against it.”  Then the Burgreve said that she spake well and as one
wise.

Then spake the Burgreve to the barons, I and showed them the letter, and
they accorded all to that that the matter of the letter must be
accomplished, and the will of the Emperor done.  Then they wedded the
fair youth Coustans, according to the paynim law, unto the fair daughter
of the Emperor; and the wedding endured for fifteen days: and such great
joy was there at Byzance that it was exceeding, and folk did no work in
the city, save eating and drinking and making merry.

Long while abode the Emperor in the land whereas he was: and when he had
done his business, he went his ways back towards Byzance; and whenas he
was but anigh two journeys thence, came to him a message of the
messengers who came from Byzance.  The Emperor asked of him what they did
in the city; and the varlet said that they were making exceeding good
cheer of eating and drinking and taking their ease, and that no work had
they done therein these fifteen days.

“And wherefore is that?” said the Emperor.  “Wherefore, Sir!  Wot ye not
well thereof?”  “Nay, forsooth,” said the Emperor, “but tell me
wherefore.”

“Sir,” said the varlet, “thou sentest a youngling, exceeding fair, to thy
Burgreve, and badest him by thy letter to wed him to thy daughter the
fair, and that he should be emperor after thee, whereas he was a man
right high, and well worthy to have her.  But thy daughter would not take
that before that the Burgreve should have spoken to the barons.  And he
spake to all them, and showed them thy letter; and they said that it
behoved to do thy commandment.  And when thy daughter saw that they were
all of one accord thereon, she durst not go against them, but yea-said
it.  Even in such wise hath thy daughter been wedded, and such joy has
been in the city as none might wish it better.”

The Emperor, when he heard the messenger speak thus, was all astonied,
and thought much of this matter; and he asked of the varlet how long it
was since the lad had wedded his daughter, and whether or no he had lain
by her?

“Sir,” said the varlet, “yea; and she may well be big by now; because it
is more than three weeks since he hath wedded her.”  “Forsooth,” said the
Emperor, “in a good hour be it! for since it is so, it behoveth me to
abide it, since no other it may be.”

So far rode the Emperor till he came to Byzance, whereas they made him
much fair feast; and his fair daughter came to meet him, and her husband
Coustans, who was so fair a child that none might better be.  The
Emperor, who was a wise man, made of them much great joy, and laid his
two hands upon their two heads, and held them there a great while; which
is the manner of benison amongst the paynims.

That night thought the Emperor much on this marvel, how it could have
come about; and so much he pondered it, that he wotted full well that it
had been because of his daughter.  So he had no will to gain-say her, but
he demanded to see the letter which he had sent, and they showed it unto
him, and he saw his seal hanging thereto, and saw the letter which was
written; and by the manner whereby the thing had been done, he said to
himself that he had striven against the things which behoved to be.

Thereafter, the Emperor made Coustans a knight, even his new son who was
wedded unto his daughter, and he gave and granted to him all the whole
land after his death.  And the said Coustans bore him well and wisely, as
a good knight, and a valiant and hardy, and defended him full well
against his enemies.  No long time wore ere his lord the Emperor died,
and his service was done much richly, after the paynim law.  Then was
Coustans emperor, and he loved and honoured much the Abbot who had
nourished him, and he made him his very master.  And the Emperor
Coustans, by the counsel of the Abbot, and the will of God the all
mighty, did do christen his wife, and all they of that land were
converted to the law of Jesus Christ.  And the Emperor Coustans begot on
his wife an heir male, who had to name Constantine, who was thereafter a
prudhomme much great.  And thereafter was the city called Constantinople,
because of his father, Coustans, who costed so much, but aforetime was it
called Byzance.

Here withal endeth the Story of King Coustans the Emperor.

The said story was done out of the ancient French into English by William
Morris.




The Friendship of Amis and Amile


IN the time of Pepin King of France was a child born in the Castle of
Bericain of a noble father of Alemaine who was of great holiness.

The father and the mother promised to God, and Saint Peter and Saint
Paul, whereas they had none other child, that if God gave it life, they
would bear it to Rome to baptism.  At the same time came a vision to a
Count of Alverne, whose wife was big with child, whereby it seemed that
the Apostle of Rome was baptizing many children in his palace and
confirming them with chrism.

So when the Count was awaken he sought of many wise folk what might
signify that which he had seen in the dream.  And when his vision was
uncovered, a wise man and ancient bespake him by the counsel of God:
“Make great joy, Count, for there shall be born to thee a son full of
great prowess and of great holiness; and him thou shalt let bear to Rome
and let baptize him by the Apostle.”

Thereof great joy made the Count, and he and his folk praised the counsel
of the elder.

The child was born and dearly fostered, and when he had two years, and
the father after his purpose was bearing him to Rome, he came to the city
of Lucca.  And therein he found a noble man of Almaine who was wending
Romeward and bearing his son to baptism.  They greeted one the other, and
each asked other who he was and what he sought, and when they found
themselves to be of one purpose they joined company in all friendliness
and entered Rome together.  And the two children fell to loving one
another so sorely that one would not eat without the other, they lived of
one victual, and lay in one bed.

In this wise the fathers brought them before the Apostle at Rome, and
spake to him: “Holy Father, whom we know and believe to be in the place
of Saint Peter the Apostle, the Count of Alverne, and a noble knight of
Bericain the Castle, beseech your Holiness that ye would deign to baptize
their sons which they have brought from far away, and that ye would take
their little offering from their hands.”

And the Apostle answered them: “I hold your gifts for right acceptable,
but they are not to me of much necessity; give them to the poor, who have
need thereof.  The infants will I baptize with a good will, that the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost may embrace them in the love of the
Holy Trinity.”

Forthwith then the Apostle baptized them in the Church of the Holy
Saviour, and laid for name on the son of the Count, Amile, and on the son
of the Knight, Amis; and many a knight of Rome held them at the font with
mickle joy, and raised them aloft even as God would.  And the office of
Baptism done, the Apostle bade bring two hanaps of tree dight with gold
and precious stones, side and wide alike, and of like fashion, and gave
them to the bairns and said: “Take these gifts in token that I have
baptized you in the Church of the Holy Saviour.”  Which gifts they took
joyfully and thanked him much, and betook them thence home in all
joyance.

To the child of Bericain did God give so great wisdom, that one might
trow that he were another Solomon; and when he was of the age of thirty
years a fever took his father, and he fell to admonishing his son in such
like words: “Fair son, well beloved, it behoveth me presently to die, and
thou shalt abide and be thine own master.  Now firstly, fair son, keep
thou the commandments of God; the chivalry of Jesus Christ do thou.  Keep
thou faith to thy lords, and give aid to thy fellows and friends.  Defend
the widows and orphans.  Uphold the poor and needy: and all days hold thy
last day in memory.  Forget not the fellowship and friendship of the son
of the Count of Alverne, whereas the Apostle of Rome on one day baptized
you both, and with one gift honoured you.  Ye be alike of beauty, of
fashion, and stature, and whoso should see you, would deem you to be
brethren.”

So having finished these words, and received his Saviour, he departed in
our Lord, and his son did do bury him, and did do render him his service,
even as one should do for the dead.

After the death of his father evil folk bore envy against him, and did
him many a scathe, and grieved him sorely; but he loved them all and
suffered whatsoever they did to him.  What more may I tell you, save that
they cast him and his folk out of the heritage of his fathers, and chased
him forth out of his castle.  So when he bethought him of the commandment
of his father, he said to them who went in his company: “The wicked have
wrongfully cast me forth out of mine heritage: yet have I good hope in
our Lord that he will help me; go we now to the Court of the Count Amile,
who was my friend and my fellow.  May-happen he will make us rich with
his goods and his havings.  But if it be not so, then shall we go to
Hildegard the Queen, wife of King Charles of France, who is wont to
comfort the disinherited.”

And they answered that they were ready to follow him and do his bidding.

Therewith they went their ways to the Court of the Count and found him
not there, because he was gone to Bericain to visit Amis his fellow, and
comfort him of the death of his father.  And when he found him not, he
departed sore troubled, and said to himself that he would not betake him
to his own land till he had found Amis his fellow; and he sought him in
France and in Almaine, where soever he heard tell that his kindred were,
and could find no certainty of him.

Therewithal Amis together with his folk, ceased not to seek his fellow
Amile, until they came to the house of a noble man where they were
guested.  Thereat they told by order all their adventure and the noble
man said to them: “Abide with me, Sir Knights, and I will give my
daughter to your lord, because of the wisdom that I have heard of him,
and I will make you all rich of gold and of silver, and of havings.”

That word pleased them, and they I held the bridal with mickle joy.  But
when they had abided there for a year and a half, then said Amis to his
ten fellows “We have done amiss in that we have left seeking of Amile.”
And he left there two of his sergeants and his hanap, and went his ways
toward Paris.

Now by this time had Amile been a-seeking for Amis two years past without
ceasing.  And whenas Amile drew nigh to Paris he found a pilgrim and
asked if he had seen Amis whom men had chased out of his land; and that
one said nay, he had not.  But Amile did off his coat and gave it to the
pilgrim and said: “Pray thou to our Lord and his Hallows that they give
me to find Amis my fellow.”

Then he departed from the pilgrim, and went his ways to Paris, and found
no-whither Amis his fellow.

But the pilgrim went his ways forthwith, and about vespers happened on
Amis, and they greeted each the other.  And Amis said to the pilgrim, had
he seen or heard tidings in any land of Amile, son of the Count of
Alverne.  And the pilgrim answered him all marvelling: “Who art thou,
Knight, who thus mockest a pilgrim?  Thou seemest to me that Amile who
this day asked of me if I had seen Amis his fellow.  I wot not for why
thou hast changed thy garments, thy folk, thine horses, and thine arms.
Thou askest me now what thou didst ask me to-day about tierce; and thou
gavest me this coat.”

“Trouble not thine heart,” said Amis, “I am not he whom thou deemest; but
I am Amis who seeketh Amile.”  And he gave him of his silver, and bade
him pray our Lord to give him to find Amile.  And the pilgrim said: “Go
thy ways forthright to Paris, and I trow that thou shalt find him whom
thou seekest so sore longing.”  And therewith Aims went his ways full
eagerly.

Now on the morrow Amile was already departed from Paris, and was sitting
at meat with his knights hard by the water of Seine in a flowery meadow.
And when they saw Amis coming with his fellows all armed, they rose up
and armed them, and so went forth before them; and Amis said to his
fellows: “I see French knights who come against us in arms.  Now fight
hardily and defend your lives.  If we may escape this peril, then shall
we go with great joy to Paris, and thereto shall we be received with high
favour at the Court of the King.”

Then were the reins let loose and the spears shaken aloft, and the swords
drawn on either side, in such wise that no semblance was there that any
should escape alive.  But God the all mighty who seeth all, and who
setteth an end to the toil of the righteous, did to hold aback them of
one part and of the other when they were now hard on each other, for then
said Amis: “Who are ye knights, who have will to slay Amis the exile and
his fellows?”  At that voice Amile knew Amis his fellow and said: “O thou
Amis most well beloved, rest from my travail, I am Amile, son of the
Count of Alverne, who have not ceased to seek thee for two whole years.”

And therewith they lighted down from their horses, and embraced and
kissed each other, and gave thanks to God of that they were found.  And
they swore fealty and friendship and fellowship perpetual, the one to the
other, on the sword of Amile, wherein were relics.  Thence went they all
together to the Court of Charles, King of France; there might men behold
them young, well attempered, wise, fair, and of like fashion and visage,
loved of all and honoured.  And the King received them much joyously, and
made of Amis his treasurer, and of Amile his server.

But when they had abided thus three years, Amis said unto Amile: “Fair
sweet fellow, I desire sore to go see my wife whom I have left behind;
and I will return the soonest that I may; and do thou abide at the Court.
But keep thee well from touching the daughter of the King; and above all
things beware of Arderi the felon.”  Amile answered him: “I will take
heed of thy commandment; but betake thee back hither so soon as thou
mayest.”

Thuswise departed Amis.  But Amile cast his eyes upon the King’s
daughter, and knew her so soon as he might; and right soon forgat he the
commandment and the teaching of Amis his fellow.  Yet is not this
adventure strange, whereas he was no holier than David, nor wiser than
Solomon.

Amidst these things Arderi the traitor, who bore him envy, came to him
and said: “Thou wottest not, fellow, thou wottest not, how Amis hath
robbed the treasure of the King, and therefore is fled away.  Wherefore I
require of thee thou swear me fealty and friendship and fellowship, and I
will swear the same to thee on the holy Gospel.”  And so when that was
done Amile doubted not to lay bare his secret to Arderi.

But whenas Amile was a-giving water to the King to wash his hands withal,
the false Arderi said to the King: “Take thou no water from this evil
man, sir King: for he is more worthy of death than of life, whereas he
hath taken from the Queen’s Daughter the flower of her virginity.”  But
when Amile heard this, he fell adown all astonied, and might say never a
word; but the benign King lifted him up again, and said to him: “Rise up,
Amile, and have no fear, and defend thee of this blame.”  So he lifted
himself up and said: “Have no will to trow, sire, in the lies of Arderi
the traitor, for I wot that thou art a rightwise judge, and that thou
turnest not from the right way, neither for love nor for hatred.
Wherefore I pray thee that thou give me frist of counsel; and that I may
purge me of this guilt before thee, and do the battle against Arderi the
traitor, and make him convict of his lies before all the Court.”

So the King gave to one and the other frist of counsel till after nones,
and that then they should come before him for to do their devoir; and
they came before the King at the term which he had given them.  Arderi
brought with him the Count Herbert for his part; but Amile found none who
would be for him saving Hildegarde the Queen, who took up the cause for
him, and gat frist of counsel for Amile, on such covenant that if Amile
came not back by the term established, she should be lacking all days of
the bed of the King.

But when Amile went to seek counsel, he happened on Amis, his fellow, who
was betaking him to the King’s Court; and Amile lighted down from his
horse, and cast himself at the feet of his fellow, and said: “O thou, the
only hope of my salvation, evilly have I kept thy commandment; for I have
run into wyte of the King’s Daughter, and I have taken up battle against
the false Arderi.”

Then said Amis, sighing: “Leave we here our folk, end enter into this
wood to lay bare our secret.”  And Amis fell to blaming Amile, and said:
“Change we our garments and our horses, and get thee to my house, and I
will do the battle for thee against the traitor.”  And Amile answered:
“How may I go into thine house, who have no knowledge of thy wife and thy
folk, and have never seen them face to face?”  But Amis said to him: “Go
in all safety, and seek wisely to know them: but take good heed that thou
touch not my wife.”

And thuswise they departed each from his fellow weeping; and Amis went
his ways to the Court of the King in the semblance of Amile, and Amile to
the house of his fellow in the semblance of Amis.  But the wife of Amis,
when she saw him betake him thither, ran to embrace him, whom she deemed
was her husband, and would have kissed him.  But he said: “Flee thou from
before me, for I have greater need to lament than to play; whereas, since
I departed from thee, I have suffered adversity full sore, and yet have
to suffer.”

And a night-time whenas they lay in one bed, then Amile laid his sword
betwixt the two of them, and said to the woman: “Take heed that thou
touch me in no manner wise, else diest thou straightway by this sword.”
And in likewise did he the other nights, until Amis betook him in
disguise to his house to wot if Amile kept faith with him of his wife.

Now was the term of the battle come, and the Queen abode Amile all full
of fear, for the traitor Arderi said, all openly, that the Queen should
nevermore draw nigh the bed of the King, whereas she had suffered and
consented hereto, that Amile should shame her daughter.  Amidst these
words Amis entered into the Court of the King clad in the raiment of his
fellow, Amile, at the hour of midday and said to the King: “Right
debonaire and loyal judge, here am I apparelled to do the battle against
the false Arderi, in defence of me, the Queen, and her daughter of the
wyte which they lay upon us.”

And the King answered benignly and said: “Be thou nought troubled, Count,
for if thou vanquishest the battle, I will give thee to wife Belisant my
daughter.”

On the morrow’s morn, Arderi and Amis entered armed into the field in the
presence of the King and his folk.  And the Queen with much company of
virgins, and widows and wedded wives, went from church to church making
prayers for the Champion of her daughter, and they gave gifts, oblations
and candles.

But Amis fell to pondering in his heart, that if he should slay Arderi,
he would be guilty of his death before God, and if he were vanquished, it
should be for a reproach to him all his days.  Wherefore he spake
thuswise to Arderi: “O thou, Count, foul rede thou hast, in that thou
desirest my death so sorely, and hast foolishly cast thy life into peril
of death.  If thou wouldest but take back the wyte which thou layest on
me, and leave this mortal battle, thou mayest have my friendship and my
service.”

But Arderi, as one out of his wit, answered him: “I will nought of thy
friendship nor thy service; but I shall swear the sooth as it verily is,
and I shall smite the head from off thee.”

So Arderi swore that he had shamed the King’s Daughter, and Amis swore
that he lied; and straightway they dealt together in strokes, and fought
together from the hour of tierce right on till nones.  And Arderi was
vanquished, and Amis smote off his head.

The King was troubled that he had Arderi; yet was he joyous that his
daughter was purged of her guilt.  And he gave to Amis his daughter, and
a great sum of gold and silver, and a city hard by the sea wherein to
dwell.  And Amis received the same with great joy.  Then he returned at
his speediest to his hostel wherein he had left Amile his fellow; but
whenas Amile saw him coming with much company of horse, he deemed that
Amis was vanquished, and fell to fleeing: but Amis bade him return in all
safety, for that he had vanquished Arderi, and thereby was wedded for him
to the King’s Daughter.  Thence then did Amile betake him, and abode in
the aforesaid city with his wife.

But Amis abode with his wife, and he became mesel by the will of our
Lord, in such wise that he might not move from his bed; for God
chastiseth him that He loveth.

And his wife, who had to name Obias, had him in sore hate, and many a
time strove to strangle him; and when Amis found that, he called to him
two of his sergeants, Azones and Horatus by name, and said to them: “Take
me out of the hands of this evil woman, and take my hanap privily and
bear me to the Castle of Bericain.”

So when they drew nigh to the castle, folk came to meet them, and asked
of them who was the feeble sick man whom they bore; and they said it was
Amis, the master of them, who was become mesel, and prayed them that they
would do him some mercy.  But nevertheless, they beat the sergeants of
Amis, and cast him down from the cart whereon they were bearing him, and
said: “Flee hence speedily if ye would not lose your lives.”

Then Amis fell a-weeping, and said: “O Thou, God debonaire and full of
pity, give me death, or give me aid from mine infirmity!”  And therewith
he said to his sergeants: “Bring me to the Church of the Father of Rome,
whereas God may peradventure of His great mercy purvey for my poverty.”

When they came to Rome, Constantin the Apostle, full of pity and of
holiness, and many a knight of Rome of them who had held Amis at the
font, came to meet him, and gave him sustenance enough for him and his
sergeants.

But in the space of three years thereafter was so great famine in the
city, that the father had will to thrust the son away from his house.
Then spake Azones and Horatus to Amis, and said: “Fair sir, thou wottest
how feally we have served thee sithence the death of thy father unto this
day, and that we have never trespassed against thy commandment.  But now
we may no longer abide with thee, whereas we have no will to perish of
hunger: wherefore we pray thee give us leave to escape this mortal
pestilence.”

Then Amis answered them weeping: “O ye fair sons, and not sergeants, my
only comfort, I pray you for God’s sake that ye leave me not here, but
bear me to the city of the Count Amile my fellow.”

And they who would well obey his commandments, bore him thither whereas
was Amile; and there they fell to sounding on their tartavelles before
the Court of Amile, even as mesel folk be wont to do.  And when Amile
heard the sound thereof he bade a sergeant of his to bear to the sick man
of bread and of flesh, and therewithal his hanap, which was given to him
at Rome, full of good wine: and when the sergeant had done his
commandment he said to him when he came again: “By the faith which I owe
thee, sir, if I held not thine hanap in my hand, I had deemed that it was
even that which the sick man had; for one and the same be they of
greatness and of fashion.”  Then said Amile: “Go speedily and lead him
hither to me.”

But when he was before his fellow he asked of him who he was, and how he
had gotten that hanap.  Said he: “I am of Bericain the Castle, and the
hanap was given me by the Apostle of Rome, when he baptized me.”

And when Amile heard that, he knew that it was Amis his fellow who had
delivered him from death, and given him to wife the King’s Daughter of
France; straightway he cast himself upon him and fell to crying out
strongly, and to weeping and lamenting, and to kissing and embracing him.
And when his wife heard the same, she ran thereto all dishevelled, and
making great dole, whereas she had in memory of how he had slain Arderi.
And straightway they laid him in a very fair bed, and said to him: “Abide
with us, fair sir, until that God shall do his will of thee, for
whatsoever we have is for thee to deal with.”  And he abode with them,
and his sergeants with him.

Now it befel on a night whenas Amis and Amile lay in one chamber without
other company, that God sent to Amis Raphael his angel, who said to him:
“Sleepest thou, Amis?”  And he, who deemed that Amile had called to him,
answered: “I sleep not, fair sweet fellow.”  Then the angel said to him:
“Thou hast answered well, whereas thou art the fellow of the citizens of
Heaven, and thou hast followed after Job, and Thoby in patience.  Now I
am Raphael, an angel of our Lord, and am come to tell thee of a medicine
for thine healing, whereas He hath heard thy prayers.  Thou shalt tell to
Amile thy fellow, that he slay his two children and wash thee in their
blood, and thence thou shalt get thee the healing of thy body.”

Then said Amis: “Never shall it be that my fellow be a manslayer for the
healing of me.”  But the Angel said: “Yet even so it behoveth to do.”

And when he had so said, the Angel departed; and therewith Amile, as if
a-sleeping, heard those words, and awoke, and said: “What is it, fellow?
who hath spoken unto thee?”  And Amis answered that none had spoken: “But
I have prayed to our Lord according to my wont.”  Then Amile said: “Nay,
it is not so; some one hath spoken to thee.”  Therewith he arose and went
to the door of the chamber, and found it shut, and said: “Tell me, fair
brother, who hath spoken to thee these words of the night?”

Then Amis fell a-weeping sorely, and said to him that it was Raphael the
Angel of our Lord who had said to him: “Amis, our Lord biddeth that thou
tell Amile that he slay his two children, and wash thee with the blood of
them, and that then thou wilt be whole of thy meselry.”

But Amile was sore moved with these words, and said to him: “Amis, I have
given over to thee man-servant and maid-servant and all my goods, and now
thou feignest in fraud that the Angel hath spoken to thee that I slay my
two children!”  But forthwith Amis fell a-weeping, and said: “I wot that
I have spoken to thee things grievous, as one constrained, and now I pray
thee that thou cast me not out of thine house.”  And Amile said that he
had promised that he would hold him till the hour of his death: “But I
conjure thee by the faith which is betwixt thee and me, and by our
fellowship, and by the baptism which we took between me and thee at Rome,
that thou tell me if it be man or Angel who hath said this to thee.”

Then Amis answered: “As true as it was an Angel who spake to me this
night, so may God deliver me from mine infirmity.”

Then Amile fell to weeping privily, and thinking in his heart: “This man
forsooth was apparelled before the King to die for me, and why should I
not slay my children for him; if he hath kept faith with me to the death,
why keep I not faith?  Abraham was saved by faith, and by faith have the
hallows vanquished kingdoms; and God saith in the Gospel: ‘That which ye
would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.’”

And Amile without more tarrying, went to the chamber of his wife, and
bade her go hear the service of our Lord; and the Countess gat her to the
church even as she was wont.

Then the Count took his sword, and went to the bed where lay his
children, and found them sleeping, and he threw himself upon them, and
fell to weeping bitterly and said: “Who hath heard ever of a father who
of his own will hath slain his child?  Ah, alas my children!  I shall be
no more your father, but your cruel murderer!”  And therewith the
children awoke because of the tears which fell on them from their father;
and the children, who looked on the face of their father, fell
a-laughing.  And whereas they were of the age of three years or
thereabout, their father said to them: “Your laughter shall be turned
into weeping, for now shall your innocent blood be shed.”

When he had so said he cut off their heads and then laid them out behind
the bed, and laid the heads to the bodies, and covered them over even as
they slept.  And with their blood which he received, he washed his
fellow, and said: “Sire God, Jesus Christ, who commandest men to keep
faith upon the earth, and who cleansest the mesel by thy word, deign thou
to cleanse my fellow, for the love of whom I have shed the blood of my
children.”

Then was Amis cleansed of his meselry, and they gave thanks to our Lord
with great joy and said: “Blessed be God, the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who healeth them that have hope in him.”

And Amile clad his fellow in his own right goodly raiment; and therewith
they went to the church to give thanks there, and the bells by the grace
of God rang of themselves.  And when the people of the city heard that,
they ran all together toward that marvel.

Now the wife of the Count when she saw them both going together, fell to
asking which of the two was her husband and said: “I know well the
raiment of these twain, but I wot not which is Amile.”

And the Count said: “I am Amile, and this my fellow is Amis, who is
whole.”  Then the Countess wondered, and said: “I see him all whole; but
much I desire to know whereby he is healed.”  “Render we thanks to our
Lord,” said the Count, “nor disquiet us as to how it may be.”

Now was come the hour of tierce, and neither the father nor the mother
was yet entered in to their children; but the father sighed grievously
for the death of his babes.  Then the Countess asked for her children to
make her joy, and the Count said: “Dame let be, let the children sleep!”

Therewith he entered all alone to the children to weep over them, and he
found them playing in the bed; but the scars of their wounds showed about
the necks of each of them even as a red fillet.

Then he took them in his arms, and bore them to their mother, and said
“Make great joy, dame, whereas thy sons whom I had slain by the
commandment of the Angel are alive again, and by their blood is Amis
cured and healed.”

And when the Countess heard it she said: “O thou, Count, why didst thou
not lead me with thee to receive the blood of my children, and I would
have washed therewith Amis thy fellow and my Lord?”

Then said the Count: “Dame, let be these words; and let us be at the
service of our Lord, who hath done such great wonders in our house.”

Which thing they did even unto their death and held chastity.

And they made great joy through that same city for ten days.

But on the selfsame day that Amis was made whole, the devils bore off his
wife; they brake the neck of her, and bore away her soul.

After these things Amis betook him to the Castle of Bericain and laid
siege before it; and abode there before so long, that they of the castle
rendered themselves to him.  He received them benignly, and pardoned them
their evil will; and from thenceforth he dwelt with them peaceably and he
held with him the elder son of Amile, and served our Lord with all his
heart.

Thereafter Adrian, Apostle of Rome, sent word to Charles, King of France,
that he come help him against Desir, the King of the Lombards, who much
tormented the Church; and Charles was as then in the town of Theodocion.
Thither came Peter, messenger of the Apostle, who said to him that the
Apostle prayed him to come defend Holy Church.  Thereupon King Charles
sent to the said Desir messengers to pray him that he give back to the
Holy Father the cities and other things which he had taken from him, and
that he would give him thereto the sum of forty thousand sols of gold in
gold and in silver.  But he would give way neither for prayers nor gifts.
Thereon the good King bade come to him all manner folk, Bishops, Abbots,
Dukes, Princes, Marquises and other strong knights.  And he sent to
Cluses certain of these for to guard the passage of the ways.  Amongst
the which was Albins, Bishop of Angier, a man full of great holiness.

Then the King Charles together with many warriors, drew nigh to Cluses by
the Mount of Sinense, and sent Bernhart his uncle, and a many with him,
by the Mount of Jove.  And the vanward said that Desir, together with all
his force, was already at Cluses, the which he had do dight with bulwarks
of iron and stone.

But whenas Charles drew nigh to Cluses, he sent his messengers to Desir,
praying him to give back to the Holy Father the cities which he had
taken; but he would nought for the prayer.  Again Charles bade him that
he send three of the children of the judges of Lombardy in hostage, until
such time as he had given back the cities of the Church, and that he
would betake him to France with all his host, without battle and without
doing any scathe.  But he neither for that, nor for aught else would
blench one whit.

Now when God the almighty had seen the hard heart and malice of this man;
and that the French were sore desirous to get them aback home, he set so
great fear and so great trembling in the hearts of the Lombards, that
they turned to flight all of them, although none chased them, and left
there behind them their tents and all their gear.  When that saw Charles
and his host, they followed them and thrust forth into Lombardy French,
Almaines, English and all other manner of folk.

Of that host were Amis and Amile, who were the first in the court of the
King, and every way they heeded the works of our Lord, in fasting, in
praying, in alms-doing, in giving aid to widows and orphans, in often
times appeasing the wrath of the King, in suffering the evil, and
consoling the realm of the Romans.

Now whenas Charles had much folk in Lombardy, King Desir came to meet him
with his little host; for whereas Desir had a priest, Charles had a
bishop; whereas that one had a monk, the other had an abbot; where Desir
had a knight Charles had a prince; the one had a man afoot, the other a
duke or a count.  What should I say, where that King had one knight,
Charles had thirty.  So the two hosts fell to blows together with great
cries and banners displayed; stones and darts flying here and there, and
knights falling on every part.

And the Lombards fought so mightily for three days, that they slew of
King Charles a very great infinity.  And after the third day’s wearing
Charles called to him the most mighty and the strongest of his host, and
said to them: “Either die ye in battle, or gain ye the victory.”

So the King Desir and the whole host of the Lombards together fled away
to the place hight Mortara, which in those days was called Fair-wood,
whereas thereabout was the land delectable: there they refreshed them and
took heed to their horses.

On the morrow morn King Charles and his host came thither, and found the
Lombards all armed, and there they joined battle, and a great multitude
of dead there was on one side and the other, and because of this
slaughter had the place to name Mortara.

Moreover, there died Amis and Amile, for even as God had joined them
together by good accord in their life-days, so in their death they were
not sundered.  Withal many another doughty baron was slain with them.
But Desir, together with his judges, and a great multitude of the
Lombards, fled away and entered into Pavia; and King Charles followed
after them, and besieged the city on all sides.  Withal he sent into
France for his wife and his children.  But the holy Albins, bishop of
Angier, and many other bishops and abbots gave counsel to the King and
the Queen, that they should bury the dead and make there a church: and
the said counsel pleased much the King, and there were made two churches,
one by the commandment of Charles in honour of St. Eusebius of Verceil,
and the other by the commandment of the Queen in honour of St. Peter.

And the King did do bear thither two arks of stone, wherein were buried
Amis and Amile; and Amile was borne into the Church of St. Peter, and
Amis into the Church of St. Eusebius; and the other corpses were buried
here and there.  But on the morrow’s morn the body of Amile, and his
coffin therewith, was found in the Church of St. Eusebius hard by the
coffin of Amis his fellow.

Now hear ye of this marvellous fellowship which might not be sundered by
death.  This wonder wrought for them God, who had given such might to His
disciples that they had power to move mountains and shift them.  But
because of this miracle the King and the Queen abode there thirty days,
and did do the service of them that were slain, and worshipped the said
churches with great gifts.

Meanwhile the host of Charles wrought for the taking of the city which
they had besieged; and our Lord tormented them that were within in such
wise that they were brought to nought by great feebleness and by
mortalities.  And after ten months from the time when the city was
besieged, Charles took Desir, and all them who were with him, and laid
the city and all the realm under his subjection.  And King Desir and his
wife they led into France.

But Saint Albins, who by that time had raised the dead to life, and given
light to many blind folk, ordained clerks, priests, and deacons in the
aforesaid Church of St. Eusebius, and commanded them that they should
without ceasing guard and keep the bodies of those two fellows, AMIS and
AMILE, who suffered death at the hands of Desir, King of Lombardy, on the
fourth of the ides of October.

Reigning our Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth without end with
the Father and the Holy Ghost.  AMEN.




The Tale of King Florus and the Fair Jehane


HERE telleth the tale of a king who had to name King Florus of Ausay.  A
full good knight was he and a gentleman of high lineage.  The said King
Florus of Ausay took to wife the daughter of the Prince of Brabant, who
was a woman very gentle, and of great line: and a right fair maid was she
when he wedded her and dainty of body and fashion; and saith the tale
that she was but of fifteen years when the King Florus took her, and he
but of seventeen.  A full good life they lived, as for young folk who
loved together dearly: but King Florus might have no child of her,
whereof he was sore grieving, and she also was exceeding heavy-hearted
thereat.  Much fair was this lady, and much she loved God and Holy
Church, and therewith was so good almsgiver and so charitable that she
fed and clad poor people and kissed their feet.  And to mesel folk both
carles and queans was she so kind and careful, that the Holy Ghost dwelt
in her.  Her Lord King Florus went often to tournays in Alemain and
France, and in many other lands whereas he wotted of them, when he was
without war: much good he expended thereon and much honour he gained
thereby.

But now leaveth the tale to tell of him and taketh up the word of a
knight who dwelt in the marches of Flanders and Hainault.  This said
knight was full valiant and hardy, and right trusty, and had to wife a
full fair dame of whom he had a much fair daughter, who had to name
Jehane and was then of the age of twelve years.  Much word there was of
this fair maiden; for in all the land was none so fair.  Her mother spake
often to her lord that he should give her in marriage; but he was so
given up to the following of tournays, that he was nowise hot on the
wedding of his daughter, and his wife ever admonished him thereof when he
came home from his tournays.

Now this knight had a squire who had to name Robin, and was the
valiantest squire to be found in any land, and by his prowess and his
good fame oft he bore away the prize for his lord from the tournay
whereas he wended.  Whereon it befel that his lady thus bespake him:
“Robin, my lord is so given up to these tournays that I know not how to
speak with him, whereof I am sore at heart, for I would well that he
should lay pain and care to the wedding of my daughter; wherefore I pray
thee, for the love of me, that whenas thou seest the point thou say to
him that he doth very ill and is sore blamed that he weddeth not his fair
daughter, for there is no knight in the land how rich soever he be who
would not take her with a good will.”  “Lady,” said Robin, “ye have said
well; I will say it right well; since forsooth he troweth me of many
things, and so will he hereof meseemeth.”  “Robin,” said the lady, “I
pray thee of this business for all guerdon.”  “Dame,” said Robin, “I am
well prayed hereof; and wot ye that I will do to my power herein.”  “It
is enough,” said the lady.

No long while after the knight betook him to wending to a tournay afar
from his land, and when he came there he was retained straightway of the
fellowship, he and the knight of whose mesney he was, and his banner was
borne into the hostel of his lord.  The tournay began, and the knight did
so well by means of the good deeds of Robin, his squire, that he bore off
the praise and prize of the tournay from one party and the other.  On the
second day the knight betook him to wending to his own land, and Robin
put him to reason many times and blamed him much in that he gave not his
fair daughter in marriage, and many times he said it to him, till at the
last his lord said to him: “Robin, thou and thy lady give me no peace
about the marrying of my daughter; but as yet I know and see no man in my
land unto whom I would give her.”  “Ah, sir,” said Robin, “there is not a
knight in thy land who would not take her with a good will.”  “Fair
friend Robin, they are of no avail, all of them; and to none of them
shall I give her; and forsooth to no one would I give her as now, save to
one man only, and he forsooth is no knight.”  “Sir, tell me of him,” said
Robin, “and I shall speak or let speak to him so subtilly that the
marriage shall be made.”  “Certes, Robin,” said the knight, “from the
semblance that I see of thee thou willest well that my daughter should be
wedded.”  “Sir,” said Robin, “thou sayest sooth, for it is well time.”
“Robin,” said the knight, “whereas thou art so eager that my daughter
should be wedded, she shall be wedded right soon if thou accord to the
said wedding.”  “Certes, sir,” said Robin, “of a good will shall I accord
thereto.”  “Wilt thou give me thy word herein?”  “Yea, sir,” said Robin.
“Robin, thou hast served me exceeding well, and I have found thee a
valiant man, and a loyal, and such as I be thou hast made me, and great
gain have I gotten by thee, to wit, five hundred pounds of land; for it
was but a little while that I had but five hundred, and now have I a
thousand, and I tell thee that I owe much to thee: wherefore will I give
my fair daughter unto thee, if thou wilt take her.”  “Ha, sir,” said
Robin, “God’s mercy, what is this thou sayest?  I am too poor a person to
have so high a maiden, nor one so fair and so rich as my damsel is; I am
not meet thereto.  For there is no knight in this land, be he never so
gentle a man, but would take her with a good will.”  “Robin, know that no
knight of this land shall have her, but I shall give her to thee, if thou
will it; and thereto will I give thee four hundred pounds of my land.”
“Ha, sir,” said Robin, “I deem that thou mockest me.”  “Robin,” said the
knight, “wot thou surely that I mock thee not.”  “Ha, sir, neither my
lady nor her great lineage will accord hereto.”  “Robin,” said the
knight, “nought shall be done herein at the will of any of them.  Hold!
here is my glove, I invest thee with four hundred pounds of my land, and
I will be thy warrant for all.”  “Sir,” said Robin “I will nought naysay
it; fair is the gift since I know that is soothfast.”  “Robin,” said the
knight, “now hast thou the rights thereof.”

Then the knight delivered to him his glove, and invested him with the
land and his fair daughter.

Then rode the knight so far by his journeys, that he came into his land,
and when he was come thither, his wife, who was a much fair lady, made
him right great joy, and said to him: “Sir, for God’s sake think of thy
fair daughter, that she be wedded.”  “Dame,” said the lord, “so much hast
thou spoken hereof that I have wedded her.”  “Sir,” said the lady, “unto
whom?”  “Forsooth, dame, I have given her to such a man as shall never
lack of valiancy: I have given her to Robin my squire.”  “Robin!  Alas!”
quoth the lady; “Robin hath nought, and there is no knight so mighty in
all the land, but will take her with a good will; of a surety Robin shall
never have her.”  “Yea, but have her he shall, dame,” said the knight,
“and I have invested him with four hundred pounds of my land; and all
that I ought to warrant him, warrant him I will.”  When the dame heard
that, she was much sorry, and said to her lord that Robin should have her
never.  “Nay, dame,” said the lord, “have her he shall, wilt thou or wilt
thou not; for even so have I made covenant and I will hold to the same.”

When the lady heard her lord, she entered into her chamber and fell
a-weeping and making great dole; after the dole which she made she sent
to seek her brothers and her nephews and her cousins germain, and showed
them that which her lord would do; and they said to her: “Dame, what will
ye that we do?  We have no will to go against thy lord, for he is a
knight valiant and hardy and weighty withal: and on the other hand he may
do with his daughter according to his will, and with his land which he
hath gotten withal.  So wot thou well that we will not hang shield on
neck herein.”  “Nay? alas, then!” said the dame, “so shall my heart never
have joy if I lose my fair daughter.  At least, fair lords, I pray you
that ye show him that if he does thus he will neither do well nor
according to his honour.”  “Dame,” say they, “this setting forth will we
do with a good will.”

So they came unto the knight, and when they had showed him their business
he answered them right courteously: “Fair lords, I will tell you what I
will do for the love of you; if it please you I will put off the wedding
in this wise as I shall tell you; to wit: Amongst you ye be rich and of
great lands; ye are nigh friends of my fair daughter, whom I love much.
If ye will give her four hundred pounds of land I will set aside the
wedding, and she shall be wedded elsewhere according to your counsel.”
“A-God’s name,” quoth they, “we be nought fain to lay down so much.”
“Well, then,” said the knight, “since ye will not do this, then suffer me
to do with my daughter as I list.”  “Sir, with a good will,” said they.

So the knight sent for his chaplain, and brought thither his fair
daughter, and let affiance her to Robin, and set a day for the wedding.
But the third day thereafter, Robin spake to his lord, and prayed him
make him a knight, whereas it was nought meet that he should take to him
so high a wife and so fair before he was a knight.  His lord had great
joy thereof, and the next day he was made knight, and the third day
wedded the fair maiden with great feast and joyance.

But when master Robin was made knight he spake thus to his lord: “Sir, ye
have made me knight; and true it is that against the peril of death I
vowed me to the road unto Saint Jamesward on the morrow of my knighting;
wherefore I pray thee take it not in dudgeon if to-morrow morn I must
needs go my ways so soon as I shall have wedded thy fair daughter;
whereas in nowise will I break mine oath.”  “Forsooth, master Robin, if
thou leave thus my fair daughter and thus wise go your ways, ye shall be
much to blame.”  “Sir,” said he, “I shall come back right soon if God
will; but this wayfaring I needs must perforce.”  Whenas a certain knight
of the court of the lord heard these words he blamed Sir Robin much,
whereas he was leaving his fair wife at such a point, and Sir Robin said
that he needs must do it.  “Certes,” said the knight, who had to name
Raoul, “if thou goest thus to Saint James without touching thy fair wife,
I will make thee cuckold before thine home-coming, and when thou comest
home I will give thee good tokens that I have had share of her.  Now I
will lay my land thereto against thine, which our lord hath given thee,
for I have well four hundred pounds of land even as thou hast.”
“Forsooth,” said Sir Robin, “my wife is not come of such blood as that
she shall misdo against me, and I may not believe in it nowise: I will
make the wager with thee, if it please thee.”  “Yea,” said Sir Raoul,
“wilt thou pledge thee thereto?”  “Yea, verily,” said Sir Robin, “and
thou?”  “Yea, and I also.  Now go we to my lord and make record of our
covenant.”  “That will I well,” said Sir Robin.  Therewith they go unto
the lord, and the wager was recorded, and they pledged them to hold
thereto.  On the morrow betimes Sir Robin wedded the fair maiden, and
straightway after mass was said, he departed from the house and left the
wedding, and took the road for St. Jakem.

But now leaveth the tale to tell of him and telleth of Sir Raoul, who was
in great imagination how he might win his wager and lie by the fair lady.
And saith the tale that the lady held her much simply while her lord was
on pilgrimage, and was going to the minster with a good will, and prayed
God that he would bring back her lord.  But Sir Raoul pained him on the
other hand how he might win his wager, for great doubt he had to lose his
land.  He spake with the carline who dwelt with the fair lady, and said
to her, that if she could so bring it about that she might set him in
place and at point that he might speak privily with my lady Jehane, and
have his will of her, he would give her much good, so that there would be
no hour when she should not be rich.  “Sir, forsooth,” said the carline,
“thou art so fair a knight, and so wise and courteous that my lady should
well ought to love thee par amours, and I will put myself to the pain
herein to the utmost of my might.”  Then the knight drew out straightway
a forty sols, and gave it to her to buy a gown.  The carline took them
with a goodwill, and set them away surely, and said that she would speak
with the lady.  The knight departed from the carline, and the carline
abode and took her lady to task when she came back from the minster, and
said to her: “In God’s name, lady, tell me true!  My lord, when he went
to Saint Jakem, had he ever lain by thee?”  “Wherefore dost thou say
this, dame Hersent?”  “Lady, because I trow that thou be yet a clean
maid.”  “Certes, dame Hersent, so am I verily; for of no woman wot I who
would do such a deed.”  “Lady,” said dame Hersent, “great damage it is;
for if ye wotted how great is the joy that women have when they be with a
man who loveth them, ye would say that there is no joy so great; and for
this cause I marvel much that ye love not par amours even as these other
ladies who all love.  But if it pleaseth thee the matter is ready to
hand; whereas I wot of a knight, fair and valiant and wise, who will love
thee with a good will; a much rich man is he, and fairer by far than the
coward recreant who hath left thee.  And if ye dare love ye may have
whatso ye dare ask; and so much joy shall ye have as never lady had
more.”  So much spake the carline by her words that the needle of nature
stirred somewhat.  The lady asked who the knight might be.  “Who is it,
lady?  A-God’s name!  I may well name him.  It is the lovely, the
valiant, the hardy Sir Raoul, who is one of the mesney of thy father; the
kindest heart men wot of.”  “Dame Hersent,” said the lady, “thou wert
best let such words be; for I have no desire to misdo of my body, of no
such blood am I come.”  “Dame,” said the carline, “I wot well.  But never
shalt thou know the worthy joy when a man wendeth with a woman.”

Thuswise abode the matter.  Sir Raoul came back to the carline, and she
told him how she had talked with the lady, and what she had answered.
“Dame Hersent,” said the knight, “thus wise should a good lady answer;
but ye shall speak with her again, for one doeth not the business at the
first stroke: and hold, here be twenty sols to buy thee a cloth to thy
surcoat.”  The carline took the silver, and spake with the lady often,
but nought it availed.

Wore the time till at last they heard news that Sir Robin was wending
back from Saint Jakem, and that he was already hard on Paris.  Soon was
known the tidings, and Sir Raoul, who had fear of the losing of his
lands, returned to the carline, and spake with her; and she said that she
might not bring the business to an end: but that she would do so much for
the love of him, if she should earn her service, that she would so bring
it about as that there should be none in the house save he and this lady:
and then he might do his will on her, will she nill she: and he said that
he asked for nought else.  “Then,” said the carline, “ye, my lord, shall
come within eight days, and I will do my lady to bathe her in her
chamber, and I will send all the mesney out of the house and out of the
castle; then can ye come to her bathing in the chamber, and may have your
desire of her, either with her good will or maugre.”  “Ye have well
said,” quoth he.

Abode matters thus till Sir Robin sent word that he was coming to hand,
and would be at the house on the Sunday.  Then the carline let bathe the
lady the Thursday before, and the bath was in her chamber, and the fair
lady entered therein.  But the carline sent after Sir Raoul, and he came.
Thereafter she sent all the folk of the household out of the house.  Sir
Raoul came his ways to the chamber and entered therein, and greeted the
lady, but she greeted him not again, but said thus:

“Sir Raoul, thou art nowise courteous.  Whether wottest thou forsooth
that it is well with me of thy coming? accursed be thou, villain knight!”
But Sir Raoul said: “My lady, mercy, a-God’s name!  I am but dying for
grief of thee.  For God’s sake have pity of me!”  “Sir Raoul,” said she,
“I will have no mercy in such wise that I will ever be thy darling.  And
wot thou well that if thou leave me not in peace I will tell my lord, my
father, the honour thou requirest of me: for I am none such as that.”
“Nay, lady, is it so, then?”  “Yea, verily,” said she.

Therewith Sir Raoul drew nigh to her, and embraced her in his arms, which
were strong enow, and drew her all naked out of the bath and bore her
toward her bed; and so soon as he drew her forth of the bath he saw a
black spot which she had on her right groin hard by her natural part; and
he thought therewithal that that were a good token that he had lain by
her.  Thus as he bore her off to her bed, his spurs hooked them into the
serge at the bed’s edge toward the foot thereof, and down fell the
knight, he and the lady together, he below and she above; but she rose up
straightway and caught up a billet of wood, and smote Sir Raoul therewith
amidst the face, and made him a wound both deep and wide, so that the
blood fell to earth.  So when Sir Raoul felt himself hurt he had no great
desire to play, wherefore he arose and got him gone out of the chamber
straightway: he did so much that he came to his hostel, where he dwelt a
good league thence, and there he had his wound dealt with.  But the good
dame entered into her bath again, and called dame Hersent, and told the
adventure of the knight.

Much great array made the father of the fair lady against the coming of
Sir Robin, and he summoned much folk, and sent and bade Sir Raoul to
come; but he sent word that he might not come, for that he was sick.  On
the Sunday camel Sir Robin, and was received right fairly; and the father
of the fair lady went to seek Sir Raoul and found him wounded, and said
that now for nought might he abide behind from the feast.  So he dight
his face and his hurt the best wise he might, and went to the feast,
which was great and grand day long of drinking and of eating, and of
dancing and carolling.

When night was come Sir Robin went to bed with his wife, who received him
much joyously as a good dame ought to her lord; so abode they in joy and
in feast the more part of the night.  On the morrow great was the feast,
and the victual was dight and they ate.  But when it was after dinner,
Sir Raoul bore on hand Sir Robin, and said that he had won his land,
whereas he had known his wife carnally, by the token, to wit, that she
had a black spot on her right thigh and a pearlet hard by her jewel.
“Thereof I wot not,” said Sir Robin, “for I have not looked on her so
close.”  “Well, then, I tell thee,” said Sir Raoul, “by the oath that
thou hast given me that thou take heed thereof, and do me right.”  “So
will I, verily,” said Sir Robin.

When night was, Sir Robin played with his wife, and found and saw on her
right thigh the black spot, and a pearlet hard by her fair jewel: and
when he knew it he was sore grieving.  On the morrow he went to Sir
Raoul, and said before his lord that he had lost his wager.  Heavy of
heart was he day long, and when it was night he went to the stable, and
set the saddle on his palfrey, and went forth from the house, bearing
with him what he might get him of silver.  So came to Paris, and when he
was at Paris he abode there three days.  But now leaveth the tale to tell
of him, and taketh up the word concerning his wife.

Here saith the tale that much sorrowful was the fair lady and heavy of
heart, when she called to mind how she had cast her lord out of his
house.  Much she thought of the wherefore thereof and wept and made great
dole; till her father came to her, and said that he were fainer if she
were yet to wed, whereas she had done him shame and all them of his
lineage; and he told her how and wherefore.  When she heard that, she was
sore grieved and denied the deed downright; but nought availed.  For it
is well known that shame so sore is contrary to all women, that if a
woman were to burn all, she would not be trowed of such a misdoing, once
it were laid on her.

On the first hour of the night the lady arose, and took all pennies that
she had in her coffer, and took a nag and a harness thereto, and gat her
to the road; and she had let shear her fair tresses, and was otherwise
arrayed like to an esquire.  So much she went by her journeys that she
came to Paris, and went after her lord; and she said and declared that
she would never make an end before she had found him.  Thus she rode like
to a squire.  And on a morning she went forth out of Paris, and wended
the way toward Orleans until she came to the Tomb Isory, and there she
fell in with her lord Sir Robin.  Full fain she was when she saw him, and
she drew up to him and greeted him, and he gave her greeting back and
said: “Fair friend, God give thee joy!”  “Sir,” said she, “whence art
thou?”  “Forsooth, fair friend, I am of old Hainault.”  “Sir, whither
wendeth thou?”  “Forsooth, fair friend, I wot not right well whither I
go, nor where I shall dwell.  Forsooth, needs must I where fortune shall
lead me; and she is contrary enough; for I have lost the thing in the
world that most I ever loved: and she also hath lost me.  Withal I have
lost my land, which was great and fair enough.  But what hast thou to
name, and whither doth God lead thee?”  “Certes, sir,” said Jehane, “I am
minded for Marseilles on the sea, where is war as I hope.  There would I
serve some valiant man, about whom I shall learn me arms if God will.
For I am so undone in mine own country that therein for a while of time I
may not have peace.  But, sir, meseemeth that thou be a knight, and I
would serve thee with a right good will if it please thee.  And of my
company wilt thou be nought worsened.”  “Fair friend,” said Sir Robin, “a
knight am I verily.  And where I may look to find war, thitherward would
I draw full willingly.  But tell me what thou hast to name?”  “Sir,” said
she, “I have to name John.”  “In a good hour,” quoth the knight.  “And
thou, sir, how hight thou?”  “John,” said he, “I have to name Robin.”
“Sir Robin, retain me as thine esquire, and I will serve thee to my
power.”  “John, so would I with a good will.  But so little of money have
I that I must needs sell my horse before three days are worn.  Wherefore
I wot not how to do to retain thee.”  “Sir,” said John, “be not dismayed
thereof, for God will aid thee if it please him.  But tell me where thou
wilt eat thy dinner?”  “John, my dinner will soon be made; for not
another penny have I than three sols of Paris.”  “Sir,” said John, “be
nought dismayed thereof, for I have hard on ten pounds Tournais, whereof
thou shalt not lack, if thou hast not to spend at thy will.”  “Fair
friend John, have thou mickle thanks.”

Then made they good speed to Montlhery: there John dight meat for his
lord and they ate.  When they had eaten, the knight slept in a bed and
John at his feet.  When they had slept, John did on the bridles, and they
mounted and gat to the road.  They went so far by their journeys that
they came to Marseilles-on-sea; but of war they heard no word there,
whereof were they much sorry.  But now leaveth the tale to tell of them
two, and returneth to tell of Sir Raoul, who had by falsehood gained the
land of Sir Robin.

Here telleth the tale that so long did Sir Raoul hold the land of Sir
Robin without righteous cause, for seven years’ wearing.  Then he took a
great sickness and of that sickness was sore beaten down, insomuch that
he was on the point of death.  Now he doubted much the transgression
which he had done against the fair lady the daughter of his lord, and
against her husband also, whereby they were undone, both of them by
occasion of his malice.  Exceeding ill at ease was he of his wrongdoing,
which was so great that he durst not confess it.

Came a day when he was sore undone by his sickness, so he sent for his
chaplain whom he loved much, for he had found him a man valiant and
loyal; and he said to him: “Sir, thou who art my father before God, know
that I look to die of this sickness, wherefore I pray thee for God’s sake
that ye aid me with your counsel, for great is my need thereof, for I
have done an ill deed so hideous and dark that scarce shall I have mercy
therefor.”  The chaplain bade him tell it out hardily, and that he would
aid him with counsel to his power; till at last Sir Raoul told him all as
ye have heard afore.  And he prayed him for God’s sake give him counsel,
so great as was his misdoing.  “Sir,” said he, “be nought dismayed, for
if thou wilt do the penance which I enjoin thee, I will take thy
transgression on me and on my soul, so that thou shalt be quit.”  “Yea,
tell me then,” said the knight.  “Sir,” said he, “thou shalt take the
cross far over sea, and thou shalt get thee thereto within the year
wherein thou art whole, and shalt give pledges to God that thou shalt so
do: and in every place where men ask thee the occasion of thy journey,
thou shalt tell it to all who shall ask it of thee.”  “All this will I
well do,” said the knight.  “Then, sir, give thou good pledge.”  “With a
good will,” said the knight; “thou thyself shalt abide surety for me, and
I swear to thee on my knighthood that I shall quit thee well.”  “A-God’s
name, sir!” quoth the chaplain, “I will be thy surety.”  Now turned the
knight to amendment, and was all whole; and a year wore wherein he went
not over sea.  The chaplain spake to him often thereof, but he held the
covenant as but a jest; till at last the chaplain said that but if he
acquitted him before God of his pledge, he would tell the tale to the
father of the fair damsel, who had been thus undone by him.  When the
knight heard that, he said to the chaplain that within half a year he
would set about the crossing of the sea, and so swore to him.  But now
leaveth the tale to tell of the knight, and returneth to telling of King
Florus of Ausaye, of whom for a great while it hath been silent.

Now saith the tale that a much good life led King Florus of Ausay and his
wife, as of young folk who loved each other; but much sorry and
heavy-hearted were they that they might have no child.  The lady made
great prayers to God, and let sing masses; but whereas it was not well
pleasing to God, it might not be.  But on a day came thither into the
house of King Florus a good man who had his dwelling in the great forest
of Ausaye in a place right wild; and when the queen knew that he was come
she came unto him and made him right great joy.  And because he was a
good man she confessed to him and told him all her ailing, and how that
she was exceeding heavy of heart, because she had had no child by her
lord.  “Ah, lady,” said the good man, “since it pleaseth not our Lord,
needs must thou abide it; and when it pleaseth him thou shalt have one,
or two.”  “Certes, sir,” said the lady, “I were fain thereof; for my lord
holdeth me the less dear, and the high barons of this land also.  Withal
it hath been told to me that they have spoken to my lord to leave me and
take another.”  “Verily, dame,” said the good man, “he would do ill; it
would be done against God and against Holy Church.”  “Ah, sir, I pray
thee to pray to God for me that I may have a child of my lord, for great
fear I have lest he leave me.”  “Dame,” said the good man, “my prayer
shall avail but little, but if it please God; nevertheless I will pray
heartily.”

The good man departed from the lady, and the barons of the land and of
the country came to the King Florus, and bade him send away his wife and
take another, since by this he might have no child.  And if he did not
after their counsel, they would go and dwell otherwhere; for in no case
would they that the realm should be without an heir.  King Florus feared
his barons and trowed their word, and he said that he would send away his
wife, and that they should seek him another, and they trusted him
therein.  When the lady knew it she was exeeeding heavy of heart; but
nought durst she do, for she knew that her lord would leave her.  So she
sent for the hermit who had been her confessor, and he came to her.  Then
the lady told him all the tale of the matter of the barons, who would
seek for their lord another woman.  “And I pray thee, good father, that
thou wouldst aid me, and counsel me what I should do.”  “Dame,” said the
good man, “if it be so as thou sayest, ye must needs suffer it; for
against thy lord and against his barons ye may do nought perforce.”
“Sir,” said the good lady, “thou sayest sooth: but if it please God, I
were fain to be a recluse nigh unto thee; whereby I may be at the service
of God all the days of my life, and that I may have comfort of thee.”
“Dame,” said the good man, “that would be over strange a thing, whereas
thou art too young a lady and too fair.  But I will tell thee what thou
shalt do.  Hard by my hermitage there is an abbey of White Nuns, who are
right good ladies, and I counsel you go thither; and they will have great
joy of thee for thy goodness and thy high dignity.”  “Sir,” said she,
“thou hast well said; I will do all that thou counsellest me.”

On the morrow King Florus spake to his wife, and said thus: “Needs must
thou and I sunder, for that thou mayst have no child by me.  Now I say
thee soothly that the sundering lies heavy on me, for never shall I love
woman as I have loved thee.”  Therewith fell King Florus to weep sorely,
and the lady also.  “Sir,” said she, “a-God’s mercy!  And whither shall I
go, and what shall I do?”  “Dame, thou shalt do well, if it please God,
for I will send thee back well and richly into thy country to thy
kindred.”  “Sir,” said the lady, “it shall not be so: I have purveyed me
an abbey of nuns, where I will be, if it please thee; and there I will
serve God all my life; for since I lose thy company I am she that no man
shall go with any more.”  Thereat King Florus wept and the lady also.
But on the third day the queen went to the abbey; and the other queen was
come, and had great feast made her, and great joy of her friends.  King
Florus held her for three years, but never might have child of her.  But
here the tale holdeth peace of King Florus, and betaketh it again to Sir
Robin, and to John who were at Marseilles.

Here telleth the tale that much sorry was Sir Robin when he came to
Marseilles, whereas he heard tell of nought toward in the country; so he
said to John: “What do we?  Thou hast lent me of thy moneys, whereof I
thank thee: I will give them back to thee, for I will sell my palfrey,
and quit me toward thee.”  “Sir,” said John, “if it please thee, believe
me, and I shall tell thee what we shall do.  I have yet well an hundred
sols of Tournay, and if it please thee, I will sell our two horses, and
make money thereby: for I am the best of bakers that ye may wot of; and I
will make French bread, and I doubt me not but I shall earn my spending
well and bountifully.”  “John,” said Sir Robin, “I grant it thee to do
all as thou wilt.”

So on the morrow John sold the two horses for ten pounds Tournays, and
bought corn and let grind it, and bought baskets, and fell to making
French bread, so good and so well made that he sold it for more than the
best baker of the town might do; and he did so much within two years that
he had well an hundred pounds of chattels.  Then said John to his lord:
“I rede thee well that we buy us a very great house, and that we buy us
wine and take to harbouring good folk.”  “John,” said Sir Robin, “do
according to thy will, for I grant it thee, and moreover I praise thee
much.”  So John bought a house, great and fair, and harboured good folk,
and earned enough plenteously; and he arrayed his lord well and richly;
and Sir Robin had his palfrey, and went to eat and drink with the most
worthy of the town, and John sent him wine and victual, so that all they
that haunted his company marvelled thereat.  So much he gained that in
three years’ time he had gotten him more than three hundred pounds of
garnishment, out-taken his plenishing, which was well worth fifty pounds.
But here leaveth the tale to tell of Sir Robin and of John, and goeth
back to tell of Sir Raoul.

For, saith the tale, that the chaplain held Sir Raoul right short that he
should go over sea, and quit him of the pledge he had laid down; for
great fear he had lest he yet should leave it; and so much he did that
Sir Raoul saw well that he needs must go.  So he dight his journey, and
arrayed him right richly, as he that hath well enough thereto; and so he
betook him to the road with three squires: and went so much by his
journeys that he came into Marseilles-on-sea and took lodging in the
French hostel, whereas dwelt Sir Robin and John.  So soon as John saw him
she knew him by the scar of the wound she had made him, and because she
had seen him many times.  The knight sojourned in the town fifteen days,
and hired him passage.  But the while he sojourned, John drew him in to
privy talk, and asked of him the occasion of his going over sea, and Sir
Raoul told him all the occasion, as one who had little heed thereof, even
as the tale hath told afore.  When John heard that, he held his peace.
Sir Raoul set his goods aboard ship, and went upon the sea; but tarried
so much the ship wherein he was that he abode in the town for eight days;
but on the ninth day he betook him to go his ways to the holy sepulchre,
and did his pilgrimage, and confessed him the best he might: and his
confessor charged him in penance that he should give back the land which
he held wrongfully to the knight and his wife.  Whereon he said to his
confessor, that when he came into his own country he would do what his
heart bade him.  So he departed from Jerusalem and came to Acre, and
dight his passage as one who had great longing to repair to his own
country.  He went up on to the sea, and wended so diligently, as well by
night as by day, till in less than three months he came to the port of
Aigues-mort.  Then he departed from the port and came straight to
Marseilles, wherein he sojourned eight days in the hostel of Sir Robin
and John, which hight the French house.  Never did Sir Robin know him,
for on that matter he thought nothing.  At the end of eight days he
departed from Marseilles, he and his squires, and went so long by his
journeys that he came into his own country, where he was received with
great joy, as one who was a knight rich in land and chattels.  Thereon
his chaplain took him to task, and asked of him if any had demanded the
occasion of his journey; and he said: “Yea, in three places, to wit:
Marseilles, Acre, and Jerusalem: and he of whom I took counsel bade me to
give back the land to Sir Robin, if I hear tidings of him, or to his wife
else, or to his heir.”  “Certes,” said the chaplain; “he bade thee good
counsel.”  Thus was Sir Raoul in his own country a great while in rest
and good ease.  But here leaveth the tale to tell of him, and returneth
to Sir Robin and John.

Here saith the tale that when Sir Robin and John had been at Marseilles
for six years that John had gotten to the value of six hundred pounds,
and they were come into the seventh year, and John might gain eke what he
would, and so sweet he was, and so debonaire that he made himself loved
of all the neighbours, and therewithal he was of good hap as he might not
be of more, and maintained his lord so nobly and so richly that it was
wonder to behold.  When the end of the seven years drew nigh, John fell
to talk with his lord Sir Robin, and spake thus: “Sir, we have now been a
great while in this country, and so much have we gained, that we have
hard on six hundred pounds of chattels, what of money, what of vessel of
silver.”  “Forsooth, John,” said Sir Robin, “they be not mine, but thine;
for it is thou hast earned them.”  “Sir,” said John, “saving thy grace,
it is not so, but they are thine: for thou art my rightful lord, and
never, if it please God, will I change.”  “Gramercy, John, I hold thee
not for servant, but for companion and friend.”  “Sir,” said John, “all
days I have kept thee loyal company, and shall do from henceforth.”  “By
my faith,” said Sir Robin, “I will do what so pleaseth thee: but to go
into my country, I wot not to say thereof: for I have lost so much there
that hardly shall my scathe be righted to me.”  “Sir,” said John, “be
thou never dismayed of that matter; for when thou art come into thine own
country thou shalt hear good tidings, please God.  And doubt thou
nothing, for in all places whereas we shall be, if it please God, I shall
earn enough for thee and for me.”  “Certes, John,” said Sir Robin, “I
will do as it pleaseth thee, and where thou wilt that I go, thither will
I.”  “Sir,” said John, “I shall sell our chattels, and dight our journey,
and we will go within fifteen days.”  “A-God’s name, John,” said Sir
Robin.

John sold all his plenishing, whereof he had good store and goodly, and
bought three horses, a palfrey for his lord, another for himself, and a
sumpter horse.  Then they took leave of the neighbours, and the most
worthy of the town, who were sore grieved of their departure.

Wore the way Sir Robin and John, insomuch that in three weeks’ space they
came into their country.  And Robin made known to his lord, whose
daughter he had had, that he was at hand.  The lord was much joyful
thereof, for he was deeming well that his daughter would be with him.
And she indeed it was, but in the guise of an esquire.  Sir Robin was
well received of his lord, whose daughter he had erewhile wedded.  When
the lord could have no tidings of his daughter, he was right sorrowful;
nevertheless he made good feast to Sir Robin, and bade thereto his
knights and his neighbours; and thither came Sir Raoul, who held the land
of Sir Robin wrongfully.  Great was the joy that day and the morrow, and
that while Sir Robin told to John the occasion of the wager, and how Sir
Raoul held his land wrongfully.  “Sir,” said John, “do thou appeal him of
treason, and I will do the battle for thee.”  “Nay, John,” said Sir
Robin, “thou shalt not do it.”

So they left it till the morrow, when John came to Sir Robin and did him
to wit that he would speak to the father of his wife; and thus he said to
him: “Sir, thou art lord to my lord Sir Robin after God, and he wedded
thy daughter time was.  But there was a wager betwixt him and Sir Raoul,
who said that he would make him cuckold by then he returned from St.
Jakeme; whereof Sir Raoul hath made false report, whereas he hath had nor
part nor lot in thy fair daughter.  And he hath done disloyal treason.
All which things I am ready to prove on his body.”  Then leapt forth Sir
Robin and said: “John, fair friend, none shall do the battle save I;
nowise shalt thou hang shield on neck herein.”  Therewith Sir Robin
reached his pledge to his lord; and Sir Raoul was sore grieving of the
pledging, but needs must he defend him, or cry craven; so he reached for
this pledge right cowardly.  So were the pledges given, and day of battle
appointed on that day fifteen days without naysay.

Now hear ye marvels of John what he did.  John who had to name my Lady
Jehane, had in the house of her father a cousin germain of hers, who was
a fair damsel, and of some five and twenty years.  Jehane came to her,
and laid all the whole truth bare to her, and told her the whole business
from point to point, and showed her all openly; and prayed her much that
she would hide all the matter until the time and hour came when she
should make herself known to her father.  Wherefore her cousin, who knew
her well, said to her that she would keep all well hidden, so that by her
it should never be discovered.  Then was the chamber of her cousin dight
for the Lady Jehane; and the said lady, the while of the fortnight before
the battle should be, let bathe her and stove her; and she took her ease
the best she might, as one who well had therewithal.  And she let cut and
shape for her duly four pair of gowns, of Scarlet, of Vair, of Perse, and
of cloth of silk; and she took so well her ease that she came back to her
most beauty, and was so fair and dainty as no lady might be more.

But when it came to the end of the fifteen days, then was Sir Robin sore
grieving of John his esquire, because he had lost him, and knew not where
he was become.  But none the more did he leave to apparel him for the
fight as one who had heart enough and hardihood.

On the morn of the day whenas the battle was appointed, came both the
knights armed.  They drew apart one from the other, and then they fell on
each other with the irons of their glaives, and smote on each other with
so great heat that they bore down each other’s horses to the earth
beneath their bodies.  Sir Raoul was hurt a little on the left side.  Sir
Robin rose up the first, and came a great pace on Sir Raoul, and smote
him a great stroke on the helm in such wise that he beat down the
head-piece and drave in the sword on to the mail-coif, and sheared all
thereto; but the coif was of steel so strong that he wounded him not,
howbeit he made him to stagger, so that he caught hold of the arson of
the saddle; and if he had not, he had fallen to earth.  Then Sir Raoul,
who was a good knight, smote Sir Robin so great a stroke upon the helm
that he all to astonied him; and the stroke fell down to the shoulder,
and sheared the mails of the hawberk, but hurt him not.  Then Sir Robin
smote him with all his might, but he threw his shield betwixt, and Sir
Robin smote off a quarter thereof.  When Sir Raoul felt his strong
strokes, he misdoubted him much, and wished well that he were over sea,
if he were but quit of the battle, and Sir Robin back on the land which
he held.  Nevertheless he put forth all his might and drew nigh, and fell
on Sir Robin much hardly, and gave him a great stroke upon his shield so
that he sheared it to the boss thereof.  But Sir Robin laid a great
stroke upon his helm, but he threw his shield betwixt and Sir Robin
sheared it amidst, and the sword fell upon the neck of the horse, and
sheared it amidst, and beat down straightway both horse and man.  Then
Sir Raoul leapt to his feet, as one who was in a stour exceeding heavy.
Then Sir Robin lighted down, whereas he would not betake him to his horse
while the other was afoot.

Now were both knights come unto the skirmish and they hewed in pieces
each other’s shields and helms and haw—berks, and drew the blood from
each other’s bodies with their trenchant swords; and had they smitten as
great strokes as at first, soon had they slain each other, for they had
so little of their shields that scarce might they cover their fists
therewith.  Yet had neither of them fear of death or shame: nevertheless
the nighness of them to each other called on them to bring the battle to
an end.  Sir Robin took his sword in both hands, and smote Sir Raoul with
all his might on the helm, and sheared it amidst, so that one half
thereof fell upon the shoulders, and he sheared the steel coif, and made
him a great wound on the head; and Sir Raoul was so astonied of the
stroke that he bent him to the earth on one knee; but he rose up
straightway and was in great misease when he thus saw his head naked, and
great fear of death he had.  But he came up to Sir Robin and fetched a
stroke with all his might on what he had of shield and he sheared it
asunder and the stroke came on the helm and cut into it well three
fingers, so that the sword came on the iron coif, which was right good,
so that the sword brake a-twain.  When Sir Raoul saw his sword broken and
his head naked, he doubted much the death.  Nevertheless he stooped down
to the earth, and took up a great stone in his two hands, and cast it
after Sir Robin with all his might; but Sir Robin turned aside when he
saw the stone coming, and ran on Sir Raoul, who took to flight all over
the field; and Sir Robin said to him that he would slay him but if he
cried craven.  Whereon Sir Raoul thus bespake him: mercy on me, gentle
knight, and ere my sword, so much as I have thereof, and I render it to
thee, and all of me therewith unto thy mercy; and I pray thee have pity
of me, and beg of thy lord and mine to have mercy on me and that thou and
he save my life, and I render and give both thy land and mine.  For I
have held it against right and against reason.  And I have wrongfully
defamed the fair lady and good.

When Sir Robin heard this, he said that he had done enough, and he prayed
his lord so much that he pardoned Sir Raoul of his misdeed, in such wise
that he was quit thereof on the condition that he should go over seas and
abide there lifelong.

Thuswise conquered Sir Robin his land and the land of Sir Raoul to boot
for all his days.  But he was so sore grieving and sad at heart of his
good dame and fair, whom he had thus lost, that he could have no solace;
and on the other hand, he was so sore grieving for John his esquire whom
he had so lost, that marvel it was.  And his lord was no less sad at
heart for his fair daughter whom he had thus lost, and of whom he might
have no tidings.

But dame Jehane, who was in the chamber of her cousin germain for fifteen
days in good ease, when she wotted that her lord had vanquished the
battle, was exceeding much at ease.  Now she had done make four pair of
gowns, as is aforesaid, and she clad her with the richest of them which
was of silk bended of fine gold of Araby.  Moreover she was so fair of
body and of visage, and so dainty withal, that nought in the world might
be found fairer, so that her cousin germain all marvelled at her great
beauty.  And she had been bathed, and attired and had ease at all points
for the fifteen days, so that she was come into so great beauty as wonder
was.  Much fair was the Lady Jehane in her gown of silk bended of gold.
So she called her cousin to her and said: “How deemest thou of me?”
“What, dame!” said her cousin, “thou art the fairest lady of the world.”
“I shall tell thee, then, fair cousin, what thou shalt do: go thou tell
so much before my father as that he shall make dole no more, but be glad
and joyful, and that thou bearest him good news of his daughter who is
whole and well; and that he come with thee and thou wilt show him.  Then
bring him hither, and meseemeth he will see me with a good will.”  The
damsel said that she would well do that errand and she came to the father
of the Lady Jehane, and said him what his daughter had said.  When her
sire heard thereof great wonder he wist it, and went with the damsel, and
found his daughter in her chamber, and knew her straightway, and put his
arms about her neck, and wept over her for joy and pity, and had so great
joy that scarce might he speak to her.  Then he asked her where she had
been so long a while.  “Fair father,” said she, “thou shalt know it well
anon.  But a-God’s sake do my lady mother to come to me, for I have great
longing to see her.”  The lord sent for his wife, and when she came into
the chamber where was her daughter, and saw her and knew her, she swooned
for joy, and might not speak a great while, and when she came out of her
swooning none might believe the great joy that she made of her daughter.

But whiles they were in this joy, the father of the fair lady went to
seek Sir Robin and bespake him thus: “Sir Robin, fair sweet son, tidings
can I say thee exceeding joyous us between.”  “Certes,” said Sir Robin,
“of joy have I great need, for none save God can set rede to it whereby I
may have joy.  For I have lost thy fair daughter, whereof have I sore
grief at heart.  And thereto have I lost the swain and the squire, who of
all in the world hath done me most good; to wit, John the good, my
squire.”  “Sir Robin,” said the lord, “be ye nought dismayed thereof, for
of squires thou shalt find enough.  But of my fair daughter I could tell
thee good tidings; for I have seen her e’en now; and, wot ye well, she is
the fairest lady that may be in the world.”  When Sir Robin heard that,
he trembled all with joy and said to his lord: “Ah, sir, for God’s sake
bring me where I may see if this be true!”  “With a good will,” said the
lord; “come along now.”

The lord went before and he after, till I they were come to the chamber,
where the mother was yet making great feast of her daughter, and they
were weeping with joy one over the other.  But when they saw their
rightful lords a-coming, they rose up; and so soon as Sir Robin knew his
wife, he ran to her with his arms spread abroad, and they clipped and
kissed together dearly, and wept of joy and pity; and they were thus
embracing together for the space of the running of ten acres, or ever
they might sunder.  Then the lord commanded the tables to be laid for
supper, and they supped and made great joy.

After supper, when the feast had been right great, they went to bed, and
Sir Robin lay that night with the Lady Jehane his wife, who made him
great joy, and he her in likewise; and they spake together of many
things, and so much that Sir Robin asked of her where she had been; and
she said: “Sir, long were it to tell, but thou shalt know it well in
time.  Now tell to me what thou couldest to do, and where thou hast been
so long a while.”  “Lady,” said Sir Robin, “that will I well tell thee.”

So he fell to telling her all that she well knew, and of John his
esquire, who had done him so much good, and said that he was so troubled
whereas he had thus lost him, that he would make never an end of
wandering till he had found him, and that he would bestir himself thereto
the morrow’s morn.  “Sir,” said the lady, “that were folly; and how
should it be then; wouldst thou leave me, then?”  “Forsooth, dame,” said
he, “e’en so it behoveth me.  For none did ever so much for another as he
did for me.”  “Sir,” said the dame, “wherein he did for thee, he did but
duly.  Even so he was bound to do.”  “Dame,” said Sir Robin, “by what
thou sayest thou shouldst know him.”  “Forsooth,” said the lady, “I
should ought to know him well, for never did he anything whereof I wotted
not.”  “Lady,” said Sir Robin, “thou makest me to marvel at thy words.”
“Sir,” said the lady, “never marvel thou hereof!  If I tell thee a word
for sooth and for certain, wilt thou not believe me?”  “Dame,” said he,
“yea, verily.”

“Well, then, believe me in this,” said she; “for wot of a verity that I
am the very same John whom thou wouldest go seek, and I will tell thee
how.  For I knew that thou wert gone for the great sorrow thou hadst for
my misdoing against thee, and for thy land which thou deemedst thou hadst
lost for ever.  Whereas I had heard tell of the occasion of the wager,
and of the treason Sir Raoul had done, whereof I was so wroth as never
woman was more wroth.  Straightway I let shear my hair, and took the
money in my coffer, about ten pounds of Tournais, and arrayed me like an
esquire, and followed thee away to Paris, and found thee at the tomb of
Ysore; and there I fell into company with thee, and we went together into
Marseilles, and were there together seven years long, where I served thee
unto my power as my rightful lord, and I hold for well spent all the
service that I did thee.  And know of a truth that I am innocent and just
of that which the evil knight laid upon me; as well appeareth whereas he
hath been shamed in the field, and hath acknowledged the treason.”

Therewith my lady Jehane embraced Sir Robin, her lord, and kissed him on
the mouth right sweetly; for Sir Robin understood well that it was she
that had so well served him; and so great joy he had, that none could say
it or think it; and much he wondered in his heart how she could think to
do that which so turned to her great goodness.  Wherefore he loved her
the more all the days of his life.

Thus were these two good persons together; and they went to dwell upon
their land, which they had both wide and fair.  Good life they led as for
young folk who loved dearly together.  Sir Robin went often to tournays
with his lord, of whose mesney he was, and much worship he won, and great
prize he conquered and great wealth, and did so much that he gat him as
much land again as he had had.  And when the lord and his lady were dead,
then had he all the land.  And he did so well by his prowess that he was
made a double banneret, and he had well four thousand pounds of land.
But never might he have child by his wife, whereof he was much grieved.
Thus was he with his wife for ten years after he had conquered the battle
with Sir Raoul.

After the term of ten years, by the will of God, to whom we be all
subject, the pain of death took hold of him, and he died like a valiant
man, and had all his rights, and was laid in earth with great worship.
His wife the fair lady made so great sorrow over him, that all they that
saw her had pity of her; but in the end needs must she forget her
mourning and take comfort, for as little as it were.  Much abode the lady
in her widowhood as a good dame and a holy, for she loved much God and
Holy Church.  She held her much humbly and much she loved the poor, and
did them much good, and was so good a lady that none knew how to blame
her or to say of her aught save great good.  Therewithal was she so fair,
that each one said who saw her, that she was the mirror of all ladies in
the world for beauty and goodness.  But here leaveth the tale a little to
speak of her, and returneth to tell of the King Florus, of whom it hath
been silent a great while.

For saith the tale, that King Florus of Ausay was in his own country sore
grieving, and ill at ease for the departure of his first wife.
Notwithstanding the other was brought unto him, and was both fair and
dainty, but he could not hold her in his heart like as he did the first
one.  Four years was he with her, but never child might he have of her;
and when the said time was ended the pains of death took the a lady, and
she was buried, whereof her friends were sore grieving.  But service was
done unto her, as was meet to a queen.

Then abode King Florus in widowhood more than two years, and he was still
a young man, whereas he was not of more than five-and-forty winters,
wherefore the barons said to him that he behoved to marry again.
“Forsooth,” said King Florus, “so to do have I no great longing, for two
wives have I had, and never child might I have by either.  And on the
other hand, the first that I had was so good and so fair, and so much I
loved her in my heart for the great beauty that was in her, that I may
not forget her.  And I tell you well that never woman will I wed but may
have her as fair and as good as was she.  Now may God have mercy on her
soul, for she hath passed away in the abbey where she was, as folk have
done me to wit.”  “Ha, sir,” said a knight, who was of his privy counsel,
“there be many good dames up and down the country side, of whom ye know
not all; and I know one who hath not for goodness and beauty her peer in
the world.  And if thou knew her goodness, and saw but her beauty, thou
wouldst say well that happy were the king who held the danger of such a
lady.  And wot well that she is a gentle lady, and valiant, and rich, and
of great lands.  And I will tell thee a part of her goodness so please
thee.”

So the king said that he would well he should tell him.  Wherefore the
knight fell to telling how she had bestirred her to go seek her lord, and
how she found him and brought him to Marseilles, and the great goodness
and great services which she did him, even as the tale hath told afore,
so that King Florus wondered much thereat; and he said to the knight
privily that such a woman he would take with a good will.

“Sir,” said the knight, who was of the country of the lady, “I will go to
her, if it please thee, and I will so speak to her, if I may, that the
marriage of you two shall be made.”  “Yea,” said King Florus, “I will
well that thou go, and I pray thee to give good heed to the business.”

So the knight bestirred him, and went so much by his journeys that he
came to the country where dwelt the fair dame, whom the tale calleth my
Lady Jehane, and found her abiding at a castle of hers, and she made him
great joy, as one whom she knew.  The knight drew her to privy talk, and
told her of King Florus of Ausay, how he bade her come unto him that he
might take her to wife.  When the lady heard the knight so speak, she
began to smile, which beseemed her right well, and she said to the
knight: “Thy king is neither so well learned, nor so courteous as I had
deemed, whereas he biddeth me come to him and he will take me to wife:
forsooth, I am no wageling of him to go at his command.  But say to thy
king, that, so please him, he come to me, if he prize me so much and
loveth me, and it seem good to him that I take him to husband and spouse,
for the lords ought to beseech the ladies, and not ladies the lords.”
“Lady,” said the knight, “all that thou hast said to me, I will tell him
straight; but I doubt that he hold not with pride.”  “Sir knight,” said
the lady, “he shall take what heed thereof may please him but in the
matter whereof I have spoken to thee, he hath neither courtesy nor
reason.”  “Lady,” said the knight, “so be it, a-God’s name!  And I will
get me gone, with thy leave, to my lord the king, and will tell him what
thou hast told me.  And if thou wilt give me any word more, now tell it
me.”  “Yea,” said the lady, “tell him that I send him greeting, and that
I can him much good will for the honour he biddeth me.”

So the knight departed therewith from the lady, and came the fourth day
thereafter to King Florus of Ausay, and found him in his chamber, whereas
he was speaking with his privy counsel.  The knight greeted the king, who
returned the greeting, and made him sit by his side, and asked tidings of
the fair lady, and he told all her message how she would not come to him,
whereas she was not his wageling to come at his command: for that lords
are bound to beseech ladies how she had given him word that she sent him
greeting, and could him goodwill for the honour he bade her.  When the
King Florus had heard these words, he fell a-pondering, and spake no word
for a great while.

“Sir,” said a knight who was of his most privity, “what ponderest thou so
much?  Forsooth, all these words well befit a good lady and wise to say;
and so, may help me God, she is both wise and valiant.  Wherefore I
counsel thee in good faith that thou look to a day when thou canst be
there; that thou send greeting to her that thou wilt be there on such day
to do her honour, and take her to wife.”  “Forsooth,” said King Florus,
“I will send word that I will be there in the month of Paske, and that
she apparel her to receive such a man as I be.”  Then said King Florus to
the knight who had been to the lady, that within three days he should go
his ways to tell the lady these tidings.  So on the third day the knight
departed, and went so much that he came to the lady, and said that the
king sent word that he would be with her in the month of Paske; and she
answered that it was so by God’s will, and that she would speak with her
friends, and that she would be arrayed to do his will as the honour of a
good lady called on her.  After these words departed the knight, and came
to his lord King Florus, and told him the answer of the fair lady, as ye
have heard it.  So King Florus of Ausay dight his departure, and went his
ways with a right great folk to come to the country of the fair lady; and
when he was come thither, he took her and wedded her, and had great joy
and great feast thereof.  Then he led her into his country where folk
made exceeding great joy of her.  But King Florus loved her much for her
great beauty, and for the great wit and great valiancy that was in her.

And within the year that he had taken her to wife, she was big with
child, and she bore the fruit of her belly so long as right was, and was
delivered of a daughter first, and of a son thereafter, who had to name
Florence and the daughter had to name Floria.  And the child Florence was
exceeding fair, and when he was a knight he was the best that knew arms
in his time, so that he was chosen to be Emperor of Constantinople.  A
much valiant man was he, and wrought much wrack and dole on the Saracens.
But the daughter became queen of the land of her father, and the son of
the King of Hungary took her to wife, and lady she was of two realms.

This great honour gave God to the fair lady for the goodness of her and
her loyalty.  A great while abode King Florus with that fair lady; and
when it pleased God that his time came, he had such goodly knowledge that
God had in him a fair soul.  Thereafter the lady lived but a half year,
and passed away from the world as one good and loyal, and had fair end
and good knowledge.

Here endeth the tale of King Florus and the Fair Jehane.




The History of Over Sea


IN years bygone was a Count of Ponthieu, who loved much chivalry and the
world, and was a much valiant man and a good knight.

In the same times was a Count of St. Pol, who held all the country, and
was lord thereof, and a man much valiant.  He had no heir of his flesh,
whereof he was sore grieving; but a sister he had, a much good dame, and
a valiant woman of much avail, who was Dame of Dontmart in Ponthieu.  The
said dame had a son, Thibault by name, who was heir of the country of St.
Pol, but a poor man so long as his uncle lived; he was a brave knight and
a valiant, and good at arms: noble he was, and goodly, and was much
honoured and loved of good folk; for a high man he was, and gentle of
blood.

Now the Count of Ponthieu, with whom beginneth this tale, had a wife, a
much good dame: of the said dame he had a daughter, much good and of much
avail, the which waxed in great beauty and multiplied in much good; and
she was of well sixteen years of age.  But within the third year of her
birth, her mother died, whereof sore troubled she was and much sorrowful.

The Count, her father, wedded him right speedily thereafter, and took a
high lady and a gentle; and in a little while the Count had of the said
lady a son, whom he loved much.  The said son waxed in great worth and in
great goodness, and multiplied in great good.

The Count of Ponthieu, who was a valiant man, saw my lord Thibault of
Dontmart, and summoned him, and retained him of his meney; and when he
had him of his meney he was much joyous thereat, for the Count multiplied
in great good and in great avail by means of him.

As they returned from a tournament, the Count called to him Messire
Thibault, and asked of him and said: “Thibault, as God may help thee,
tell me what jewel of my land thou lovest the best?”  “Sir,” said Messire
Thibault, “I am but a poor man, but, as God may help me, of all the
jewels of thy land I love none so much as my damosel, thy daughter.”  The
Count, when he heard that, was much merry and joyful in his heart, and
said: “Thibault, I will give her to thee if she will.”  “Sir,” said he,
“much great thank have thou; God reward thee.”

Then went the Count to his daughter, and said to her: “Fair daughter, I
have married thee, save by thee be any hindrance.”  “Sir,” said she,
“unto whom?”  “A-God’s name,” said he, “to a much valiant man, of much
avail: to a knight of mine, who hath to name Thibault of Dontmart.”
“Ha,” sir, said she, “if thy country were a kingdom, and should come to
me all wholly, forsooth I should hold me right well wedded in him.”
“Daughter,” said the Count, “blessed be thine heart, and the hour wherein
thou wert born.”

So the wedding was done; the Count of Ponthieu and the Count of St. Pol
were thereat, and many another good valiant man.  With great joy were
they assembled, in great lordship and in great mirth: and in great joy
dwelt those together for five years.  But it pleased not our Lord Jesus
Christ that they should have an heir of their flesh, which was a heavy
matter to both of them.

On a night lay Messire Thibault in his bed and pondered sore, and said:
“God! of whom it cometh that I love so much this dame, and she me, and
forsooth no heir of our flesh may we have, whereby God might be served,
and good be done to the world.”  Therewith he thought on my lord St.
Jakeme, the apostle of Galicia, who would give to such as crave aright
that which by right they crave, and he behight him the road thither in
his heart.

The dame was a-sleeping yet, and whenas she awoke he held her betwixt his
arms, and prayed her that she would give him a gift.  “Sir,” said the
dame, “and what gift?”  “Dame,” said he, “thou shalt wot that when I have
it.”  “Sir,” she said, “if I may give it, I will give it, whatso it may
be.”  “Dame,” he said, “I crave leave of thee to go to my lord St. Jacque
the Apostle, that he may pray our Lord Jesus Christ to give us an heir of
our flesh, whereby God may be served in this world, and the Holy Church
refreshed.”  “Sir,” said the dame, “the gift is full courteous, and much
debonairly will I grant it thee.”

In much great joy were they for long while: wore one day, and another,
and a third; and it befell that they lay together in bed on a night, and
then said the dame: “Sir, I pray and require of thee a gift.”  “Dame,”
said he, “ask, and I will give it, if give it I may.”  “Sir,” she said,
“I crave leave of thee to go with thee on thy journey.”

When Messire Thibault heard that, he was much sorrowful, and said: “Dame,
grievous thing would it be to thine heart, for the way is much longsome,
and the land is much strange and much diverse.”  She said: “Sir, doubt
thou nought of me, for of such littlest squire that thou hast, shalt thou
be more hindered than of me.”  “Dame,” said he, “a-God’s name, I grant it
thee.”

Day came, and the tidings ran so far till the Count of Ponthieu knew it,
and sent for Messire Thibault, and said: “Thibault, thou art vowed a
pilgrim, as they tell me, and my daughter also?”  “Sir,” said he, “that
is sooth.”  “Thibault,” said the Count, “concerning thee it is well, but
concerning my daughter it is heavy on me.”  “Sir,” said Messire Thibault,
“I might not naysay her.”  “Thibault,” said the Count, “bestir ye when ye
will; so hasten ye your palfreys, your nags, and your sumpter-beasts; and
I will give you pennies and havings enow.”  “Sir,” said Messire Thibault,
“great thank I give thee.”

So then they arrayed them, and departed with great joy; and they went so
far by their journeys, that they drew nigh to St. Jacque by less than two
days.

On a night they came to a good town, and in the evening Messire Thibault
called his host, and asked him concerning the road for the morrow, what
road they should find, and what like it might be; and he said to him:
“Fair sir, at the going forth from this town ye shall find somewhat of a
forest to pass through, and all the day after a good road.”  Therewith
they held their peace, and the bed was apparelled, and they went to rest.

The morrow was much fair, and the pilgrims rose up at daybreak and made
noise.  Messire Thibault arose, and found him somewhat heavy, wherefore
he called his chamberlain, and said: “Arise now, and do our meyney to
truss and go their ways, and thou shalt abide with me and truss our
harness: for I am somewhat heavy and ill at ease.”  So that one commanded
the sergeants the pleasure of their lord, and they went their ways.

But a little while was ere Messire Thibault and his wife arose and
arrayed them, and got to the road.  The chamberlain trussed their bed,
and it was not full day, but much fair weather.  They issued out of the
town, they three, without more company but only God, and drew nigh to the
forest; and whenas they came thither, they found two ways, one good, and
the other bad.  Then Messire Thibault said to his chamberlain: “Prick
spur now, and come up with our folk, and bid them abide us, for ugly
thing it is for a dame and a knight to wend the wild-wood with little
company.”

So the chamberlain went his ways speedily; and Messire Thibault came into
the forest, and came on the sundering ways, and knew not by which to
wend.  So he said: “Dame, by which way go we?”  “Sir,” said she, “by the
good way, so please God.”

But in this forest were certain strong-thieves, who wasted the good way,
and made the false way wide and side, and like unto the other, for to
make pilgrims go astray.  So Messire Thibault lighted down, and looked on
the way, and found the false way bigger and wider than the good; so he
said: “Come dame, a-God’s name, this is it.”  So they entered therein,
and went a good quarter of a league, and then began the way to wax
strait, and the boughs to hang alow; so he said: “Dame, meseemeth that we
go not well.”

When he had so said, he looked before him, and saw four strong-thieves
armed, upon four big horses, and each one held spear in hand.  And when
he beheld them, he looked behind him, and saw other four in other fashion
armed and arrayed; and he said: “Dame, be not abashed at anything thou
mayst see now from henceforward.”  Then Messire Thibault greeted those
first come, but they held them all aloof from his greeting.  So
thereafter he asked them what was their will toward him; and one thereof
said: “That same shall we tell thee anon.”

Therewith the strong thief came against Messire Thibault with glaive in
rest, and thought to smite him amidst of the body; and Messire Thibault
saw the stroke a-coming, and if he doubted thereof, no marvel was it; but
he swerved from the stroke as best he might, and that one missed him; and
as he passed by him Messire Thibault threw himself under the glaive, and
took it from the strong thief, and bestirred him against those three
whence that one was come, and smote one of them amidst the body, and slew
him; and thereafter turned about, and went back, and smote him who had
first come on him amidst of the body, and slew him.

Now it pleased God that of the eight strong-thieves he slew three, and
the other five encompassed him, and slew his palfrey, so that he fell
adown on his back without any wound to grieve him: he had neither sword
nor any other armour to help him.  So the strong-thieves took his raiment
from him, all to his shirt, and his spurs and shoon; and then they took a
sword-belt, and bound his hands and his feet, and cast him into a
bramble-bush much sharp and much rough.

And when they had thus done, they came to the Lady, and took from her her
palfrey and all her raiment, right to her smock; and she was much fair,
and she was weeping tenderly, and much and of great manner was she
sorrowful.

Then one of the strong-thieves beheld her, and said thus to his fellows:
“Masters, I have lost my brother in this stour, therefore will I have
this Lady in atonement thereof.”  Another said: “But I also, I have lost
my cousin-german; therefore I claim as much as thou herein: yea, and
another such right have I.”  And even in such wise said the third and the
fourth and the fifth; but at last said one: “In the holding of this Lady
ye have no great getting nor gain; so let us lead her into the forest
here, and do our will on her, and then set her on the road again and let
her go.”  So did they even as they had devised, and set her on the road
again.

Messire Thibault saw it well, and much sorrowful he was, but nought might
he do against it; nor none ill will had he against the Lady for that
which had befallen her; for he wotted well that it had been perforce and
against the will of her.  The Lady was much sorrowful, and all ashamed.
So Messire Thibault called to her and said: “Dame, for God’s sake come
hither and unbind me, and deliver me from the grief wherein I am; for
these brambles grieve me sore and anguish me.”

So the Lady went whereas lay Messire Thibault, and espied a sword lying
behind there of one of the strong-thieves who had been slain.  So she
took it, and went toward her lord, full of great ire and evil will of
that which was befallen.  For she doubted much that he would have her in
despite for that he had seen her thus, and that he would reprove her one
while and lay before her what had her betid.  She said: “Sir, I will
deliver thee anon.”

Therewith she hove up the sword and came to her lord, and thought to
smite him amidst of the body; and when he saw the stroke coming he
doubted it much, for he was all naked to his shirt and breeches, and no
more.  Therefore so hardly he quaked, that the hands and the fingers of
him; were sundered; and in such wise she smote him that she but hurt him
a little, and sheared the thongs wherewith he was bound; and when he felt
the bonds slacken, he drew to him and brake the thongs, and leapt to his
feet, and said: “Dame, so please God, no more to-day shalt thou slay me.”
But she said: “Of a surety, sir, I am heavy thereof.”

He took the sword of her, and put it back into the scabbard, and
thereafter laid his hand on her shoulder, and brought her back on the
road whereby they had come.  And when he came to the entry of the wood,
there found he a great part of his company, which was come to meet him
and when they saw them thus naked, they asked of him: “Sir, who hath thus
arrayed you?”  But he told them that they had fallen in with
strong-thieves, who had thus ensnared them.  Much great dole they made
thereof; but speedily were they clad and arrayed, for they had well
enough thereto so they gat to horse and went their ways.

That day they rode, and for nought that had befallen Messire Thibault
made no worser semblance unto the Lady.  That night they came unto a good
town, and there they harboured.  Messire Thibault asked of his host if
there were any house of religion anigh thereto, where one might leave a
lady, and the host said: “Sir, it befalleth well to thee; hard by without
is a house much religious and of much good dames.”

Wore the night, and Messire Thibault went on the morrow into that house
and heard mass, and thereafter spake to the abbess, and the convent, and
prayed them that they would guard that Lady there till his coming back;
and they granted it to him much willingly.  Messire Thibault left of his
meney there to serve the Lady, and went his ways, and did his pilgrimage
the best he might.  And when he had done his pilgrimage fair and well, he
returned, and came to the Lady.  He did good to the house, and gave
thereto of his havings, and took the Lady unto him again, and led her
into his country with as much great honour as he had led her away, save
the lying a-bed with her.

When he was gotten aback into his land, much great joy did they make of
him, and of the Lady.  At his homecoming was the Count of Ponthieu, the
father of the Lady, and there also was the Count of St. Pol, who was
uncle unto my lord Thibault.  A many was there of good folk and valiant
at their coming.  The Lady was much honoured of dames and of damsels.

That day the Count of Ponthieu sat, he and Messire Thibault, they two
together, at one dish, and so it fell out that the Count said to him:
“Thibault, fair son, he who long way wendeth heareth much, and seeth of
adventures, whereof nought they know who stir not; tell me tale, then, if
it please thee, of some matter which thou hast seen, or heard tell of,
since ye departed hence.”

Messire Thibault answered him that he knew of no adventure to tell of;
but the Count prayed him again, and tormented him thereto, and held him
sore to tell of some adventure, insomuch that Messire Thibault answered
him: “Sir, since tell I needs must, I will tell thee; but so please thee,
let it not be within earshot of so much folk.”  The Count answered and
said that it so pleased him well.  So after dinner, whenas they had
eaten, the Count arose and took Messire Thibault by the hand, and said to
him: “Now would I that thou say thy pleasure, for here is not a many of
folk.”

And Messire Thibault fell to telling how that it had betid to a knight
and a lady, even as ye have heard in the tale told; but he told not the
persons unto whom it had befallen: and the Count, who was much sage and
right thoughtful, asked what the knight had done with the Lady; and he
answered that the knight had brought and led the Lady back to her own
country, with as much great joy and as much great honour as he had led
her thence, save lying in the bed whereas lay the Lady.

“Thibault,” said the Count, “otherwise deemed the knight than I had
deemed; for by the faith which I owe unto God, and unto thee, whom much I
love, I would have hung the Lady by the tresses to a tree or to a bush,
or by the very girdle, if none other cord I might find.”  “Sir,” said
Messire Thibault, “nought so certain is the thing as it will be if the
Lady shall bear witness thereto with her very body.”  “Thibault,” said
the Count, “knowest thou who was the knight?”  “Sir,” said Messire
Thibault, “yet again I pray thee that thou acquit me of naming the knight
to whom this adventure betid: know of a verity that in naming him lieth
no great gain.”  “Thibault,” said the Count, “know that it is not my
pleasure that thou hide it.”  “Sir,” said Thibault, “then will I tell the
same, since I may not be acquitted thereof, as willingly I would be if it
were your pleasure; for in telling thereof lieth not great avail, nor
great honour.”  “Thibault,” said the Count, “since the word has gone so
far, know that I would wot straightway who was the knight unto whom this
adventure betid; and I conjure thee, by the faith which thou owest to God
and to me, that thou tell me who was the knight, since thou knowest
thereof.”

“Sir,” said Messire Thibault, “by that wherewith thou hast conjured me
withal, I will tell thee.  And I would well that thou shalt know of a
verity that I am the knight unto whom this adventure betid.  And wot thou
that I was sore grieving and abashed in my heart; and wot thou well that
never erst have I spoken thereof to any man alive; and, moreover, with a
good will had I put aside the telling of it, if it had but pleased thee.”

But when the Count had heard tell this adventure, much grieving was he,
and abashed, and held his peace a great while, and spake no word; and
when he spoke, he said: “Thibault, then to my daughter it was that this
adventure betid?”  “Sir,” said he, “of a verity.”  “Thibault,” said the
Count, “well shalt thou be avenged, since thou hast brought her back to
me.”

And because of the great ire which the Count had, he called for his
daughter, and asked of her if that were true which Messire Thibault had
said; and she asked, “What?” and he answered: “This, that thou wouldest
have slain him, even as he hath told it?”  “Sir,” she said, “yea.”  “And
wherefore,” said the Count, “wouldst thou have done it?”  “Sir,” said
she, “hereto, for that yet it grieveth me that I did it not, and that I
slew him not.”

So the Count let all that be, and abode till the Court was departed.
Thereafter was he at Rue-on-Sea, and Messire Thibault with him, and the
son of the Count; and the Count let lead with him the Lady.  Then the
Count let array a strong craft and a trim, and did do the Lady enter
therein; and withal let lay therein a tun, all new, strong, and great,
and thick.  Then they entered into the said ship, all three, without
fellowship of other folk, save the mariners who rowed the ship.  Then did
the Count cause them to row a full two leagues out to sea; and much
marvelled each one of what he thought to do, but none durst ask him.

But when they were so far forth in the sea as ye have heard, the Count
let smite out one head of the tun, and took the Lady, who was his
daughter, and who was much fair and well attired, and made her to enter
in the tun, would she, would she not; and then let head up the tun again
straightway, and dight it well, and let redo the staves, and stop it
well, that the water might not enter in no manner.  Then the Count let
put it overboard the ship, and he laid hand thereto with his very own
body, and thrust the tun into the sea, and said: “I commend thee unto the
winds and the waves.”

Much grieving was Messire Thibault thereat, and the brother of the Lady
withal; yea, and all they that saw the same; and they fell all at the
feet of the Count, and prayed him mercy, that from out of that tun they
might take her and deliver her.  But the Count, who was much wroth and
full of ire, would not grant it them for any thing that they might do or
pray.  So they let it be, and prayed to Jesus Christ, the Sovereign
Father, that he, of his exceeding great goodness, would have pity of her
soul, and do her pardon of her sins.

Thus have they left the Lady in great mischief and great peril, even as
ye have heard the tale tell afore, and thus they returned thence.  But
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Sovereign Father of us all, and who
willeth not the death of sinners, be they he or she, but that they may
turn them from their sins and live (every day he showeth it unto us
openly by works, by examples, and by miracles), sent succour unto the
Lady, even as ye may hear further on.

For the history testifieth us, and telleth of a verity, that a merchant
ship which came from the parts of Flanders, before the Count and his
fellows were well come aland, saw the tun floating even as the winds and
waves led it.  So said one of the merchants to his fellows: “Masters, lo
there a tun, and it shall come our way, meseemeth; and if we draw it
aboard, well shall we have some avail of it in any case.”

Now know ye that this ship was wont to go to the Land of the Saracens for
cheaping.  So the mariners drew thither where was the tun, and did so
much, what by wile, what by force, that they gat the tun on to their
ship.  And when the tun was laid on their ship, they looked much thereon,
and much marvelled what it might be; and so much, that they beheld how
one of the heads of the said tun was newly arrayed.  Wherefore they
unheaded it, and found the Lady therein, in such case as though her hour
were waning, for air failed her.  Her body was big, her visage all
swollen, and her eyes ugly and troubled.  But when she saw the air, and
felt the wind, she sighed a little, and the merchants stood about her and
called unto her, but she had no might to speak.  But at last the heart
came aback to her, and speech withal, and she spoke to the merchants and
other folk whom she saw around her; and much she marvelled when she found
herself in such wise amidst of the merchants; but when she saw of them
that they were Christians and merchants, the more at ease she was, and
much she praised Jesus Christ therefor in her heart, and thanked him of
his goodness, whereas he had so done by her that she yet had a space of
life.  For she had much great devotion in her heart, and much great
desire to amend her life toward God, and toward others, of the misdeeds
she had done, whereof she doubted mightily.

The merchants asked her of whence she was, and she hid the matter from
them, and said that a wretched thing she was, and a poor sinner, even as
they might behold; and that by much cruel adventure was she thither come;
and for God’s sake let them have mercy upon her: and they answered that
even so would they.  And she ate and drank, and became much fair.

Now so far went the ship of the merchants, that they came to the Land of
the Saracens, and took haven by Aumarie.  Galleys of the Saracens came to
meet them, and they answered that they were merchants who led divers
merchandise by many lands; and that they had the safe-conduct of princes
and high barons, and that they might go into all lands surely, to seek
chaffer and lead their goods.

So they brought the Lady aland, and were with her.  And one asked the
other what they should do with her; and one said that they should sell
her; and another said: “If I may be trowed, we shall give her as a gift
to the rich Soudan of Aumarie, and then will our matter be mightily
amended.”

Thereto they accorded all, and they took the Lady and brought her to the
Soudan, who was a young man: but first they did do attire and array the
Lady much richly, and so gave her to the Soudan, who received the Lady
much joyously and with much good-will, for right fair was she.  The
Soudan asked of them what she was, and they said: “Sir, we wot not; but
by marvellous adventure did we find her.”

Much good-will had the Soudan to them of this gift, and much good he did
to them therefor.  Much he loved the Lady withal, and he let serve her
honourably.  Well was she heeded, and the colour came again unto her, and
she became marvellous fair.

The Soudan fell to coveting the Lady and to loving of her; and he let ask
her by Latiners of what folk she was, but no sooth thereof would she tell
him or let him know.  Thereof was he heavy, whereas he saw of her that
she was a high woman, and of gentle lineage.  He let ask of her if she
were Christian, and that if she would leave her law he would take her to
wife, for no wife had he as yet.  She saw well that better it were to
come thereto by love than by force, so she answered that so would she do
of a good will; and when she had renied her, and had left her law, the
Soudan took her to wife according to the manner and wont of the Land of
the Saracens.  He held her right dear, and honoured her much, and waxed
of great love towards her.

But a little while was she with the Soudan ere she was big of a son, and
lay in at her time; the Soudan was right glad, and made much great joy.
And the dame was ever of good fellowship with the folk, and much
courteous and of good will toward them, and learnt so much that she knew
the Saracen tongue.

But a little while wore in the years whereas she had the son, ere she
conceived and had a daughter, who anon became much fair and much wise,
and in all lordliness she let nourish her.  Thus was the Lady abiding a
two years in much joy and mirth.

But now the story leaves telling of the Lady and the Soudan till after,
as ye shall come to hear, and returneth to the Count of Ponthieu, and to
the son of the Count, and to Messire Thibault of Dontmart, who were sore
grieving for the Lady who had been thuswise cast into the sea, even as ye
have heard, and knew no tidings of her, what was become of her, and
trowed more that she were dead than alive.

Now saith the history, and the sooth beareth witness thereto, that the
Count was in Ponthieu, and his son, and Messire Thibault.  The Count was
in sore great sadness, and heavy thought of his daughter, and much he
doubted him of the sin which he had done.  Messire Thibault durst not to
wed him; nor did the son of the Count either, because of the dolour
wherein he saw his friends abiding.  Neither would the son of the Count
become knight, though he were well of an age thereto, had he the will.

On a day the Count forthought him much of the sin which he had done to
his daughter, and he betook him to the Archbishop of Rheims and confessed
to him, and said to him all the deed, as he had done it.  He took the
cross of Over Sea, and crossed him.  And whenas Messire Thibault saw his
lord the Count crossed, he confessed him and crossed him withal.
Likewise, when the son of the Count saw his father crossed, and Messire
Thibault also, whom he loved much, he also crossed himself.  And when the
Count saw his son crossed, he was much grieved, and said: “Fair son,
wherefore art thou crossed?  Now shall the land abide void of lord.”  But
the son answered and said: “Father, I am crossed for God’s sake first
before all things, and for the saving of my soul, and to serve God and
honour him to my power, so long as I shall have the life in my body.”

So the Count arrayed him speedily and bestirred him, and went and took
leave; but withal he looked to it who should ward his land.  And Messire
Thibault and the son of the Count dight their matters, and they took to
the way with much great safe-conduct.  They came in the Land of Over Sea
safe of body and havings, and there they did their pilgrimage much holily
in all the places whereas they wotted that it ought to be done, and God
to be served.

And when the Count had so done, he bethought him that he would well to do
yet more: so he gave himself to the service of the Temple for one year,
him and his company; and then when it came to the end of the year, deemed
that he would go visit his land and his country.  Wherefore he sent unto
Acre and let array his journey, and he took leave of them of the Temple,
and of the land, and much they thanked him for the honour which he had
brought them.  He came to Acre with his fellows, and they went aboard
ship, and departed from the haven with right good wind at will; but it
endured but for a little; for when they were on the high sea, then did a
wind mighty and horrible fall upon them unawares; and the mariners knew
not whitherward they went, and every hour they looked to be drowned; and
so great was their distress that they bound themselves together, the son
to the father, the nephew to the uncle, yea, one to the other, even as
they were intermingled.  The Count and his son and Messire Thibault bound
themselves together so that they might not sunder.

But a little way had they gone in this wise ere they saw land; and they
asked the mariners what land it was, and they answered that it was the
Land of the Saracens; and they called it the Land of Aumarie, and said
unto the Count: “Sir, what is thy pleasure that we do? for if we go
yonder, we shall be all taken and fall into the hands of the Saracens.”
The Count said to them: “Let go according to the will of Jesus Christ,
who shall take heed to our bodies and our lives; for of an eviller or
uglier death we may not die than to die in this sea.”

So they let run along Aumarie, and galleys and craft of the Saracens came
against them.  Wot ye well that this was an evil meeting; for they took
them and brought them before the Soudan, who was lord of that land and
country.  So they made him a present of the Christians and of all their
havings: the Soudan departed them, and sent them to divers places of his
prisons.  The Count of Ponthieu and his son and Messire Thibault were so
strongly bound together that they might not be sundered.  The Soudan
commanded that they should be laid in a prison by themselves, where they
should have but little to eat and little to drink; and it was done even
as he commanded.  There were they a while of time in great misease, and
so long that the son of the Count was much sick, insomuch that the Count
and Messire Thibault had fear of his dying.

Thereafter it fell out that the Soudan held court much mightily, and made
great joy for his birthday; and this was after the custom of the
Saracens.

After dinner came the Saracens unto the Soudan, and said to him: “Sir, we
require of thee our right.”  He asked them what it was, and they said:
“Sir, a captive Christian to set up at the butts.”  So he granted it to
them whereas it was a matter of nought, and he said to them: “Go ye to
the gaol, and take him who has the least of life in him.”

To the gaol they went, and drew out the Count, all bedone with a thick
beard; and when the Soudan saw him in so poor estate, he said to them:
“This one hath little might to live; go ye, lead him hence, and do ye
your will on him.”

The wife of the Soudan, of whom ye have heard, who was daughter of the
Count, was in the place whereas the Count who was her father was being
led to the death, and so soon as she saw him, the blood and the heart was
stirred within her, not so much for that she knew him, but rather that
nature constrained her.  Then said the Lady to the Soudan: “Sir, I am
French, wherefore I would willingly speak to yonder poor man before he
dieth, if it please thee.”  “Yea, dame,” said the Soudan, “it pleaseth me
well.”

So the Lady came to the Count, and drew him apart, and caused the
Saracens to draw aback, and asked him of whence he was, and he said:
“Lady, I am of the kingdom of France, of a land which is called
Ponthieu.”

When the Lady heard that, all the blood of her stirred within her, and
straightway she asked of what kindred he was.  “Certes, dame,” said he,
“it may not import to me of what kin I be, for I have suffered so many
pains and griefs since I departed, that I love better to die than to
live; but so much can I tell thee of a sooth, that I was the Count of
Ponthieu.”

When the Lady heard that, she made no semblance, but forthwith departed
from the Count and came to the Soudan, and said: “Sir, give me this
captive, if it please thee, for he knoweth the chess and the tables, and
fair tales withal, which shall please thee much; and he shall play before
thee and learn thee.”  “Dame,” said the Soudan, “by my law, wot that with
a good will I will give him thee; do with him as thou wilt.”

Then the Lady took him and sent him into her chamber, and the jailers
went to seek another, and led out Messire Thibault, who was the husband
of the Lady; and in sorry raiment was he, for he was dight with long
hair, and had a great beard; he was lean and fleshless, as one who had
suffered pain and dolour enough.  When the Lady saw him, she said unto
the Soudan: “Sir, again with this one would I willingly speak, if it
please thee.”  “Dame,” said the Soudan, “it pleaseth me well.”  So the
Lady came to Messire Thibault, and asked him of whence he was, and he
said: “I am of the land of the old warrior whom they led before thee e’en
now: and I had his daughter to wife; and I am a knight.”

The Lady knew well her lord, so she went back unto the Soudan, and said
to him: “Sir, great goodness wilt thou do unto me if thou wilt give me
this one also.”  “Dame,” said he, “with a good will I will give him to
thee.”  So she thanked him, and sent him into her chamber with the other.

But the archers hastened and came to the Soudan, and said: “Sir, thou
doest us wrong, and the day is a-waning.”  And therewith they went to the
gaol and brought out the son of the Count, who was all covered with his
hair and dishevelled, as one who had not been washen a while.  Young man
he was, so that he had not yet a beard; but so lean he was, and so sick
and feeble, that scarce might he hold him up.  And when the Lady saw him,
she had of him much great pity.  She came to him and asked of him whose
son, and whence he was, and he said he was the son of the first worthy.
Then she wotted well that he was her brother, but no semblance she made
thereof.

“Sir, certes,” said she to the Soudan, “thou wilt now do me great
goodness if thou wilt give me this one also; for he knows the chess and
the tables, and all other games, which much shall please thee to see and
to hear.”  But the Soudan said: “Dame, by my law, were there an hundred
of them I would give them unto thee willingly.”

The Lady thanked him much, and took her brother, and sent him straightway
into her chamber.  But the folk betook them anew to the gaol, and brought
forth another; and the Lady departed thence, whereas she knew him not.
So was he led to his martyrdom, and our Lord Jesus Christ received his
soul.  But the Lady went her ways forthwith; for it pleased her not, the
martyrdoms which the Saracens did on the Christians.

She came to her chamber wherein were the prisoners, and when they saw her
coming, they made as they would rise up, but she made sign to them to
hold them still.  Then she went close up to them, and made them sign of
friendship.  And the Count, who was right sage, asked thereon: “Dame,
when shall they slay us?”  And she answered that it would not be yet.
“Dame,” said they, “thereof are we heavy; for we have so great hunger,
that it lacketh but a little of our hearts departing from us.”

Thereat she went forth and let array meat; and then she brought it, and
gave to each one a little, and a little of drink.  And when they had
taken it, then had they yet greater hunger than afore.  Thuswise she gave
them to eat, ten times the day, by little and little; for she doubted
that if they ate all freely, that they would take so much as would grieve
them.  Wherefore she did them to eat thus attemperly.

Thuswise did the good dame give them might again; and they were before
her all the first seven days, and the night-tide she did them to lie at
their ease; and she did them do off their evil raiment and let give them
good and new.  After the eighth day, she had strengthened them little by
little and more and more; and then she let bring them victuals and drink
to their contentment, and in such wise that they were so strong that she
abandoned to them the victual and the drink withal.  They had chequers
and tables, and played thereon, and were in all content.  The Soudan was
ofttimes with them, and good will he had to see them play, and much it
pleased him.  But the dame refrained her sagely toward them, so that
never was one of them that knew her, neither by word nor deed of hers.

But a little while wore after this matter, as telleth the tale, ere the
Soudan had to do, for a rich soudan, who marched on him, laid waste his
land, and fell to harrying him.  And he, to avenge his trouble, summoned
folk from every part, and assembled a great host.  When the Lady knew
thereof she came into the chamber whereas were the prisoners, and she sat
down before them, and spoke to them, and said: “Lords, ye have told me of
your matters a deal; now would I wot whether that which ye have told me
be true or not: for ye told me that thou wert Count of Ponthieu on the
day that thou departedst therefrom, and that that man had had thy
daughter to wife, and that the other one was thy son.  Now, I am Saracen,
and know the art of astronomy: wherefore I tell you well, that never were
ye so nigh to a shameful death as now ye be, if ye tell me not the truth.
Thy daughter, whom this knight had, what became of her?”

“Lady,” said the Count, “I trow that she be dead.”  “What wise died she?”
quoth she.  “Certes, Lady,” said the Count, “by an occasion which she had
deserved.”  “And what was the occasion?” said the Lady.

Then the Count fell to tell, sore weeping, how she was wedded, and of the
tarrying, whereby she might not have a child; and how the good knight
promised his ways to St. Jakeme in Galicia, and how the Lady besought him
that she might go along with him, and he granted it willingly.  And how
they bestirred them with great joy, and went their ways, and so far that
they came unto a place where they were without company.  Then met they in
a forest robbers well armed, who fell upon them.  The good knight might
do nothing against all them, for he was lacking of arms; but amidst all
that he slew three, and five were left, who fell upon him and slew his
palfrey, and took the knight and stripped him to the shirt, and bound him
hand and foot, and cast him into a briar-bush: and the Lady they
stripped, and took from her her palfrey.  They beheld the Lady, and saw
that she was full fair, and each one would have her.  At the last, they
accorded betwixt them hereto, that they should lie with her, and they had
their will of her in her despite; and when they had so done they went
their ways, and she abode, much grieving and much sad.  The good knight
beheld it, and said much sweetly: “Dame, now unbind me my hands, and let
us be going.”  Now she saw a sword, which was of one of the slain
strong-thieves; she took it, and went towards her lord, who lay as
aforesaid; she came in great ire by seeming, and said: “Yea, unbind thee
I will.”  Then she held the sword all bare, and hove it up, and thought
to smite him amidst the body, but by the good mercy of Jesus Christ, and
by the valiancy of the knight, he turned upso down, and she smote the
bonds he was bound withal, and sundered them, and he leapt up, for as
bound and hurt as he was, and said: “Dame, if God will, thou shalt slay
me not to-day.”

At this word spake the Lady, the wife of the Soudan: “Ha, sir! thou
sayest the sooth; and well I know wherefore she would to do it.”  “Dame,”
said the Count, “and wherefore?”  “Certes,” quoth she, “for the great
shame which had befallen her.”

When Messire Thibault heard that, he fell a-weeping much tenderly, and
said: “Ha, alas! what fault had she therein then, Lady?  So may God give
me deliverance from this prison wherein I am, never should I have made
worse semblance to her therefor, whereas it was maugre her will.”

“Sir,” said the Lady, “that she deemed nought.  Now tell me,” she said,
“which deem ye the rather, that she be quick or dead?”  “Dame,” said he,
“we wot not.”  “Well wot I,” said the Count, “of the great pain we have
suffered, which God hath sent us for the sin which I did against her.”
“But if it pleased God,” said the Lady, “that she were alive, and that ye
might have of her true tidings, what would ye say thereto?”  “Lady,” said
the Count, “then were I gladder than I should be to be delivered out of
this prison, or to have so much riches as never had I in my life.”
“Dame,” said Messire Thibault, “may God give me no joy of that which I
most desire, but I were not the gladder than to be king of France.”
“Dame,” said the varlet who was her brother, “certes none could give me
or promise me thing whereof I should be so glad as of the life of my
sister, who was so fair a dame, and so good.”

But when the Lady heard these words, then was the heart of her softened
and she praised God, and gave him thanks therefor, and said to them:
“Take heed, now, that there be no feigning in your words.”  And they
answered and said that none there was.  Then fell the Lady a-weeping
tenderly, and said to them: “Sir, now mayest thou well say that thou art
my father, and I thy daughter, even her on whom thou didest such cruel
justice.  And thou, Messire Thibault, thou art my lord and my baron.  And
thou, sir varlet, art my brother.”

Therewith she told them how the merchants had found her, and how they
gave her as a gift to the Soudan.  And when they heard that, they were
much glad, and made much great joy, and humbled them before her; but she
forbade them that they should make any semblance, and said: “I am
Saracen, and renied, for otherwise I might never endure, but were
presently dead.  Wherefore I pray you and bid you, for as dear as ye hold
your lives and honours, and your havings the greater, that ye never once,
whatso ye may hear or see, make any more fair semblance unto me, but hold
you simply.  So leave me to deal therewith.  Now shall I tell you
wherefore I have uncovered me to you.  The Soudan, who is now my lord,
goeth presently a-riding; and I know thee well” (said she to Messire
Thibault), “that thou art a valiant man and a good knight: therefore I
will pray the Soudan to take thee with him; and then if ever thou wert
valiant, now do thou show it, and serve the Soudan so well that he may
have no evil to tell of thee.”

Therewith departed the Lady, and came unto the Soudan, and said: “Sir,
one of my prisoners will go with thee, if it please thee.”  “Dame,” said
he, “I would not dare trust me to him, lest he do me some treason.”
“Sir,” she said, “in surety mayest thou lead him along; for I will hold
the others.”  “Dame,” said he, “I will lead him with me, since thou
counsellest me so, and I will give him a horse much good, and arms, and
all that is meet for him.”

So then the Lady went back, and said to Messire Thibault: “I have done so
much with the Soudan, that thou shalt go with him.  Now bethink thee to
do well.”  But her brother kneeled before her, and prayed her that she
would do so much with the Soudan that he also should go.  But said she:
“I will not do it, the matter be over open thereby.”

The Soudan arrayed his matters and went his ways, and Messire Thibault
with him, and they went against the enemy.  The Soudan delivered to
Messire Thibault arms and horse.  By the will of Jesus Christ, who never
forgetteth them who have in him trust and good faith, Messire Thibault
did so much in arms, that in a little while the enemy of the Soudan was
brought under, whereof much was the Soudan rejoiced; he had the victory,
and led away much folk with him.  And so soon as he was come back, he
went to the Lady, and said: “Dame, by my law, I much praise thy prisoner,
for much well hath he served me; and if he will cast aside his law and
take ours, I will give him wide lands, and richly will I marry him.”
“Sir,” she said, “I wot not, but I trow not that he will do it.”
Therewith they were silent, so that they spake not more.  But the Lady
dighted in her business straightway after these things the best she
might, and she came to her prisoners, and said:

“Lords, now do ye hold ye wisely, that the Soudan perceive not our
counsel; for, if God please, we shall yet be in France and the land of
Ponthieu.”

Now came a day when the Lady moaned much, and complained her, and came
before the Soudan, and said: “Sir, I go with child, well I wot it, and am
fallen into great infirmity, nor ever since thy departure have I eaten
aught wherein was any savour to me.”  “Dame,” said he, “I am heavy of thy
sickness, but much joyous that thou art with child.  But now command and
devise all things that thou deemest might be good for thee, and I will
let seek and array them, whatsoever they may cost me.”

When the Lady heard that, she had much great joy in her heart; but never
did she show any semblance thereof, save that so much she said: “Sir, my
old prisoner hath said to me, that but I be presently upon earth of a
right nature, I am but dead and that I may not live long.”  “Dame,” said
the Soudan, “nought will I thy death: look to it, then, on what land thou
wouldest be, and I will let lead thee thereto.”  “Sir,” she said, “it is
of no matter to me, so that I be out of this city.”

Then the Soudan let array a ship fair and stout, and let garnish her well
with wine and victual.  “Sir,” said the Lady to the Soudan, “I will have
with me my old prisoner and my young one, and they shall play at the
chess and the tables; and my son will I take to pleasure me.”  “Dame,”
said he, “it pleaseth me well that thou do thy will herein.  But what hap
with the third prisoner?”  “Sir,” said she, “thou shalt do thy will
herein.”  “Dame,” said he, “I will that thou take him with thee; for he
is a valiant man, and will heed thee well on land and sea, if need thou
have thereto.”

Therewith she prayed leave of the Soudan, and he granted it, and much he
prayed her to come back speedily.  The ship was apparelled, and they were
alboun; and they went aboard, and departed from the haven.

Good wind they had, and ran much hard: and the mariners called to the
Lady, and said to her: “Dame, this wind is bringing straight to Brandis;
now command us thy pleasure to go thither or elsewhere.”  And she said to
them: “Let run hardily, for I know well how to speak French and other
tongues, and I will lead you through all.”

Now so much they ran by day and by night, through the will of Jesus
Christ, that they are come to Brandis there they took harbour in all
safety, and lighted down on the shore, and were received with much great
joy.  The Lady, who was much wise, drew towards the prisoners, and said
to them: “Lords, I would that ye call to mind the words and agreements
which ye said to me, and I would be now all sure of you, and have good
surety of your oaths, and that ye say to me on all that ye hold to be of
God if ye will to hold to your behests, which ye have behight me, or not;
for yet have I good might to return.”

They answered: “Lady, know without doubt that we have covenanted nought
with you which shall not be held toward you by us loyally; and know by
our Christendom and our Baptism, and by whatsoever we hold of God, that
we will hold to it; be thou in no doubt thereof.”

“And I will trow in you henceforth,” said the Lady.  “Now, lords,” said
she, “lo here my son, whom I had of the Soudan; what shall we do with
him?”  “Dame, let him come to great honour and great gladness.”  “Lords,”
said the Lady, “much have I misdone against the Soudan, for I have taken
from him my body, and his son whom he loved much.”

Then she went back to the mariners, and called and said to them:
“Masters, get ye back and tell to the Soudan that I have taken from him
my body, and his son whom he loved much, and that I have cast forth from
prison my father, my husband, and my brother.”  And when the mariners
heard that, they were much grieving; but more they might not do; and they
returned, sad and sorrowful for the Lady, and for the youngling, whom
they loved much, and for the prisoners, who were thus lost without
recoverance.

But the Count apparelled himself, whereto he had well enough, by means of
merchants and by Templars, who lent him of their good full willingly.
And when the Count and his company had sojourned in the town so long as
their pleasure was, they arrayed them and went their ways thence, and
came to Rome.  The Count went before the Apostle, and his fellowship with
him.  Each one confessed him the best that he could; and when the Apostle
heard it, he was much glad, and much great cheer he made of them.  He
baptized the child, and he was called William.  He reconciled the Lady,
and set her again in right Christendom, and confirmed the Lady and
Messire Thibault, her baron, in right marriage, and joined them together
again, and gave penitence to each of them, and absolved them of their
sins.

After that, they abode no long while ere they departed from Rome and took
their leave of the Apostle, who much had honoured them; and he gave them
his blessing, and commended them to God.  So went they in great joy and
in great pleasance, and praised God and his mother and the hallows, both
carl and quean, and gave thanks for the goods which they had done them.

And so far they journeyed, that they came into the land where they were
born, and were received in great procession by the bishops and the
abbots, and the people of religion and the other clerks, who much had
desired them.

But above all other joys made they joy the Lady who was thus recovered,
and who had thus delivered her father, her husband, and her brother from
the hands of the Saracens, even as ye have heard.  But now leave we of
them in this place, and tell we of the mariners who had brought them, and
of the Saracens who had come with them.

The mariners and the Saracens who had brought them to Brandis returned at
their speediest; they had good wind, and ran till they came off Aumarie.

They lighted down on shore sad and sorrowful, and went to tell the
tidings to the Soudan, who was much sorrowful thereof, and in great dole
abode; and for this adventure the less he loved his daughter, who had
abided there, and honoured her the less.  Notwithstanding, the damsel
became much sage, and waxed in great wit, so that all honoured her and
loved her, and prized her for the good deeds which they told of her.

But now the history holds its peace of the Soudan, who made great dole
for his wife and his prisoners who thus had escaped, and it returneth to
the Count of Ponthieu, who was received into his land with great
procession, and much honoured as the lord that he was.

No long while wore ere his son was made knight, and great cheer folk made
of him.  He was a knight much worthy and valiant, and much he loved the
worthies, and fair gifts he gave to poor knights and poor gentle dames of
the country, and much was prized and loved of poor and of rich.  For a
worthy he was, and a good knight, and courteous, and openhanded, and
kind, and nowise proud.  Yet but a little while he lived, which was great
damage, and much was he bemoaned of all.

After this adventure it befell that the Count held a great court and a
great feast, and had a many of knights and other folk with him; and
therewithal came a very noble man and knight, who was a much high man in
Normandy, who was called my lord Raoul de Preaux.  This Raoul had a
daughter much fair and much wise.  The Count spake so much to my lord
Raoul and to his friends, that he made the wedding betwixt William his
nephew, son to the Soudan of Aumarie, and the daughter of my lord Raoul,
for no heir had he save that daughter.  William wedded the damsel, and
the wedding was done much richly, and thereafter was the said William
lord of Preaux.

Long time thence was the land in peace and without war: and Messire
Thibault was with the Lady, and had of her sithence two man-children, who
thereafter were worthies and of great lordship.  The son of the Count of
Ponthieu, of whom we have told so much good, died but a little
thereafter, whereof was made great dole throughout all the land.  The
Count of St. Pol lived yet, and now were the two sons of my lord Thibault
heirs of those two countries, and thereto they attained at the last.  The
good dame their mother lived in great penitence, and much she did of good
deeds and alms; and Messire Thibault lived as the worthy which he was,
and much did he of good whiles he was in life.

Now it befell that the daughter of the Lady, who had abided with the
Soudan her father, waxed in great beauty and became much wise, and was
called the Fair Caitif, because her mother had left her thus as ye have
heard: but a Turk, much valiant, who served the Soudan (Malakin of Baudas
was he called), this Malakin saw the damsel to be courteous and sage, and
much good had heard tell of her; wherefore he coveted her in his heart,
and came to the Soudan and said to him: “Sir, for the service which I
have done thee, give me a gift.”  “Malakin,” said the Soudan, “what
gift?”  “Sir,” said he, “might I dare to say it, because of her highness,
whereof I have nought so much as she, say it I would.”

The Soudan, who wise was and clear-seeing, said to him: “Speak in all
surety that which thou willest to speak; for much I love thee and prize
thee; and if the thing be a thing which I may give thee, saving my
honour, know verily that thou shalt have it.”  “Sir,” said he, “well I
will that thine honour shall be safe, and against it nought would I ask
of thee: but if it please thee, give me thy daughter, for I pray her of
thee, and right willingly would I take her.”

The Soudan held his peace and thought awhile; and he saw well that
Malakin was a worthy, and wise, and might well come to great honour and
great good, and that well he might be worthied; so he said: “Malakin, by
my law, thou hast craved me a great thing, for I love much my daughter,
and no heir else have I, as thou wottest well, and as sooth is.  She is
born and come from the most highest kindred and the most valiant of
France; for her mother is daughter of the Count of Ponthieu; but whereas
thou art valiant, and much well hast served me, I will give her to thee
with a good will, if she will grant it.”  “Sir,” said Malakin, “against
her will would I do nothing.”

Then the Soudan let call the damsel, and she came, and he said to her:
“My fair daughter, I have married thee, if so it please thee.”  “Sir,”
she said, “well is my pleasure therein, if thou will it.”  Then the
Soudan took her by the hand, and said: “Hold, Malakin!  I give her to
thee.”  He received her gladly, and in great joy and in great honour of
all his friends; and he wedded her according to the Saracen law; and he
led her into his land in great joy and in great honour.  The Soudan
brought him on his road a great way, with much company of folk, so far as
him pleased; then returned, and took leave of his daughter and her lord.
But a great part of his folk he sent with her to serve them.

Malakin came into his country, and much was he served and honoured, and
was received with great joy by all his friends; and they twain lived
together long and joyously, and had children together, as the history
beareth witness.

Of this dame, who was called the Fair Caitif, was born the mother of the
courteous Turk Salahadin, who was so worthy and wise and conquering.

Here ends the Story of Over Sea, done out of ancient French into English
by William Morris.




CHAPTER I.  OF BURGSTEAD AND ITS FOLK AND ITS NEIGHBOURS.


ONCE upon a time amidst the mountains and hills and falling streams of a
fair land there was a town or thorp in a certain valley.  This was
well-nigh encompassed by a wall of sheer cliffs; toward the East and the
great mountains they drew together till they went near to meet, and left
but a narrow path on either side of a stony stream that came rattling
down into the Dale: toward the river at that end the hills lowered
somewhat, though they still ended in sheer rocks; but up from it, and
more especially on the north side, they swelled into great shoulders of
land, then dipped a little, and rose again into the sides of huge fells
clad with pine-woods, and cleft here and there by deep ghylls: thence
again they rose higher and steeper, and ever higher till they drew dark
and naked out of the woods to meet the snow-fields and ice-rivers of the
high mountains.  But that was far away from the pass by the little river
into the valley; and the said river was no drain from the snow-fields
white and thick with the grinding of the ice, but clear and bright were
its waters that came from wells amidst the bare rocky heaths.

The upper end of the valley, where it first began to open out from the
pass, was rugged and broken by rocks and ridges of water-borne stones,
but presently it smoothed itself into mere grassy swellings and knolls,
and at last into a fair and fertile plain swelling up into a green wave,
as it were, against the rock-wall which encompassed it on all sides save
where the river came gushing out of the strait pass at the east end, and
where at the west end it poured itself out of the Dale toward the
lowlands and the plain of the great river.

Now the valley was some ten miles of our measure from that place of the
rocks and the stone-ridges, to where the faces of the hills drew somewhat
anigh to the river again at the west, and then fell aback along the edge
of the great plain; like as when ye fare a-sailing past two nesses of a
river-mouth, and the main-sea lieth open before you.

Besides the river afore-mentioned, which men called the Weltering Water,
there were other waters in the Dale.  Near the eastern pass, entangled in
the rocky ground was a deep tarn full of cold springs and about two acres
in measure, and therefrom ran a stream which fell into the Weltering
Water amidst the grassy knolls.  Black seemed the waters of that tarn
which on one side washed the rocks-wall of the Dale; ugly and aweful it
seemed to men, and none knew what lay beneath its waters save black
mis-shapen trouts that few cared to bring to net or angle: and it was
called the Death-Tarn.

Other waters yet there were: here and there from the hills on both sides,
but especially from the south side, came trickles of water that ran in
pretty brooks down to the river; and some of these sprang bubbling up
amidst the foot-mounds of the sheer-rocks; some had cleft a rugged and
strait way through them, and came tumbling down into the Dale at diverse
heights from their faces.  But on the north side about halfway down the
Dale, one stream somewhat bigger than the others, and dealing with softer
ground, had cleft for itself a wider way; and the folk had laboured this
way wider yet, till they had made them a road running north along the
west side of the stream.  Sooth to say, except for the strait pass along
the river at the eastern end, and the wider pass at the western, they had
no other way (save one of which a word anon) out of the Dale but such as
mountain goats and bold cragsmen might take; and even of these but few.

This midway stream was called the Wildlake, and the way along it
Wildlake’s Way, because it came to them out of the wood, which on that
north side stretched away from nigh to the lip of the valley-wall up to
the pine woods and the high fells on the east and north, and down to the
plain country on the west and south.

Now when the Weltering Water came out of the rocky tangle near the pass,
it was turned aside by the ground till it swung right up to the feet of
the Southern crags; then it turned and slowly bent round again northward,
and at last fairly doubled back on itself before it turned again to run
westward; so that when, after its second double, it had come to flowing
softly westward under the northern crags, it had cast two thirds of a
girdle round about a space of land a little below the grassy knolls and
tofts aforesaid; and there in that fair space between the folds of the
Weltering Water stood the Thorp whereof the tale hath told.

The men thereof had widened and deepened the Weltering Water about them,
and had bridged it over to the plain meads; and athwart the throat of the
space left clear by the water they had built them a strong wall though
not very high, with a gate amidst and a tower on either side thereof.
Moreover, on the face of the cliff which was but a stone’s throw from the
gate they had made them stairs and ladders to go up by; and on a knoll
nigh the brow had built a watch-tower of stone strong and great, lest war
should come into the land from over the hills.  That tower was ancient,
and therefrom the Thorp had its name and the whole valley also; and it
was called Burgstead in Burgdale.

So long as the Weltering Water ran straight along by the northern cliffs
after it had left Burgstead, betwixt the water and the cliffs was a wide
flat way fashioned by man’s hand.  Thus was the water again a good
defence to the Thorp, for it ran slow and deep there, and there was no
other ground betwixt it and the cliffs save that road, which was easy to
bar across so that no foemen might pass without battle, and this road was
called the Portway.  For a long mile the river ran under the northern
cliffs, and then turned into the midst of the Dale, and went its way
westward a broad stream winding in gentle laps and folds here and there
down to the out-gate of the Dale.  But the Portway held on still
underneath the rock-wall, till the sheer-rocks grew somewhat broken, and
were cumbered with certain screes, and at last the wayfarer came upon the
break in them, and the ghyll through which ran the Wildlake with
Wildlake’s Way beside it, but the Portway still went on all down the Dale
and away to the Plain-country.

That road in the ghyll, which was neither wide nor smooth, the wayfarer
into the wood must follow, till it lifted itself out of the ghyll, and
left the Wildlake coming rattling down by many steps from the east; and
now the way went straight north through the woodland, ever mounting
higher, (because the whole set of the land was toward the high fells,)
but not in any cleft or ghyll.  The wood itself thereabout was thick, a
blended growth of diverse kinds of trees, but most of oak and ash; light
and air enough came through their boughs to suffer the holly and bramble
and eglantine and other small wood to grow together into thickets, which
no man could pass without hewing a way.  But before it is told whereto
Wildlake’s Way led, it must be said that on the east side of the ghyll,
where it first began just over the Portway, the hill’s brow was clear of
wood for a certain space, and there, overlooking all the Dale, was the
Mote-stead of the Dalesmen, marked out by a great ring of stones, amidst
of which was the mound for the Judges and the Altar of the Gods before
it.  And this was the holy place of the men of the Dale and of other folk
whereof the tale shall now tell.

For when Wildlake’s Way had gone some three miles from the Mote-stead,
the trees began to thin, and presently afterwards was a clearing and the
dwellings of men, built of timber as may well be thought.  These houses
were neither rich nor great, nor was the folk a mighty folk, because they
were but a few, albeit body by body they were stout carles enough.  They
had not affinity with the Dalesmen, and did not wed with them, yet it is
to be deemed that they were somewhat akin to them.  To be short, though
they were freemen, yet as regards the Dalesmen were they well-nigh their
servants; for they were but poor in goods, and had to lean upon them
somewhat.  No tillage they had among those high trees; and of beasts
nought save some flocks of goats and a few asses.  Hunters they were, and
charcoal-burners, and therein the deftest of men, and they could shoot
well in the bow withal: so they trucked their charcoal and their smoked
venison and their peltries with the Dalesmen for wheat and wine and
weapons and weed; and the Dalesmen gave them main good pennyworths, as
men who had abundance wherewith to uphold their kinsmen, though they were
but far-away kin.  Stout hands had these Woodlanders and true hearts as
any; but they were few-spoken and to those that needed them not somewhat
surly of speech and grim of visage: brown-skinned they were, but
light-haired; well-eyed, with but little red in their cheeks: their women
were not very fair, for they toiled like the men, or more.  They were
thought to be wiser than most men in foreseeing things to come.  They
were much given to spells, and songs of wizardry, and were very mindful
of the old story-lays, wherein they were far more wordy than in their
daily speech.  Much skill had they in runes, and were exceeding deft in
scoring them on treen bowls, and on staves, and door-posts and roof-beams
and standing-beds and such like things.  Many a day when the snow was
drifting over their roofs, and hanging heavy on the tree-boughs, and the
wind was roaring through the trees aloft and rattling about the close
thicket, when the boughs were clattering in the wind, and crashing down
beneath the weight of the gathering freezing snow, when all beasts and
men lay close in their lairs, would they sit long hours about the
house-fire with the knife or the gouge in hand, with the timber twixt
their knees and the whetstone beside them, hearkening to some tale of old
times and the days when their banner was abroad in the world; and they
the while wheedling into growth out of the tough wood knots and blossoms
and leaves and the images of beasts and warriors and women.

They were called nought save the Woodland-Carles in that day, though time
had been when they had borne a nobler name: and their abode was called
Carlstead.  Shortly, for all they had and all they had not, for all they
were and all they were not, they were well-beloved by their friends and
feared by their foes.

Now when Wildlake’s Way was gotten to Carlstead, there was an end of it
toward the north; though beyond it in a right line the wood was thinner,
because of the hewing of the Carles.  But the road itself turned west at
once and went on through the wood, till some four miles further it first
thinned and then ceased altogether, the ground going down-hill all the
way: for this was the lower flank of the first great upheaval toward the
high mountains.  But presently, after the wood was ended, the land broke
into swelling downs and winding dales of no great height or depth, with a
few scattered trees about the hillsides, mostly thorns or scrubby oaks,
gnarled and bent and kept down by the western wind: here and there also
were yew-trees, and whiles the hillsides would be grown over with
box-wood, but none very great; and often juniper grew abundantly.  This
then was the country of the Shepherds, who were friends both of the
Dalesmen and the Woodlanders.  They dwelt not in any fenced town or
thorp, but their homesteads were scattered about as was handy for water
and shelter.  Nevertheless they had their own stronghold; for amidmost of
their country, on the highest of a certain down above a bottom where a
willowy stream winded, was a great earthwork: the walls thereof were high
and clean and overlapping at the entering in, and amidst of it was a deep
well of water, so that it was a very defensible place: and thereto would
they drive their flocks and herds when war was in the land, for nought
but a very great host might win it; and this stronghold they called
Greenbury.

These Shepherd-Folk were strong and tall like the Woodlanders, for they
were partly of the same blood, but burnt they were both ruddy and brown:
they were of more words than the Woodlanders but yet not many-worded.
They knew well all those old story-lays, (and this partly by the
minstrelsy of the Woodlanders,) but they had scant skill in wizardry, and
would send for the Woodlanders, both men and women, to do whatso they
needed therein.  They were very hale and long-lived, whereas they dwelt
in clear bright air, and they mostly went light-clad even in the winter,
so strong and merry were they.  They wedded with the Woodlanders and the
Dalesmen both; at least certain houses of them did so.  They grew no
corn; nought but a few pot-herbs, but had their meal of the Dalesmen; and
in the summer they drave some of their milch-kine into the Dale for the
abundance of grass there; whereas their own hills and bents and winding
valleys were not plenteously watered, except here and there as in the
bottom under Greenbury.  No swine they had, and but few horses, but of
sheep very many, and of the best both for their flesh and their wool.
Yet were they nought so deft craftsmen at the loom as were the Dalesmen,
and their women were not very eager at the weaving, though they loathed
not the spindle and rock.  Shortly, they were merry folk well-beloved of
the Dalesmen, quick to wrath, though it abode not long with them; not
very curious in their houses and halls, which were but little, and were
decked mostly with the handiwork of the Woodland-Carles their guests; who
when they were abiding with them, would oft stand long hours nose to
beam, scoring and nicking and hammering, answering no word spoken to them
but with aye or no, desiring nought save the endurance of the daylight.
Moreover, this shepherd-folk heeded not gay raiment over-much, but
commonly went clad in white woollen or sheep-brown weed.

But beyond this shepherd-folk were more downs and more, scantily peopled,
and that after a while by folk with whom they had no kinship or affinity,
and who were at whiles their foes.  Yet was there no enduring enmity
between them; and ever after war and battle came peace; and all
blood-wites were duly paid and no long feud followed: nor were the
Dalesmen and the Woodlanders always in these wars, though at whiles they
were.  Thus then it fared with these people.

But now that we have told of the folks with whom the Dalesmen had
kinship, affinity, and friendship, tell we of their chief abode,
Burgstead to wit, and of its fashion.  As hath been told, it lay upon the
land made nigh into an isle by the folds of the Weltering Water towards
the uppermost end of the Dale; and it was warded by the deep water, and
by the wall aforesaid with its towers.  Now the Dale at its widest, to
wit where Wildlake fell into it, was but nine furlongs over, but at
Burgstead it was far narrower; so that betwixt the wall and the wandering
stream there was but a space of fifty acres, and therein lay Burgstead in
a space of the shape of a sword-pommel: and the houses of the kinships
lay about it, amidst of gardens and orchards, but little ordered into
streets and lanes, save that a way went clean through everything from the
tower-warded gate to the bridge over the Water, which was warded by two
other towers on its hither side.

As to the houses, they were some bigger, some smaller, as the housemates
needed.  Some were old, but not very old, save two only, and some quite
new, but of these there were not many: they were all built fairly of
stone and lime, with much fair and curious carved work of knots and
beasts and men round about the doors; or whiles a wale of such-like work
all along the house-front.  For as deft as were the Woodlanders with
knife and gouge on the oaken beams, even so deft were the Dalesmen with
mallet and chisel on the face of the hewn stone; and this was a great
pastime about the Thorp.  Within these houses had but a hall and solar,
with shut-beds out from the hall on one side or two, with whatso of
kitchen and buttery and out-bower men deemed handy.  Many men dwelt in
each house, either kinsfolk, or such as were joined to the kindred.

Near to the gate of Burgstead in that street aforesaid and facing east
was the biggest house of the Thorp; it was one of the two abovesaid which
were older than any other.  Its door-posts and the lintel of the door
were carved with knots and twining stems fairer than other houses of that
stead; and on the wall beside the door carved over many stones was an
image wrought in the likeness of a man with a wide face, which was
terrible to behold, although it smiled: he bore a bent bow in his hand
with an arrow fitted to its string, and about the head of him was a ring
of rays like the beams of the sun, and at his feet was a dragon, which
had crept, as it were, from amidst of the blossomed knots of the
door-post wherewith the tail of him was yet entwined.  And this head with
the ring of rays about it was wrought into the adornment of that house,
both within and without, in many other places, but on never another house
of the Dale; and it was called the House of the Face.  Thereof hath the
tale much to tell hereafter, but as now it goeth on to tell of the ways
of life of the Dalesmen.

In Burgstead was no Mote-hall or Town-house or Church, such as we wot of
in these days; and their market-place was wheresoever any might choose to
pitch a booth: but for the most part this was done in the wide street
betwixt the gate and the bridge.  As to a meeting-place, were there any
small matters between man and man, these would the Alderman or one of the
Wardens deal with, sitting in Court with the neighbours on the wide space
just outside the Gate: but if it were to do with greater matters, such as
great manslayings and blood-wites, or the making of war or ending of it,
or the choosing of the Alderman and the Wardens, such matters must be put
off to the Folk-mote, which could but be held in the place aforesaid
where was the Doom-ring and the Altar of the Gods; and at that Folk-mote
both the Shepherd-Folk and the Woodland-Carles foregathered with the
Dalesmen, and duly said their say.  There also they held their great
casts and made offerings to the Gods for the Fruitfulness of the Year,
the ingathering of the increase, and in Memory of their Forefathers.
Natheless at Yule-tide also they feasted from house to house to be glad
with the rest of Midwinter, and many a cup drank at those feasts to the
memory of the fathers, and the days when the world was wider to them, and
their banners fared far afield.

But besides these dwellings of men in the field between the wall and the
water, there were homesteads up and down the Dale whereso men found it
easy and pleasant to dwell: their halls were built of much the same
fashion as those within the Thorp; but many had a high garth-wall cast
about them, so that they might make a stout defence in their own houses
if war came into the Dale.

As to their work afield; in many places the Dale was fair with growth of
trees, and especially were there long groves of sweet chestnut standing
on the grass, of the fruit whereof the folk had much gain.  Also on the
south side nigh to the western end was a wood or two of yew-trees very
great and old, whence they gat them bow-staves, for the Dalesmen also
shot well in the bow.  Much wheat and rye they raised in the Dale, and
especially at the nether end thereof.  Apples and pears and cherries and
plums they had in plenty; of which trees, some grew about the borders of
the acres, some in the gardens of the Thorp and the homesteads.  On the
slopes that had grown from the breaking down here and there of the
Northern cliffs, and which faced the South and the Sun’s burning, were
rows of goodly vines, whereof the folk made them enough and to spare of
strong wine both white and red.

As to their beasts; swine they had a many, but not many sheep, since
herein they trusted to their trucking with their friends the Shepherds;
they had horses, and yet but a few, for they were stout in going afoot;
and, had they a journey to make with women big with babes, or with
children or outworn elders, they would yoke their oxen to their wains,
and go fair and softly whither they would.  But the said oxen and all
their neat were exceeding big and fair, far other than the little beasts
of the Shepherd-Folk; they were either dun of colour, or white with black
horns (and those very great) and black tail-tufts and ear-tips.  Asses
they had, and mules for the paths of the mountains to the east; geese and
hens enough, and dogs not a few, great hounds stronger than wolves,
sharp-nosed, long-jawed, dun of colour, shag-haired.

As to their wares; they were very deft weavers of wool and flax, and made
a shift to dye the thrums in fair colours; since both woad and madder
came to them good cheap by means of the merchants of the plain country,
and of greening weeds was abundance at hand.  Good smiths they were in
all the metals: they washed somewhat of gold out of the sands of the
Weltering Water, and copper and tin they fetched from the rocks of the
eastern mountains; but of silver they saw little, and iron they must buy
of the merchants of the plain, who came to them twice in the year, to wit
in the spring and the late autumn just before the snows.  Their wares
they bought with wool spun and in the fleece, and fine cloth, and skins
of wine and young neat both steers and heifers, and wrought copper bowls,
and gold and copper by weight, for they had no stamped money.  And they
guested these merchants well, for they loved them, because of the tales
they told them of the Plain and its cities, and the manslayings therein,
and the fall of Kings and Dukes, and the uprising of Captains.

Thus then lived this folk in much plenty and ease of life, though not
delicately nor desiring things out of measure.  They wrought with their
hands and wearied themselves; and they rested from their toil and feasted
and were merry: to-morrow was not a burden to them, nor yesterday a thing
which they would fain forget: life shamed them not, nor did death make
them afraid.

As for the Dale wherein they dwelt, it was indeed most fair and lovely,
and they deemed it the Blessing of the Earth, and they trod its flowery
grass beside its rippled streams amidst its green tree-boughs proudly and
joyfully with goodly bodies and merry hearts.




CHAPTER II.  OF FACE-OF-GOD AND HIS KINDRED.


TELLS the tale, that on an evening of late autumn when the weather was
fair, calm, and sunny, there came a man out of the wood hard by the
Mote-stead aforesaid, who sat him down at the roots of the Speech-mound,
casting down before him a roe-buck which he had just slain in the wood.
He was a young man of three and twenty summers; he was so clad that he
had on him a sheep-brown kirtle and leggings of like stuff bound about
with white leather thongs; he bore a short-sword in his girdle and a
little axe withal; the sword with fair wrought gilded hilts and a
dew-shoe of like fashion to its sheath.  He had his quiver at his back
and bare in his hand his bow unstrung.  He was tall and strong, very fair
of fashion both of limbs and face, white-skinned, but for the sun’s
tanning, and ruddy-cheeked: his beard was little and fine, his hair
yellow and curling, cut somewhat close, but for its length so plenteous,
and so thick, that none could fail to note it.  He had no hat nor hood
upon his head, nought but a fillet of golden beads.

As he sat down he glanced at the dale below him with a well-pleased look,
and then cast his eyes down to the grass at his feet, as though to hold a
little longer all unchanged the image of the fair place he had just seen.
The sun was low in the heavens, and his slant beams fell yellow all up
the dale, gilding the chestnut groves grown dusk and grey with autumn,
and the black masses of the elm-boughs, and gleaming back here and there
from the pools of the Weltering Water.  Down in the midmost meadows the
long-horned dun kine were moving slowly as they fed along the edges of
the stream, and a dog was bounding about with exceeding swiftness here
and there among them.  At a sharply curved bight of the river the man
could see a little vermilion flame flickering about, and above it a thin
blue veil of smoke hanging in the air, and clinging to the boughs of the
willows anear; about it were a dozen menfolk clear to see, some sitting,
some standing, some walking to and fro, but all in company together: four
of were brown-clad and short-skirted like himself, and from above the
hand of one came a flash of light as the sun smote upon the steel of his
spear.  The others were long-skirted and clad gayer, and amongst them
were red and blue and green and white garments, and they were clear to be
seen for women.  Just as the young man looked up again, those of them who
were sitting down rose up, and those that were strolling drew nigh, and
they joined hands together, and fell to dancing on the grass, and the dog
and another one with him came up to the dancers and raced about and
betwixt them; and so clear to see were they all and so little, being far
away, that they looked like dainty well-wrought puppets.

The young man sat smiling at it for a little, and then rose up and
shouldered his venison, and went down into Wildlake’s Way, and presently
was fairly in the Dale and striding along the Portway beside the northern
cliffs, whose greyness was gilded yet by the last rays of the sun, though
in a minute or two it would go under the western rim.  He went fast and
cheerily, murmuring to himself snatches of old songs; none overtook him
on the road, but he overtook divers folk going alone or in company toward
Burgstead; swains and old men, mothers and maidens coming from the field
and the acre, or going from house to house; and one or two he met but not
many.  All these greeted him kindly, and he them again; but he stayed not
to speak with any, but went as one in haste.

It was dusk by then he passed under the gate of Burgstead; he went
straight thence to the door of the House of the Face, and entered as one
who is at home, and need go no further, nor abide a bidding.

The hall he came into straight out of the open air was long and somewhat
narrow and not right high; it was well-nigh dark now within, but since he
knew where to look, he could see by the flicker that leapt up now and
then from the smouldering brands of the hearth amidmost the hall under
the luffer, that there were but three men therein, and belike they were
even they whom he looked to find there, and for their part they looked
for his coming, and knew his step.

He set down his venison on the floor, and cried out in a cheery voice:
‘Ho, Kettel!  Are all men gone without doors to sleep so near the
winter-tide, that the Hall is as dark as a cave?  Hither to me!  Or art
thou also sleeping?’

A voice came from the further side of the hearth: ‘Yea, lord, asleep I
am, and have been, and dreaming; and in my dream I dealt with the
flesh-pots and the cake-board, and thou shalt see my dream come true
presently to thy gain.’

Quoth another voice: ‘Kettel hath had out that share of his dream already
belike, if the saw sayeth sooth about cooks.  All ye have been away, so
belike he hath done as Rafe’s dog when Rafe ran away from the slain
buck.’

He laughed therewith, and Kettel with him, and a third voice joined the
laughter.  The young man also laughed and said: ‘Here I bring the venison
which my kinsman desired; but as ye see I have brought it over-late: but
take it, Kettel.  When cometh my father from the stithy?’

Quoth Kettel: ‘My lord hath been hard at it shaping the Yule-tide sword,
and doth not lightly leave such work, as ye wot, but he will be here
presently, for he has sent to bid us dight for supper straightway.’

Said the young man: ‘Where are there lords in the dale, Kettel, or hast
thou made some thyself, that thou must be always throwing them in my
teeth?’

‘Son of the Alderman,’ said Kettel, ‘ye call me Kettel, which is no name
of mine, so why should I not call thee lord, which is no dignity of
thine, since it goes well over my tongue from old use and wont?  But here
comes my mate of the kettle, and the women and lads.  Sit down by the
hearth away from their hurry, and I will fetch thee the hand-water.’

The young man sat down, and Kettel took up the venison and went his ways
toward the door at the lower end of the hall; but ere he reached it it
opened, and a noisy crowd entered of men, women, boys, and dogs, some
bearing great wax candles, some bowls and cups and dishes and trenchers,
and some the boards for the meal.

The young man sat quiet smiling and winking his eyes at the sudden flood
of light let into the dark place; he took in without looking at this or
the other thing the aspect of his Fathers’ House, so long familiar to
him; yet to-night he had a pleasure in it above his wont, and in all the
stir of the household; for the thought of the wood wherein he had
wandered all day yet hung heavy upon him.  Came one of the girls and cast
fresh brands on the smouldering fire and stirred it into a blaze, and the
wax candles were set up on the daïs, so that between them and the
mew-quickened fire every corner of the hall was bright.  As aforesaid it
was long and narrow, over-arched with stone and not right high, the
windows high up under the springing of the roof-arch and all on the side
toward the street; over against them were the arches of the shut-beds of
the housemates.  The walls were bare that evening, but folk were wont to
hang up hallings of woven pictures thereon when feasts and high-days were
toward; and all along the walls were the tenter-hooks for that purpose,
and divers weapons and tools were hanging from them here and there.
About the daïs behind the thwart-table were now stuck for adornment leavy
boughs of oak now just beginning to turn with the first frosts.  High up
on the gable wall above the tenter-hooks for the hangings were carven
fair imagery and knots and twining stems; for there in the hewn atone was
set forth that same image with the rayed head that was on the outside
wall, and he was smiting the dragon and slaying him; but here inside the
house all this was stained in fair and lively colours, and the sun-like
rays round the head of the image were of beaten gold.  At the lower end
of the hall were two doors going into the butteries, and kitchen, and
other out-bowers; and above these doors was a loft upborne by stone
pillars, which loft was the sleeping chamber of the goodman of the house;
but the outward door was halfway between the said loft and the hearth of
the hall.

So the young man took the shoes from his feet and then sat watching the
women and lads arraying the boards, till Kettel came again to him with an
old woman bearing the ewer and basin, who washed his feet and poured the
water over his hands, and gave him the towel with fair-broidered ends to
dry them withal.

Scarce had he made an end of this ere through the outer door came in
three men and a young woman with them; the foremost of these was a man
younger by some two years than the first-comer, but so like him that none
might misdoubt that he was his brother; the next was an old man with a
long white beard, but hale and upright; and lastly came a man of
middle-age, who led the young woman by the hand.  He was taller than the
first of the young men, though the other who entered with him outwent him
in height; a stark carle he was, broad across the shoulders, thin in the
flank, long-armed and big-handed; very noble and well-fashioned of
countenance, with a straight nose and grey eyes underneath a broad brow:
his hair grown somewhat scanty was done about with a fillet of golden
beads like the young men his sons.  For indeed this was their father, and
the master of the House.

His name was Iron-face, for he was the deftest of weapon-smiths, and he
was the Alderman of the Dalesmen, and well-beloved of them; his kindred
was deemed the noblest of the Dale, and long had they dwelt in the House
of the Face.  But of his sons the youngest, the new-comer, was named
Hall-face, and his brother the elder Face-of-god; which name was of old
use amongst the kindred, and many great men and stout warriors had borne
it aforetime: and this young man, in great love had he been gotten, and
in much hope had he been reared, and therefore had he been named after
the best of the kindred.  But his mother, who was hight the Jewel, and
had been a very fair woman, was dead now, and Iron-face lacked a wife.

Face-of-god was well-beloved of his kindred and of all the Folk of the
Dale, and he had gotten a to-name, and was called Gold-mane because of
the abundance and fairness of his hair.

As for the young woman that was led in by Iron-face, she was the
betrothed of Face-of-god, and her name was the Bride.  She looked with
such eyes of love on him when she saw him in the hall, as though she had
never seen him before but once, nor loved him but since yesterday; though
in truth they had grown up together and had seen each other most days of
the year for many years.  She was of the kindred with whom the chiefs and
great men of the Face mostly wedded, which was indeed far away kindred of
them.  She was a fair woman and strong: not easily daunted amidst perils
she was hardy and handy and light-foot: she could swim as well as any,
and could shoot well in the bow, and wield sword and spear: yet was she
kind and compassionate, and of great courtesy, and the very dogs and kine
trusted in her and loved her.  Her hair was dark red of hue, long and
fine and plenteous, her eyes great and brown, her brow broad and very
fair, her lips fine and red: her cheek not ruddy, yet nowise sallow, but
clear and bright: tall she was and of excellent fashion, but well-knit
and well-measured rather than slender and wavering as the willow-bough.
Her voice was sweet and soft, her words few, but exceeding dear to the
listener.  In short, she was a woman born to be the ransom of her Folk.

Now as to the names which the menfolk of the Face bore, and they an
ancient kindred, a kindred of chieftains, it has been said that in times
past their image of the God of the Earth had over his treen face a mask
of beaten gold fashioned to the shape of the image; and that when the
Alderman of the Folk died, he to wit who served the God and bore on his
arm the gold-ring between the people and the altar, this visor or face of
God was laid over the face of him who had been in a manner his priest,
and therewith he was borne to mound; and the new Alderman and priest had
it in charge to fashion a new visor for the God; and whereas for long
this great kindred had been chieftains of the people, they had been, and
were all so named, that the word Face was ever a part of their names.




CHAPTER III.  THEY TALK OF DIVERS MATTERS IN THE HALL.


NOW Face-of-god, who is also called Gold-mane, rose up to meet the
new-comers, and each of them greeted him kindly, and the Bride kissed him
on the cheek, and he her in likewise; and he looked kindly on her, and
took her hand, and went on up the hall to the daïs, following his father
and the old man; as for him, he was of the kindred of the House, and was
foster-father of Iron-face and of his sons both; and his name was
Stone-face: a stark warrior had he been when he was young, and even now
he could do a man’s work in the battlefield, and his understanding was as
good as that of a man in his prime.  So went these and four others up on
to the daïs and sat down before the thwart-table looking down the hall,
for the meat was now on the board; and of the others there were some
fifty men and women who were deemed to be of the kindred and sat at the
endlong tables.

So then the Alderman stood up and made the sign of the Hammer over the
meat, the token of his craft and of his God.  Then they fell to with good
hearts, for there was enough and to spare of meat and drink.  There was
bread and flesh (though not Gold-mane’s venison), and leeks and roasted
chestnuts of the grove, and red-cheeked apples of the garth, and honey
enough of that year’s gathering, and medlars sharp and mellow: moreover,
good wine of the western bents went up and down the hall in great gilded
copper bowls and in mazers girt and lipped with gold.

But when they were full of meat, and had drunken somewhat, they fell to
speech, and Iron-face spake aloud to his son, who had but been speaking
softly to the Bride as one playmate to the other: but the Alderman said:
‘Scarce are the wood-deer grown, kinsman, when I must needs eat sheep’s
flesh on a Thursday, though my son has lain abroad in the woods all night
to hunt for me.’

And therewith he smiled in the young man’s face; but Gold-mane reddened
and said: ‘So is it, kinsman, I can hit what I can see; but not what is
hidden.’

Iron-face laughed and said: ‘Hast thou been to the Woodland-Carles? are
their women fairer than our cousins?’

Face-of-god took up the Bride’s hand in his and kissed it and laid it to
his cheek; and then turned to his father and said: ‘Nay, father, I saw
not the Wood-carles, nor went to their abode; and on no day do I lust
after their women.  Moreover, I brought home a roebuck of the fattest;
but I was over-late for Kettel, and the flesh was ready for the board by
then I came.’

‘Well, son,’ quoth Iron-face, for he was merry, ‘a roebuck is but a
little deer for such big men as are thou and I.  But I rede thee take the
Bride along with thee the next time; and she shall seek whilest thou
sleepest, and hit when thou missest.’

Then Face-of-god smiled, but he frowned somewhat also, and he said: ‘Well
were that, indeed!  But if ye must needs drag a true tale out of me: that
roebuck I shot at the very edge of the wood nigh to the Mote-stead as I
was coming home: harts had I seen in the wood and its lawns, and boars,
and bucks, and loosed not at them: for indeed when I awoke in the morning
in that wood-lawn ye wot of, I wandered up and down with my bow unbent.
So it was that I fared as if I were seeking something, I know not what,
that should fill up something lacking to me, I know not what.  Thus I
felt in myself even so long as I was underneath the black boughs, and
there was none beside me and before me, and none to turn aback to: but
when I came out again into the sunshine, and I saw the fair dale, and the
happy abode lying before me, and folk abroad in the meads merry in the
eventide; then was I full fain of it, and loathed the wood as an empty
thing that had nought to give me; and lo you! all that I had been longing
for in the wood, was it not in this House and ready to my hand?—and that
is good meseemeth.’

Therewith he drank of the cup which the Bride put into his hand after she
had kissed the rim, but when he had set it down again he spake once more:

‘And yet now I am sitting honoured and well-beloved in the House of my
Fathers, with the holy hearth sparkling and gleaming down there before
me; and she that shall bear my children sitting soft and kind by my side,
and the bold lads I shall one day lead in battle drinking out of my very
cup: now it seems to me that amidst all this, the dark cold wood, wherein
abide but the beasts and the Foes of the Gods, is bidding me to it and
drawing me thither.  Narrow is the Dale and the World is wide; I would it
were dawn and daylight, that I might be afoot again.’

And he half rose up from his place.  But his father bent his brow on him
and said: ‘Kinsman, thou hast a long tongue for a half-trained whelp: nor
see I whitherward thy mind is wandering, but if it be on the road of a
lad’s desire to go further and fare worse.  Hearken then, I will offer
thee somewhat!  Soon shall the West-country merchants be here with their
winter truck.  How sayest thou? hast thou a mind to fare back with them,
and look on the Plain and its Cities, and take and give with the
strangers?  To whom indeed thou shalt be nothing save a purse with a few
lumps of gold in it, or maybe a spear in the stranger’s band on the
stricken field, or a bow on the wall of an alien city.  This is a craft
which thou mayst well learn, since thou shalt be a chieftain; a craft
good to learn, however grievous it be in the learning.  And I myself have
been there; for in my youth I desired sore to look on the world beyond
the mountains; so I went, and I filled my belly with the fruit of my own
desires, and a bitter meat was that; but now that it has passed through
me, and I yet alive, belike I am more of a grown man for having endured
its gripe.  Even so may it well be with thee, son; so go if thou wilt;
and thou shalt go with my blessing, and with gold and wares and wain and
spearmen.’

‘Nay,’ said Face-of-god, ‘I thank thee, for it is well offered; but I
will not go, for I have no lust for the Plain and its Cities; I love the
Dale well, and all that is round about it; therein will I live and die.’

Therewith he fell a-musing; and the Bride looked at him anxiously, but
spake not.  Sooth to say her heart was sinking, as though she foreboded
some new thing, which should thrust itself into their merry life.

But the old man Stone-face took up the word and said:

‘Son Gold-mane, it behoveth me to speak, since belike I know the
wild-wood better than most, and have done for these three-score and ten
years; to my cost.  Now I perceive that thou longest for the wood and the
innermost of it; and wot ye what?  This longing will at whiles entangle
the sons of our chieftains, though this Alderman that now is hath been
free therefrom, which is well for him.  For, time was this longing came
over me, and I went whither it led me: overlong it were to tell of all
that befell me because of it, and how my heart bled thereby.  So sorry
were the tidings that came of it, that now meseemeth my heart should be
of stone and not my face, had it not been for the love wherewith I have
loved the sons of the kindred.  Therefore, son, it were not ill if ye
went west away with the merchants this winter, and learned the dealings
of the cities, and brought us back tales thereof.’

But Gold-mane cried out somewhat angrily, ‘I tell thee, foster-father,
that I have no mind for the cities and their men and their fools and
their whores and their runagates.  But as for the wood and its wonders, I
have done with it, save for hunting there along with others of the Folk.
So let thy mind be at ease; and for the rest, I will do what the Alderman
commandeth, and whatso my father craveth of me.’

‘And that is well, son,’ said Stone-face, ‘if what ye say come to pass,
as sore I misdoubt me it will not.  But well it were, well it were!  For
such things are in the wood, yea and before ye come to its innermost, as
may well try the stoutest heart.  Therein are Kobbolds, and Wights that
love not men, things unto whom the grief of men is as the sound of the
fiddle-bow unto us.  And there abide the ghosts of those that may not
rest; and there wander the dwarfs and the mountain-dwellers, the dealers
in marvels, the givers of gifts that destroy Houses; the forgers of the
curse that clingeth and the murder that flitteth to and fro.  There
moreover are the lairs of Wights in the shapes of women, that draw a
young man’s heart out of his body, and fill up the empty place with
desire never to be satisfied, that they may mock him therewith and waste
his manhood and destroy him.  Nor say I much of the strong-thieves that
dwell there, since thou art a valiant sword; or of them who have been
made Wolves of the Holy Places; or of the Murder-Carles, the remnants and
off-scourings of wicked and wretched Folks—men who think as much of the
life of a man as of the life of a fly.  Yet happiest is the man whom they
shall tear in pieces, than he who shall live burdened by the curse of the
Foes of the Gods.’

The housemaster looked on his son as the old carle spake, and a cloud
gathered on his face a while; and when Stone-face had made an end he
spake:

‘This is long and evil talk for the end of a merry day, O fosterer!  Wilt
thou not drink a draught, O Redesman, and then stand up and set thy
fiddle-bow a-dancing, and cause it draw some fair words after it?  For my
cousin’s face hath grown sadder than a young maid’s should be, and my
son’s eyes gleam with thoughts that are far away from us and abroad in
the wild-wood seeking marvels.’

Then arose a man of middle-age from the top of the endlong bench on the
east side of the hall: a man tall, thin and scant-haired, with a nose
like an eagle’s neb: he reached out his hand for the bowl, and when they
had given to him he handled it, and raised it aloft and cried:

‘Here I drink a double health to Face-of-god and the Bride, and the love
that lieth between them, and the love betwixt them twain and us.’

He drank therewith, and the wine went up and down the hall, and all men
drank, both carles and queens, with shouting and great joy.  Then
Redesman put down the cup (for it had come into his hands again), and
reached his hand to the wall behind him, and took down his fiddle hanging
there in its case, and drew it out and fell to tuning it, while the hall
grew silent to hearken: then he handled the bow and laid it on the
strings till they wailed and chuckled sweetly, and when the song was well
awake and stirring briskly, then he lifted up his voice and sang:

                          _The Minstrel saith_:

   ‘O why on this morning, ye maids, are ye tripping
      Aloof from the meadows yet fresh with the dew,
   Where under the west wind the river is lipping
      The fragrance of mint, the white blooms and the blue?

   For rough is the Portway where panting ye wander;
      On your feet and your gown-hems the dust lieth dun;
   Come trip through the grass and the meadow-sweet yonder,
      And forget neath the willows the sword of the sun.

                          _The Maidens answer_:

   Though fair are the moon-daisies down by the river,
      And soft is the grass and the white clover sweet;
   Though twixt us and the rock-wall the hot glare doth quiver,
      And the dust of the wheel-way is dun on our feet;

   Yet here on the way shall we walk on this morning
      Though the sun burneth here, and sweet, cool is the mead;
   For here when in old days the Burg gave its warning,
      Stood stark under weapons the doughty of deed.

   Here came on the aliens their proud words a-crying,
      And here on our threshold they stumbled and fell;
   Here silent at even the steel-clad were lying,
      And here were our mothers the story to tell.

   Here then on the morn of the eve of the wedding
      We pray to the Mighty that we too may bear
   Such war-walls for warding of orchard and steading,
      That the new days be merry as old days were dear.’

Therewith he made an end, and shouts and glad cries arose all about the
hall; and an old man arose and cried: ‘A cup to the memory of the Mighty
of the Day of the Warding of the Ways.’  For you must know this song told
of a custom of the Folk, held in memory of a time of bygone battle,
wherein they had overthrown a great host of aliens on the Portway betwixt
the river and the cliffs, two furlongs from the gate of Burgstead.  So
now two weeks before Midsummer those maidens who were presently to be
wedded went early in the morning to that place clad in very fair raiment,
swords girt to their sides and spears in their hands, and abode there on
the highway from morn till even as though they were a guard to it.  And
they made merry there, singing songs and telling tales of times past: and
at the sunsetting their grooms came to fetch them away to the Feast of
the Eve of the Wedding.

While the song was a-singing Face-of-god took the Bride’s hand in his and
caressed it, and was soft and blithe with her; and she reddened and
trembled for pleasure, and called to mind wedding feasts that had been,
and fair brides that she had seen thereat, and she forgot her fears and
her heart was at peace again.

And Iron-face looked well-pleased on the two from time to time, and
smiled, but forbore words to them.

But up and down the hall men talked with one another about things long
ago betid: for their hearts were high and they desired deeds; but in that
fair Dale so happy were the years from day to day that there was but
little to tell of.  So deepened the night and waned, and Gold-mane and
the Bride still talked sweetly together, and at whiles kindly to the
others; and by seeming he had clean forgotten the wood and its wonders.

Then at last the Alderman called for the cup of good-night, and men drank
thereof and went their ways to bed.




CHAPTER IV.  FACE-OF-GOD FARETH TO THE WOOD AGAIN.


WHEN it was the earliest morning and dawn was but just beginning,
Face-of-god awoke and rose up from his bed, and came forth into the hall
naked in his shirt, and stood by the hearth, wherein the piled-up embers
were yet red, and looked about and could see nothing stirring in the
dimness: then he fetched water and washed the night-tide off him, and
clad himself in haste, and was even as he was yesterday, save that he
left his bow and quiver in their place and took instead a short
casting-spear; moreover he took a leathern scrip and went therewith to
the buttery, and set therein bread and flesh and a little gilded beaker;
and all this he did with but little noise; for he would not be
questioned, lest he should have to answer himself as well as others.

Thus he went quietly out of doors, for the door was but latched, since no
bolts or bars or locks were used in Burgstead, and through the town-gate,
which stood open, save when rumours of war were about.  He turned his
face straight towards Wildlake’s Way, walking briskly, but at whiles
looking back over his shoulder toward the East to note what way was made
by the dawning, and how the sky lightened above the mountain passes.

By then he was come to the place where the Maiden Ward was held in the
summer the dawn was so far forward that all things had their due colours,
and were clear to see in the shadowless day.  It was a bright morning,
with an easterly air stirring that drave away the haze and dried the
meadows, which had otherwise been rimy; for it was cold.  Gold-mane
lingered on the place a little, and his eyes fell on the road, as dusty
yet as in Redesman’s song; for the autumn had been very dry, and the
strip of green that edged the outside of the way was worn and dusty also.
On the edge of it, half in the dusty road, half on the worn grass, was a
long twine of briony red-berried and black-leaved; and right in the midst
of the road were two twigs of great-leaved sturdy pollard oak, as though
they had been thrown aside there yesterday by women or children
a-sporting; and the deep white dust yet held the marks of feet, some
bare, some shod, crossing each other here and there.  Face-of-god smiled
as he passed on, as a man with a happy thought; for his mind showed him a
picture of the Bride as she would be leading the Maiden Ward next summer,
and singing first among the singers, and he saw her as clearly as he had
often seen her verily, and before him was the fashion of her hands and
all her body, and the little mark on her right wrist, and the place where
her arm whitened, because the sleeve guarded it against the sun, which
had long been pleasant unto him, and the little hollow in her chin, and
the lock of red-brown hair waving in the wind above her brow, and shining
in the sun as brightly as the Alderman’s cunningest work of golden wire.
Soft and sweet seemed that picture, till he almost seemed to hear her
sweet voice calling to him, and desire of her so took hold of the youth,
that it stirred him up to go swiftlier as he strode on, the day
brightening behind him.

Now was it nigh sunrise, and he began to meet folk on the way, though not
many; since for most their way lay afield, and not towards the Burg.  The
first was a Woodlander, tall and gaunt, striding beside his ass, whose
panniers were laden with charcoal.  The carle’s daughter, a little maiden
of seven winters, riding on the ass’s back betwixt the panniers, and
prattling to herself in the cold morning; for she was pleased with the
clear light in the east, and the smooth wide turf of the meadows, as one
who had not often been far from the shadow of the heavy trees of the
wood, and their dark wall round about the clearing where they dwelt.
Face-of-god gave the twain the sele of the day in merry fashion as he
passed them by, and the sober dark-faced man nodded to him but spake no
word, and the child stayed her prattle to watch him as he went by.

Then came the sound of the rattle of wheels, and, as he doubled an angle
of the rock-wall, he came upon a wain drawn by four dun kine, wherein lay
a young woman all muffled up against the cold with furs and cloths;
beside the yoke-beasts went her man, a well-knit trim-faced Dalesman clad
bravely in holiday raiment, girt with a goodly sword, bearing a bright
steel helm on his head, in his hand a long spear with a gay red and white
shaft done about with copper bands.  He looked merry and proud of his
wain-load, and the woman was smiling kindly on him from out of her
scarlet and fur; but now she turned a weary happy face on Gold-mane, for
they knew him, as did all men of the Dale.

So he stopped when they met, for the goodman had already stayed his slow
beasts, and the goodwife had risen a little on her cushions to greet him,
yet slowly and but a little, for she was great with child, and not far
from her time.  That knew Gold-mane well, and what was toward, and why
the goodman wore his fine clothes, and why the wain was decked with
oak-boughs and the yoke-beasts with their best gilded bells and
copper-adorned harness.  For it was a custom with many of the kindreds
that the goodwife should fare to her father’s house to lie in with her
first babe, and the day of her coming home was made a great feast in the
house.  So then Face-of-god cried out: ‘Hail to thee, O Warcliff!  Shrewd
is the wind this morning, and thou dost well to heed it carefully, this
thine orchard, this thy garden, this thy fair apple-tree!  To a good hall
thou wendest, and the Wine of Increase shall be sweet there this even.’

Then smiled Warcliff all across his face, and the goodwife hung her head
and reddened.  Said the goodman: ‘Wilt thou not be with us, son of the
Alderman, as surely thy father shall be?’

‘Nay,’ said Face-of-god, ‘though I were fain of it: my own matters carry
me away.’

‘What matters?’ said Warcliff; ‘perchance thou art for the cities this
autumn?’

Face-of-god answered somewhat stiffly: ‘Nay, I am not;’ and then more
kindly, and smiling, ‘All roads lead not down to the Plain, friend.’

‘What road then farest thou away from us?’ said the goodwife.

‘The way of my will,’ he answered.

‘And what way is that?’ said she; ‘take heed, lest I get a longing to
know.  For then must thou needs tell me, or deal with the carle there
beside thee.’

‘Nay, goodwife,’ said Face-of-god, ‘let not that longing take thee; for
on that matter I am even as wise as thou.  Now good speed to thee and to
the new-comer!’

Therewith he went close up to the wain, and reached out his hand to her,
and she gave him hers and he kissed it, and so went his ways smiling
kindly on them.  Then the carle cried to his kine, and they bent down
their heads to the yoke; and presently, as he walked on, he heard the
rumble of the wain mingling with the tinkling of their bells, which in a
little while became measured and musical, and sounded above the creaking
of the axles and the rattle of the gear and the roll of the great wheels
over the road: and so it grew thinner and thinner till it all died away
behind him.

He was now come to where the river turned away from the sheer rock-wall,
which was not so high there as in most other places, as there had been in
old time long screes from the cliff, which had now grown together, with
the waxing of herbs and the washing down of the earth on to them, and
made a steady slope or low hill going down riverward.  Over this the road
lifted itself above the level of the meadows, keeping a little way from
the cliffs, while on the other side its bank was somewhat broken and
steep here and there.  As Face-of-god came up to one of these broken
places, the sun rose over the eastern pass, and the meadows grew golden
with its long beams.  He lingered, and looked back under his hand, and as
he did so heard the voices and laughter of women coming up from the slope
below him, and presently a young woman came struggling up the broken bank
with hand and knee, and cast herself down on the roadside turf laughing
and panting.  She was a long-limbed light-made woman, dark-faced and
black-haired: amidst her laughter she looked up and saw Gold-mane, who
had stopped at once when he saw her; she held out her hands to him, and
said lightly, though her face flushed withal:

‘Come hither, thou, and help the others to climb the bank; for they are
beaten in the race, and now must they do after my will; that was the
forfeit.’

He went up to her, and took her hands and kissed them, as was the custom
of the Dale, and said:

‘Hail to thee, Long-coat! who be they, and whither away this morning
early?’

She looked hard at him, and fondly belike, as she answered slowly: ‘They
be the two maidens of my father’s house, whom thou knowest; and our
errand, all three of us, is to Burgstead, the Feast of the Wine of
Increase which shall be drunk this even.’

As she spake came another woman half up the bank, to whom went
Face-of-god, and, taking her hands, drew her up while she laughed merrily
in his face: he saluted her as he had Long-coat, and then with a laugh
turned about to wait for the third; who came indeed, but after a little
while, for she had abided, hearing their voices.  Her also Gold-mane drew
up, and kissed her hands, and she lay on the grass by Long-coat, but the
second maiden stood up beside the young man.  She was white-skinned and
golden-haired, a very fair damsel, whereas the last-comer was but comely,
as were well-nigh all the women of the Dale.

Said Face-of-god, looking on the three: ‘How comes it, maidens, that ye
are but in your kirtles this sharp autumn morning? or where have ye left
your gowns or your cloaks?’

For indeed they were clad but in close-fitting blue kirtles of fine wool,
embroidered about the hems with gold and coloured threads.

The last-comer laughed and said: ‘What ails thee, Gold-mane, to be so
careful of us, as if thou wert our mother or our nurse?  Yet if thou must
needs know, there hang our gowns on the thorn-bush down yonder; for we
have been running a match and a forfeit; to wit, that she who was last on
the highway should go down again and bring them up all three; and now
that is my day’s work: but since thou art here, Alderman’s son, thou
shalt go down instead of me and fetch them up.’

But he laughed merrily and outright, and said: ‘That will I not, for
there be but twenty-four hours in the day, and what between eating and
drinking and talking to fair maidens, I have enough to do in every one of
them.  Wasteful are ye women, and simple is your forfeit.  Now will I,
who am the Alderman’s son, give forth a doom, and will ordain that one of
you fetch up the gowns yourselves, and that Long-coat be the one; for she
is the fleetest-footed and ablest thereto.  Will ye take my doom? for
later on I shall not be wiser.’

‘Yea,’ said the fair woman, ‘not because thou art the Alderman’s son, but
because thou art the fairest man of the Dale, and mayst bid us poor souls
what thou wilt.’

Face-of-god reddened at her words, and the speaker and the last-comer
laughed; but Long-coat held her peace: she cast one very sober look on
him, and then ran lightly down the bent; he drew near the edge of it, and
watched her going; for her light-foot slimness was fair to look on: and
he noted that when she was nigh the thorn-bush whereon hung the
bright-broidered gowns, and deemed belike that she was not seen, she
kissed both her hands where he had kissed them erst.

Thereat he drew aback and turned away shyly, scarce looking at the other
twain, who smiled on him with somewhat jeering looks; but he bade them
farewell and departed speedily; and if they spoke, it was but softly, for
he heard their voices no more.

He went on under the sunlight which was now gilding the outstanding
stones of the cliffs, and still his mind was set upon the Bride; and his
meeting with the mother of the yet unborn baby, and with the three women
with their freshness and fairness, did somehow turn his thought the more
upon her, since she was the woman who was to be his amongst all women,
for she was far fairer than any one of them; and through all manner of
life and through all kinds of deeds would he be with her, and know more
of her fairness and kindness than any other could: and him-seemed he
could see pictures of her and of him amidst all these deeds and ways.

Now he went very swiftly; for he was eager, though he knew not for what,
and he thought but little of the things on which his eyes fell.  He met
none else on the road till he was come to Wildlake’s Way, though he saw
folk enough down in the meadows; he was soon amidst the first of the
trees, and without making any stay set his face east and somewhat north,
that is, toward the slopes that led to the great mountains.  He said to
himself aloud, as he wended the wood: ‘Strange! yestereven I thought much
of the wood, and I set my mind on not going thither, and this morning I
thought nothing of it, and here am I amidst its trees, and wending
towards its innermost.’

His way was easy at first, because the wood for a little space was all of
beech, so that there was no undergrowth, and he went lightly betwixt the
tall grey and smooth boles; albeit his heart was nought so gay as it was
in the dale amidst the sunshine.  After a while the beech-wood grew
thinner, and at last gave out altogether, and he came into a space of
rough broken ground with nought but a few scrubby oaks and thorn-bushes
growing thereon here and there.  The sun was high in the heavens now, and
shone brightly down on the waste, though there were a few white clouds
high up above him.  The rabbits scuttled out of the grass before him;
here and there he turned aside from a stone on which lay coiled an adder
sunning itself; now and again both hart and hind bounded away from before
him, or a sounder of wild swine ran grunting away toward closer covert.
But nought did he see but the common sights and sounds of the woodland;
nor did he look for aught else, for he knew this part of the woodland
indifferent well.

He held on over this treeless waste for an hour or more, when the ground
began to be less rugged, and he came upon trees again, but thinly
scattered, oak and ash and hornbeam not right great, with thickets of
holly and blackthorn between them.  The set of the ground was still
steadily up to the east and north-east, and he followed it as one who
wendeth an assured way.  At last before him seemed to rise a wall of
trees and thicket; but when he drew near to it, lo! an opening in a
certain place, and a little path as if men were wont to thread the tangle
of the wood thereby; though hitherto he had noted no slot of men, nor any
sign of them, since he had plunged into the deep of the beech-wood.  He
took the path as one who needs must, and went his ways as it led.  In
sooth it was well-nigh blind, but he was a deft woodsman, and by means of
it skirted many a close thicket that had otherwise stayed him.  So on he
went, and though the boughs were close enough overhead, and the sun came
through but in flecks, he judged that it was growing towards noon, and he
wotted well that he was growing aweary.  For he had been long afoot, and
the more part of the time on a rough way, or breasting a slope which was
at whiles steep enough.

At last the track led him skirting about an exceeding close thicket into
a small clearing, through which ran a little woodland rill amidst rushes
and dead leaves: there was a low mound near the eastern side of this
wood-lawn, as though there had been once a dwelling of man there, but no
other sign or slot of man was there.

So Face-of-god made stay in that place, casting himself down beside the
rill to rest him and eat and drink somewhat.  Whatever thoughts had been
with him through the wood (and they been many) concerning his House and
his name, and his father, and the journey he might make to the cities of
the Westland, and what was to befall him when he was wedded, and what war
or trouble should be on his hands—all this was now mingled together and
confused by this rest amidst his weariness.  He laid down his scrip, and
drew his meat from it and ate what he would, and dipping his gilded
beaker into the brook, drank water smacking of the damp musty savour of
the woodland; and then his head sank back on a little mound in the short
turf, and he fell asleep at once.  A long dream he had in short space;
and therein were blent his thoughts of the morning with the deeds of
yesterday; and other matters long forgotten in his waking hours came back
to his slumber in unordered confusion: all which made up for him pictures
clear, but of little meaning, save that, as oft befalls in dreams,
whatever he was a-doing he felt himself belated.

When he awoke, smiling at something strange in his gone-by dream, he
looked up to the heavens, thinking to see signs of the even at hand, for
he seemed to have been dreaming so long.  The sky was thinly overcast by
now, but by his wonted woodcraft he knew the whereabouts of the sun, and
that it was scant an hour after noon.  He sat there till he was wholly
awake, and then drank once more of the woodland water; and he said to
himself, but out loud, for he was fain of the sound of a man’s voice,
though it were but his own:

‘What is mine errand hither?  Whither wend I?  What shall I have done
to-morrow that I have hitherto left undone?  Or what manner of man shall
I be then other than I am now?’

Yet though he said the words he failed to think the thought, or it left
him in a moment of time, and he thought but of the Bride and her
kindness.  Yet that abode with him but a moment, and again he saw himself
and those two women on the highway edge, and Long-coat lingering on the
slope below, kissing his kisses on her hands; and he was sorry that she
desired him over-much, for she was a fair woman and a friendly.  But all
that also flowed from him at once, and he had no thought in him but that
he also desired something that he lacked: and this was a burden to him,
and he rose up frowning, and said to himself, ‘Am I become a mere sport
of dreams, whether I sleep or wake?  I will go backward—or forward, but
will think no more.’

Then he ordered his gear again, and took the path onward and upward
toward the Great Mountains; and the track was even fainter than before
for a while, so that he had to seek his way diligently.




CHAPTER V.  FACE-OF-GOD FALLS IN WITH MENFOLK ON THE MOUNTAIN.


NOW he plodded on steadily, and for a long time the forest changed but
little, and of wild things he saw only a few of those that love the
closest covert.  The ground still went up and up, though at whiles were
hollows, and steeper bents out of them again, and the half-blind path or
slot still led past the close thickets and fallen trees, and he made way
without let or hindrance.  At last once more the wood began to thin, and
the trees themselves to be smaller and gnarled and ill-grown: therewithal
the day was waning, and the sky was quite clear again as the afternoon
grew into a fair autumn evening.

Now the trees failed altogether, and the slope grown steeper was covered
with heather and ling; and looking up, he saw before him quite near by
seeming in the clear even (though indeed they were yet far away) the
snowy peaks flushed with the sinking sun against the frosty dark-grey
eastern sky; and below them the dark rock-mountains, and below these
again, and nigh to him indeed, the fells covered with pine-woods and
looking like a wall to the heaths he trod.

He stayed a little while and turned his head to look at the way whereby
he had come; but that way a swell of the oak-forest hid everything but
the wood itself, making a wall behind him as the pine-wood made a wall
before.  There came across him then a sharp memory of the boding words
which Stone-face had spoken last night, and he felt as if he were now
indeed within the trap.  But presently he laughed and said: ‘I am a fool:
this comes of being alone in the dark wood and the dismal waste, after
the merry faces of the Dale had swept away my foolish musings of
yesterday and the day before.  Lo! here I stand, a man of the Face, sword
and axe by my side; if death come, it can but come once; and if I fear
not death, what shall make me afraid?  The Gods hate me not, and will not
hurt me; and they are not ugly, but beauteous.’

Therewith he strode on again, and soon came to a place where the ground
sank into a shallow valley and the ling gave place to grass for a while,
and there were tall old pines scattered about, and betwixt them grey
rocks; this he passed through, climbing a steep bent out of it, and the
pines were all about him now, though growing wide apart, till at last he
came to where they thickened into a wood, not very close, wherethrough he
went merrily, singing to himself and swinging his spear.  He was soon
through this wood, and came on to a wide well-grassed wood-lawn, hedged
by the wood aforesaid on three sides, but sloping up slowly toward the
black wall of the thicker pine-wood on the fourth side, and about half a
furlong overthwart and endlong.  The sun had set while he was in the last
wood, but it was still broad daylight on the wood-lawn, and as he stood
there he was ware of a house under the pine-wood on the other side, built
long and low, much like the houses of the Woodland-Carles, but rougher
fashioned and of unhewn trees.  He gazed on it, and said aloud to himself
as his wont was:

‘Marvellous! here is a dwelling of man, scarce a day’s journey from
Burgstead; yet have I never heard tell of it: may happen some of the
Woodland-Carles have built it, and are on some errand of hunting peltries
up in the mountains, or maybe are seeking copper and tin among the rocks.
Well, at least let us go see what manner of men dwell there, and if they
are minded for a guest to-night; for fain were I of a bed beneath a roof,
and of a board with strong meat and drink on it.’

Therewith he set forward, not heeding much that the wood he had passed
through was hard on his left hand; but he had gone but twenty paces when
he saw a red thing at the edge of the wood, and then a glitter, and a
spear came whistling forth, and smote his own spear so hard close to the
steel that it flew out of his hand; then came a great shout, and a man
clad in a scarlet kirtle ran forth on him.  Face-of-god had his axe in
his hand in a twinkling, and ran at once to meet his foe; but the man had
the hill on his side as he rushed on with a short-sword in his hand.  Axe
and sword clashed together for a moment of time, and then both the men
rolled over on the grass together, and Face-of-god as he fell deemed that
he heard the shrill cry of a woman.  Now Face-of-god found that he was
the nethermost, for if he was strong, yet was his foe stronger; the axe
had flown out of his hand also, while the strange man still kept a hold
of his short-sword; and presently, though he still struggled all he
could, he saw the man draw back his hand to smite with the said sword;
and at that nick of time the foeman’s knee was on his breast, his left
hand was doubled back behind him, and his right wrist was gripped hard in
the stranger’s left hand.  Even therewith his ears, sharpened by the
coming death, heard the sound of footsteps and fluttering raiment drawing
near; something dark came between him and the sky; there was the sound of
a great stroke, and the big man loosened his grip and fell off him to one
side.

Face-of-god leapt up and ran to his axe and got hold of it; but turning
round found himself face to face with a tall woman holding in her hand a
stout staff like the limb of a tree.  She was calm and smiling, though
forsooth it was she who had stricken the stroke and stayed the sword from
his throat.  His hand and axe dropped down to his side when he saw what
it was that faced him, and that the woman was young and fair; so he spake
to her and said:

‘What aileth, maiden? is this man thy foe? doth he oppress thee? shall I
slay him?’

She laughed and said: ‘Thou art open-handed in thy proffers: he might
have asked the like concerning thee but a minute ago.’

‘Yea, yea,’ said Gold-mane, laughing also, ‘but he asked it not of thee.’

‘That is sooth,’ she said, ‘but since thou hast asked me, I will tell
thee that if thou slay him it will be my harm as well as his; and in my
country a man that taketh a gift is not wont to break the giver’s head
with it straightway.  The man is my brother, O stranger, and presently,
if thou wilt, thou mayst be eating at the same board with him.  Or if
thou wilt, thou mayst go thy ways unhurt into the wood.  But I had liefer
of the twain that thou wert in our house to-night; for thou hast a wrong
against us.’

Her voice was sweet and clear, and she spake the last words kindly, and
drew somewhat nigher to Gold-mane.  Therewithal the smitten man sat up,
and put his hand to his head, and quoth he:

‘Angry is my sister! good it is to wear the helm abroad when she shaketh
the nut-trees.’

‘Nay,’ said she, ‘it is thy luck that thou wert bare-headed, else had I
been forced to smite thee on the face.  Thou churl, since when hath it
been our wont to thrust knives into a guest, who is come of great kin, a
man of gentle heart and fair face?  Come hither and handsel him self-doom
for thy fool’s onset!’

The man rose to his feet and said: ‘Well, sister, least said, soonest
mended.  A clout on the head is worse than a woman’s chiding; but since
ye have given me one, ye may forbear the other.’

Therewith he drew near to them.  He was a very big-made man, most
stalwarth, with dark red hair and a thin pointed beard; his nose was
straight and fine, his eyes grey and well-opened, but somewhat fierce
withal.  Yet was he in nowise evil-looking; he seemed some thirty summers
old.  He was clad in a short scarlet kirtle, a goodly garment, with a
hood of like web pulled off his head on to his shoulders: he bore a great
gold ring on his left arm, and a collar of gold came down on to his
breast from under his hood.

As for the woman, she was clad in a long white linen smock, and over it a
short gown of dark blue woollen, and she had skin shoes on her feet.

Now the man came up to Face-of-god, and took his hand and said: ‘I deemed
thee a foe, and I may not have over-many foes alive: but it seems that
thou art to be a friend, and that is well and better; so herewith I
handsel thee self-doom in the matter of the onslaught.’

Then Face-of-god laughed and said: ‘The doom is soon given forth; against
the tumble on the grass I set the clout on the head; there is nought left
over to pay to any man’s son.’

Said the scarlet-clad man: ‘Belike by thine eyes thou art a true man, and
wilt not bewray me.  Now is there no foeman here, but rather maybe a
friend both now and in time to come.’  Therewith he cast his arms about
Face-of-god and kissed him.  But Face-of-god turned about to the woman
and said: ‘Is the peace wholly made?’

She shook her head and said soberly: ‘Nay, thou art too fair for a woman
to kiss.’

He flushed red, as his wont was when a woman praised him; yet was his
heart full of pleasure and well-liking.  But she laid her hand on his
shoulder and said: ‘Now is it for thee to choose betwixt the wild-wood
and the hall, and whether thou wilt be a guest or a wayfarer this night.’

As she touched him there took hold of him a sweetness of pleasure he had
never felt erst, and he answered: ‘I will be thy guest and not thy
stranger.’

‘Come then,’ she said, and took his hand in hers, so that he scarce felt
the earth under his feet, as they went all three together toward the
house in the gathering dusk, while eastward where the peaks of the great
mountains dipped was a light that told of the rising of the moon.




CHAPTER VI.  OF FACE-OF-GOD AND THOSE MOUNTAIN-DWELLERS.


A YARD or two from the threshold Gold-mane hung back a moment, entangled
in some such misgiving as a man is wont to feel when he is just about to
do some new deed, but is not yet deep in the story; his new friends noted
that, for they smiled each in their own way, and the woman drew her hand
away from his.  Face-of-god held out his still as though to take hers
again, and therewithal he changed countenance and said as though he had
stayed but to ask that question:

‘Tell me thy name, tall man; and thou, fair woman, tell me thine; for how
can we talk together else?’

The man laughed outright and said: ‘The young chieftain thinks that this
house also should be his!  Nay, young man, I know what is in thy thought,
be not ashamed that thou art wary; and be assured!  We shall hurt thee no
more than thou hast been hurt.  Now as to my name; the name that was born
with me is gone: the name that was given me hath been taken from me: now
I belike must give myself a name, and that shall be Wild-wearer; but it
may be that thou thyself shalt one day give me another, and call me
Guest.’

His sister gazed at him solemnly as he spoke, and Face-of-god beholding
her the while, deemed that her beauty grew and grew till she seemed as
aweful as a Goddess; and into his mind it came that this over-strong man
and over-lovely woman were nought mortal, and they withal dealing with
him as father and mother deal with a wayward child: then for a moment his
heart failed him, and he longed for the peace of Burgdale, and even the
lonely wood.  But therewith she turned to him and let her hand come into
his again, and looked kindly on him and said: ‘And as for me, call me the
Friend; the name is good and will serve for many things.’

He looked down from her face and his eyes lighted on her hand, and when
he noted even amid the evening dusk how fair and lovely it was fashioned,
and yet as though it were deft in the crafts that the daughters of
menfolk use, his fear departed, and the pleasure of his longing filled
his heart, and he drew her hand to him to kiss it; but she held it back.
Then he said: ‘It is the custom of the Dale to all women.’

So she let him kiss her hand, heeding the kiss nothing, and said soberly:

‘Then art thou of Burgdale, and if it were lawful to guess, I would say
that thy name is Face-of-god, of the House of the Face.’

‘Even so it is,’ said he, ‘but in the Dale those that love me do mostly
call me Gold-mane.’

‘It is well named,’ she said, ‘and seldom wilt thou be called otherwise,
for thou wilt be well-beloved.  But come in now, Gold-mane, for night is
at hand, and here have we meat and lodging such as an hungry and weary
man may take; though we be broken people, dwellers in the waste.’

Therewith she led him gently over the threshold into the hall, and it
seemed to him as if she were the fairest and the noblest of all the
Queens of ancient story.

When he was in the house he looked and saw that, rough as it was without
it lacked not fairness within.  The floor was of hard-trodden earth
strewn with pine-twigs, and with here and there brown bearskins laid on
it: there was a standing table near the upper end athwart the hall, and a
days beyond that, but no endlong table.  Gold-mane looked to the
shut-beds, and saw that they were large and fair, though there were but a
few of them; and at the lower end was a loft for a sleeping chamber dight
very fairly with broidered cloths.  The hangings on the walls, though
they left some places bare which were hung with fresh boughs, were fairer
than any he had ever seen, so that he deemed that they must come from far
countries and the City of Cities: therein were images wrought of warriors
and fair women of old time and their dealings with the Gods and the
Giants, and Wondrous wights; and he deemed that this was the story of
some great kindred, and that their token and the sign of their banner
must needs be the Wood-wolf, for everywhere was it wrought in these
pictured webs.  Perforce he looked long and earnestly at these fair
things, for the hall was not dark yet, because the brands on the hearth
were flaming their last, and when Wild-wearer beheld him so gazing, he
stood up and looked too for a moment, and then smote his right hand on
the hilt of his sword, and turned away and strode up and down the hall as
one in angry thought.

But the woman, even the Friend, bestirred herself for the service of the
guest, and brought water for his hands and feet, and when she had washed
him, bore him the wine of Welcome and drank to him and bade him drink;
and he all the while was shamefaced; for it was to him as if one of the
Ladies of the Heavenly Burg were doing him service.  Then she went away
by a door at the lower end of the hall, and Wild-wearer came and sat down
by Gold-mane, and fell a-talking with him about the ways of the Dalesmen,
and their garths, and the pastures and growths thereof; and what temper
the carles themselves were of; which were good men, which were ill, which
was loved and which scorned; no otherwise than if he had been the goodman
of some neighbouring dale; and Gold-mane told him whatso he knew, for he
saw no harm therein.

After a while the outer door opened, and there came in a woman of some
five-and-twenty winters, trimly and strongly built; short-skirted she was
and clad as a hunter, with a bow in her hand and a quiver at her back:
she unslung a pouch, which she emptied at Wild-wearer’s feet of a leash
of hares and two brace of mountain grouse; of Face-of-god she took but
little heed.

Said Wild-wearer: ‘This is good for to-morrow, not for to-day; the meat
is well-nigh on the board.’

Then Gold-mane smiled, for he called to mind his home-coming of
yesterday.  But the woman said:

‘The fault is not mine; she told me of the coming guest but three hours
agone.’

‘Ay?’ said Wild-wearer, ‘she looked for a guest then?’

‘Yea, certes,’ said the woman, ‘else why went I forth this afternoon, as
wearied as I was with yesterday?’

‘Well, well,’ said Wild-wearer, ‘get to thy due work or go play; I meddle
not with meat! and for thee all jests are as bitter earnest.’

‘And with thee, chief,’ she said, ‘it is no otherwise; surely I am made
on thy model.’

‘Thy tongue is longer, friend,’ said he; ‘now tarry if thou wilt, and if
the supper’s service craveth thee not.’

She turned away with one keen look at Face-of-god, and departed through
the door at the lower end of the hall.

By this time the hall was dusk, for there were no candles there, and the
hearth-fire was but smouldering.  Wild-wearer sat silent and musing now,
and Face-of-god spake not, for he was deep in wild and happy dreams.  At
last the lower door opened and the fair woman came into the hall with a
torch in either hand, after whom came the huntress, now clad in a dark
blue kirtle, and an old woman yet straight and hale; and these twain bore
in the victuals and the table-gear.  Then the three fell to dighting the
board, and when it was all ready, and Gold-mane and Wild-wearer were set
down to it, and with them the fair woman and the huntress, the old woman
threw good store of fresh brands on the hearth, so that the light shone
into every corner; and even therewith the outer door opened, and four
more men entered, whereof one was old, but big and stalwarth, the other
three young: they were all clad roughly in sheep-brown weed, but had
helms upon their heads and spears in their hands and great swords girt to
their sides; and they seemed doughty men and ready for battle.  One of
the young men cast down by the door the carcass of a big-horned mountain
sheep, and then they all trooped off to the out-bower by the lower door,
and came back presently fairly clad and without their weapons.
Wild-wearer nodded to them kindly, and they sat at table paying no more
heed to Face-of-god than to cast him a nod for salutation.

Then said the old woman to them: ‘Well, lads, have ye been doing or
sleeping?’

‘Sleeping, mother,’ said one of the young men, ‘as was but due after last
night was, and to-morrow shall be.’

Said the huntress: ‘Hold thy peace, Wood-wise, and let thy tongue help
thy teeth to deal with thy meat; for this is not the talking hour.’

‘Nay, Bow-may,’ said another of the swains, ‘since here is a new man, now
is the time to talk to him.’

Said the huntress: ‘’Tis thine hands that talk best, Wood-wont; it is not
they that shall bring thee to shame.’

Spake the third: ‘What have we to do with shame here, far away from dooms
and doomers, and elders, and wardens, and guarded castles?  If the new
man listeth to speak, let him speak; or to fight, then let him; it shall
ever be man to man.’

Then spake the old woman: ‘Son Wood-wicked, hold thy peace, and forget
the steel that ever eggeth thee on to draw.’

Therewith she set the last matters on the board, while the three swains
sat and eyed Gold-mane somewhat fiercely, now that words had stirred
them, and he had sat there saying nothing, as one who was better than
they, and contemned them; but now spake Wild-wearer:

‘Whoso hungreth let him eat!  Whoso would slumber, let him to bed.  But
he who would bicker, it must needs be with me.  Here is a man of the
Dale, who hath sought the wood in peace, and hath found us.  His hand is
ready and his heart is guileless: if ye fear him, run away to the wood,
and come back when he is gone; but none shall mock him while I sit by:
now, lads, be merry and blithe with the guest.’

Then the young men greeted Gold-mane, and the old man said: ‘Art thou of
Burgstead? then wilt thou be of the House of the Face, and thy name will
be Face-of-god; for that man is called the fairest of the Dale, and there
shall be none fairer than thou.’

Face-of-god laughed and said: ‘There be but few mirrors in Burgdale, and
I have no mind to journey west to the cities to see what manner of man I
be: that were ill husbandry.  But now I have heard the names of the three
swains, tell me thy name, father!’

Spake the huntress: ‘This is my father’s brother, and his name is
Wood-father; or ye shall call him so: and I am called Bow-may because I
shoot well in the bow: and this old carline is my eme’s wife, and now
belike my mother, if I need one.  But thou, fair-faced Dalesman, little
dost thou need a mirror in the Dale so long as women abide there; for
their faces shall be instead of mirrors to tell thee whether thou be fair
and lovely.’

Thereat they all laughed and fell to their victual, which was abundant,
of wood-venison and mountain-fowl, but of bread was no great plenty; wine
lacked not, and that of the best; and Gold-mane noted that the cups and
the apparel of the horns and mazers were not of gold nor gilded copper,
but of silver; and he marvelled thereat, for in the Dale silver was rare.

So they ate and drank, and Gold-mane looked ever on the Friend, and spake
much with her, and he deemed her friendly indeed, and she seemed most
pleased when he spoke best, and led him on to do so.  Wild-wearer was but
of few words, and those somewhat harsh; yet was he as a man striving to
be courteous and blithe; but of the others Bow-may was the greatest
speaker.

Wild-wearer called healths to the Sun, and the Moon, and the Hosts of
Heaven; to the Gods of the Earth; to the Woodwights; and to the Guest.
Other healths also he called, the meaning of which was dark to Gold-mane;
to wit, the Jaws of the Wolf; the Silver Arm; the Red Hand; the Golden
Bushel; and the Ragged Sword.  But when he asked the Friend concerning
these names what they might signify, she shook her head and answered not.

At last Wild-wearer cried out: ‘Now, lads, the night weareth and the
guest is weary: therefore whoso of you hath in him any minstrelsy, now
let him make it, for later on it shall be over-late.’

Then arose Wood-wont and went to his shut-bed and groped therein, and
took from out of it a fiddle in its case; and he opened the case and drew
from it a very goodly fiddle, and he stood on the floor amidst of the
hall and Bow-may his cousin with him; and he laid his bow on the fiddle
and woke up song in it, and when it was well awake she fell a-singing,
and he to answering her song, and at the last all they of the house sang
together; and this is the meaning of the words which they sang:

                              _She singeth_.

   Now is the rain upon the day,
      And every water’s wide;
   Why busk ye then to wear the way,
      And whither will ye ride?

                              _He singeth_.

   Our kine are on the eyot still,
      The eddies lap them round;
   All dykes the wind-worn waters fill,
      And waneth grass and ground.

                              _She singeth_.

   O ride ye to the river’s brim
      In war-weed fair to see?
   Or winter waters will ye swim
      In hauberks to the knee?

                              _He singeth_.

   Wild is the day, and dim with rain,
      Our sheep are warded ill;
   The wood-wolves gather for the plain,
      Their ravening maws to fill.

                              _She singeth_.

   Nay, what is this, and what have ye,
      A hunter’s band, to bear
   The Banner of our Battle-glee
      The skulking wolves to scare?

                              _He singeth_.

   O women, when we wend our ways
      To deal with death and dread,
   The Banner of our Fathers’ Days
      Must flap the wind o’erhead.

                              _She singeth_.

   Ah, for the maidens that ye leave!
      Who now shall save the hay?
   What grooms shall kiss our lips at eve,
      When June hath mastered May?

                              _He singeth_.

   The wheat is won, the seed is sown,
      Here toileth many a maid,
   And ere the hay knee-deep hath grown
      Your grooms the grass shall wade.

                        _They sing all together_.

   Then fair befall the mountain-side
      Whereon the play shall be!
   And fair befall the summer-tide
      That whoso lives shall see.

Face-of-god thought the song goodly, but to the others it was well known.
Then said Wood-father:

‘O foster-son, thy foster-brother hath sung well for a wood abider; but
we are deeming that his singing shall be but as a starling to a throstle
matched against thy new-come guest.  Therefore, Dalesman, sing us a song
of the Dale, and if ye will, let it be of gardens and pleasant houses of
stone, and fair damsels therein, and swains with them who toil not
over-much for a scant livelihood, as do they of the waste, whose heads
may not be seen in the Holy Places.’

Said Gold-mane: ‘Father, it is ill to set the words of a lonely man afar
from his kin against the song that cometh from the heart of a noble
house; yet may I not gainsay thee, but will sing to thee what I may call
to mind, and it is called the Song of the Ford.’

Therewith he sang in a sweet and clear voice: and this is the meaning of
his words:

   In hay-tide, through the day new-born,
      Across the meads we come;
   Our hauberks brush the blossomed corn
      A furlong short of home.

   Ere yet the gables we behold
      Forth flasheth the red sun,
   And smites our fallow helms and cold
      Though all the fight be done.

   In this last mend of mowing-grass
      Sweet doth the clover smell,
   Crushed neath our feet red with the pass
      Where hell was blent with hell.

   And now the willowy stream is nigh,
      Down wend we to the ford;
   No shafts across its fishes fly,
      Nor flasheth there a sword.

   But lo! what gleameth on the bank
      Across the water wan,
   As when our blood the mouse-ear drank
      And red the river ran?

   Nay, hasten to the ripple clear,
      Look at the grass beyond!
   Lo ye the dainty band and dear
      Of maidens fair and fond!

   Lo how they needs must take the stream!
      The water hides their feet;
   On fair kind arms the gold doth gleam,
      And midst the ford we meet.

   Up through the garden two and two,
      And on the flowers we drip;
   Their wet feet kiss the morning dew
      As lip lies close to lip.

   Here now we sing; here now we stay:
      By these grey walls we tell
   The love that lived from out the fray,
      The love that fought and fell.

When he was done they all said that he had sung well, and that the song
was sweet.  Yet did Wild-wearer smile somewhat; and Bow-may said
outright: ‘Soft is the song, and hath been made by lads and minstrels
rather than by warriors.’

‘Nay, kinswoman,’ said Wood-father, ‘thou art hard to please; the guest
is kind, and hath given us that I asked for, and I give him all thanks
therefor.’

Face-of-god smiled, but he heeded little what they said, for as he sang
he had noted that the Friend looked kindly on him; and he thought he saw
that once or twice she put out her hand as if to touch him, but drew it
back again each time.  She spake after a little and said:

‘Here now hath been a stream of song running betwixt the Mountain and the
Dale even as doth a river; and this is good to come between our dreams of
what hath been and what shall be.’  Then she turned to Gold-mane, and
said to him scarce loud enough for all to hear:

‘Herewith I bid thee good-night, O Dalesman; and this other word I have
to thee: heed not what befalleth in the night, but sleep thy best, for
nought shall be to thy scathe.  And when thou wakest in the morning, if
we are yet here, it is well; but if we are not, then abide us no long
while, but break thy fast on the victual thou wilt find upon the board,
and so depart and go thy ways home.  And yet thou mayst look to it to see
us again before thou diest.’

Therewith she held out her hand to him, and he took it and kissed it; and
she went to her chamber-aloft at the lower end of the hall.  And when she
was gone, once more he had a deeming of her that she was of the kindred
of the Gods.  At her departure him-seemed that the hall grew dull and
small and smoky, and the night seemed long to him and doubtful the coming
of the day.




CHAPTER VII.  FACE-OF-GOD TALKETH WITH THE FRIEND ON THE MOUNTAIN.


SO now went all men to bed; and Face-to-god’s shut-bed was over against
the outer door and toward the lower end of the hall, and on the panel
about it hung the weapons and shields of men.  Fair was that chamber and
roomy, and the man was weary despite his eagerness, so that he went to
sleep as soon as his head touched the pillow; but within a while (he
deemed about two hours after midnight) he was awaked by the clattering of
the weapons against the panel, and the sound of men’s hands taking them
down; and when he was fully awake, he heard withal men going up and down
the house as if on errands: but he called to mind what the Friend had
said to him, and he did not so much as turn himself toward the hall; for
he said: ‘Belike these men are outlaws and Wolves of the Holy Places, yet
by seeming they are good fellows and nought churlish, nor have I to do
with taking up the feud against them.  I will abide the morning.  Yet
meseemeth that she drew me hither: for what cause?’

Therewith he fell asleep again, and dreamed no more.  But when he awoke
the sun was shining broad upon the hall-floor, and he sat up and
listened, but could hear no sound save the moaning of the wind in the
pine-boughs and the chatter of the starlings about the gables of the
house; and the place seemed so exceeding lonely to him that he was in a
manner feared by that loneliness.

Then he arose and clad himself, and went forth into the hall and gazed
about him, and at first he deemed indeed that there was no one therein.
But at last he looked and beheld the upper gable and there underneath a
most goodly hanging was the glorious shape of a woman sitting on a bench
covered over with a cloth of gold and silver; and he looked and looked to
see if the woman might stir, and if she were alive, and she turned her
head toward him, and lo it was the Friend; and his heart rose to his
mouth for wonder and fear and desire.  For now he doubted whether the
other folk were aught save shows and shadows, and she the Goddess who had
fashioned them out of nothing for his bewilderment, presently to return
to nothing.

Yet whatever he might fear or doubt, he went up the hall towards her till
he was quite nigh to her, and there he stood silent, wondering at her
beauty and desiring her kindness.

Grey-eyed she was like her brother; but her hair the colour of red wheat:
her lips full and red, her chin round, her nose fine and straight.  Her
hands and all her body fashioned exceeding sweetly and delicately; yet
not as if she were an image of which the like might be found if the
craftsman were but deft enough to make a perfect thing, but in such a way
that there was none like to her for those that had eyes to behold her as
she was; and none could ever be made like to her, even by such a
master-craftsman as could fashion a body without a blemish.

She was clad in a white smock, whose hems were broidered with gold wire
and precious gems of the Mountains, and over that a gown woven of gold
and silver: scarce hath the world such another.  On her head was a fillet
of gold and gems, and there were wondrous gold rings on her arms: her
feet lay bare on the dark grey wolf-skin that was stretched before her.

She smiled kindly upon his solemn and troubled face, and her voice
sounded strangely familiar to him coming from all that loveliness, as she
said: ‘Hail, Face-of-god! here am I left alone, although I deemed last
night that I should be gone with the others.  Therefore am I fain to show
myself to thee in fairer array than yesternight; for though we dwell in
the wild-wood, from the solace of folk, yet are we not of thralls’ blood.
But come now, I bid thee break thy fast and talk with me a little while;
and then shalt thou depart in peace.’

Spake Face-of-god, and his voice trembled as he spake: ‘What art thou?
Last night I deemed at whiles once and again that thou wert of the Gods;
and now that I behold thee thus, and it is broad daylight, and of those
others is no more to be seen than if they had never lived, I cannot but
deem that it is even so, and that thou comest from the City that shall
never perish.  Now if thou be a goddess, I have nought to pray thee, save
to slay me speedily if thou hast a mind for my death.  But if thou art a
woman—’

She broke in: ‘Gold-mane, stay thy prayer and hold thy peace for this
time, lest thou repent when repentance availeth not.  And this I say
because I am none of the Gods nor akin to them, save far off through the
generations, as art thou also, and all men of goodly kindred.  Now I bid
thee eat thy meat, since ’tis ill talking betwixt a full man and a
fasting; and I have dight it myself with mine own hands; for Bow-may and
the Wood-mother went away with the rest three hours before dawn.  Come
sit and eat as thou hast a hardy heart; as forsooth thou shouldest do if
I were a very goddess.  Take heed, friend, lest I take thee for some
damsel of the lower Dale arrayed in Earl’s garments.’

She laughed therewith, and leaned toward him and put forth her hand to
him, and he took it and caressed it; and the exceeding beauty of her body
and of the raiment which was as it were a part of her and her loveliness,
made her laughter and her friendly words strange to him, as if one did
not belong to the other; as in a dream it might be.  Nevertheless he did
as she bade him, and sat at the board and ate, while she leaned forward
on the arm of her chair and spake to him in friendly wise.  And he
wondered as she spake that she knew so much of him and his: and he kept
saying to himself: ‘She drew me hither; wherefore did she so?’

But she said: ‘Gold-mane, how fareth thy father the Alderman? is he as
good a wright as ever?’

He told her: Yea, that ever was his hammer on the iron, the copper, and
the gold, and that no wright in the Dale was as deft as he.

Said she: ‘Would he not have had thee seek to the Cities, to see the ways
of the outer world?’

‘Yea,’ said he.

She said: ‘Thou wert wise to naysay that offer; thou shalt have enough to
do in the Dale and round about it in twelve months’ time.’

‘Art thou foresighted?’ said he.

‘Folk have called me so,’ she said, ‘but I wot not.  But thy brother
Hall-face, how fareth he?’

‘Well;’ said he, ‘to my deeming he is the Sword of our House, and the
Warrior of the Dale, if the days were ready for him.’

‘And Stone-face, that stark ancient,’ she said, ‘doth he still love the
Folk of the Dale, and hate all other folks?’

‘Nay,’ he said, ‘I know not that, but I know that he loveth as, and above
all me and my father.’

Again she spake: ‘How fareth the Bride, the fair maid to whom thou art
affianced?’

As she spake, it was to him as if his heart was stricken cold; but he put
a force upon himself, and neither reddened nor whitened, nor changed
countenance in any way; so he answered:

‘She was well the eve of yesterday.’  Then he remembered what she was,
and her beauty and valour, and he constrained himself to say: ‘Each day
she groweth fairer; there is no man’s son and no daughter of woman that
does not love her; yea, the very beasts of field and fold love her.’

The Friend looked at him steadily and spake no word, but a red flush
mounted to her cheeks and brow and changed her face; and he marvelled
thereat; for still he misdoubted that she was a Goddess.  But it passed
away in a moment, and she smiled and said:

‘Guest, thou seemest to wonder that I know concerning thee and the Dale
and thy kindred.  But now shalt thou wot that I have been in the Dale
once and again, and my brother oftener still; and that I have seen thee
before yesterday.’

‘That is marvellous,’ quoth he, ‘for sure am I that I have not seen
thee.’

‘Yet thou hast seen me,’ she said; ‘yet not altogether as I am now;’ and
therewith she smiled on him friendly.

‘How is this?’ said he; ‘art thou a skin-changer?’

‘Yea, in a fashion,’ she said.  ‘Hearken! dost thou perchance remember a
day of last summer when there was a market holden in Burgstead; and there
stood in the way over against the House of the Face a tall old carle who
was trucking deer-skins for diverse gear; and with him was a queen, tall
and dark-skinned, somewhat well-liking, her hair bound up in a white coif
so that none of it could be seen; by the token that she had a large stone
of mountain blue set in silver stuck in the said coif?’

As she spoke she set her hand to her bosom and drew something from it,
and held forth her hand to Gold-mane, and lo amidst the palm the great
blue stone set in silver.

‘Wondrous as a dream is this,’ said Face-of-god, ‘for these twain I
remember well, and what followed.’

She said: ‘I will tell thee that.  There came a man of the Shepherd-Folk,
drunk or foolish, or both, who began to chaffer with the big carle; but
ever on the queen were his eyes set, and presently he put forth his hand
to her to clip her, whereon the big carle hove up his fist and smote him,
so that he fell to earth noseling.  Then ran the folk together to hale
off the stranger and help the shepherd, and it was like that the stranger
should be mishandled.  Then there thrust through the press a young man
with yellow hair and grey eyes, who cried out, “Fellows, let be!  The
stranger had the right of it; this is no matter to make a quarrel or a
court case of.  Let the market go on!  This man and maid are true folk.”
So when the folk heard the young man and his bidding, they forebore and
let the carle and the queen be, and the shepherd went his ways little
hurt.  Now then, who was this young man?’

Quoth Gold-mane: ‘It was even I, and meseemeth it was no great deed to
do.’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘and the big carle was my brother, and the tall queen,
it was myself.’

‘How then,’ said he, ‘for she was as dark-skinned as a dwarf, and thou so
bright and fair?’

She said: ‘Well, if the woods are good for nothing else, yet are they
good for the growing of herbs, and I know the craft of simpling; and with
one of these herbs had I stained my skin and my brother’s also.  And it
showed the darker beneath the white coif.’

‘Yea,’ said he, ‘but why must ye needs fare in feigned shapes?  Ye would
have been welcome guests in the Dale howsoever ye had come.’

‘I may not tell thee hereof as now,’ said she.

Said Gold-mane: ‘Yet thou mayst belike tell me wherefore was that thy
brother desired to slay me yesterday, if he knew me, who I was.’

‘Gold-mane,’ she said, ‘thou art not slain, so little story need be made
of that: for the rest, belike he knew thee not at that moment.  So it
falls with us, that we look to see foes rather than friends in the
wild-woods.  Many uncouth things are therein.  Moreover, I must tell thee
of my brother that whiles he is as the stalled bull late let loose, and
nothing is good to him save battle and onset; and then is he blind and
knows not friend from foe.’  Said Face-of-god: ‘Thou hast asked of me and
mine; wilt thou not tell me of thee and thine?’

‘Nay,’ she said, ‘not as now; thou must betake thee to the way.  Whither
wert thou wending when thou happenedst upon us?’

He said: ‘I know not; I was seeking something, but I knew not
what—meseemeth that now I have found it.’

‘Art thou for the great mountains seeking gems?’ she said.  ‘Yet go not
thither to-day: for who knoweth what thou shalt meet there that shall be
thy foe?’

He said: ‘Nay, nay; I have nought to do but to abide here as long as I
may, looking upon thee and hearkening to thy voice.’

Her eyes were upon his, but yet she did not seem to see him, and for a
while she answered not; and still he wondered that mere words should come
from so fair a thing; for whether she moved foot, or hand, or knee, or
turned this way or that, each time she stirred it was a caress to his
very heart.

He spake again: ‘May I not abide here a while?  What scathe may be in
that?’

‘It is not so,’ she said; ‘thou must depart, and that straightway: lo,
there lieth thy spear which the Wood-mother hath brought in from the
waste.  Take thy gear to thee and wend thy ways.  Have patience!  I will
lead thee to the place where we first met and there give thee farewell.’

Therewith she arose and he also perforce, and when they came to the
doorway she stepped across the threshold and then turned back and gave
him her hand and so led him forth, the sun flashing back from her golden
raiment.  Together they went over the short grey grass of that hillside
till they came to the place where he had arisen from that wrestle with
her brother.  There she stayed him and said:

‘This is the place; here must we part.’

But his heart failed him and he faltered in his speech as he said:

‘When shall I see thee again?  Wilt thou slay me if I seek to thee hither
once more?’

‘Hearken,’ she said, ‘autumn is now a-dying into winter: let winter and
its snows go past: nor seek to me hither; for me thou should’st not find,
but thy death thou mightest well fall in with; and I would not that thou
shouldest die.  When winter is gone, and spring is on the land, if thou
hast not forgotten us thou shalt meet us again.  Yet shalt thou go
further than this Woodland Hall.  In Shadowy Vale shalt thou seek to me
then, and there will I talk with thee.’

‘And where,’ said he, ‘is Shadowy Vale? for thereof have I never heard
tell.’

She said: ‘The token when it cometh to thee shall show thee thereof and
the way thither.  Art thou a babbler, Gold-mane?’

He said: ‘I have won no prize for babbling hitherto.’

She said: ‘If thou listest to babble concerning what hath befallen thee
on the Mountain, so do, and repent it once only, that is, thy life long.’

‘Why should I say any word thereof?’ said he.  ‘Dost thou not know the
sweetness of such a tale untold?’

He spake as one who is somewhat wrathful, and she answered humbly and
kindly:

‘Well is that.  Bide thou the token that shall lead thee to Shadowy Vale.
Farewell now.’

She drew her hand from his, and turned and went her ways swiftly to the
house: he could not choose but gaze on her as she went glittering-bright
and fair in that grey place of the mountains, till the dark doorway
swallowed up her beauty.  Then he turned away and took the path through
the pine-woods, muttering to himself as he went:

‘What thing have I done now that hitherto I had not done?  What manner of
man am I to-day other than the man I was yesterday?’




CHAPTER VIII.  FACE-OF-GOD COMETH HOME AGAIN TO BURGSTEAD.


FACE-OF-GOD went back through the wood by the way he had come, paying
little heed to the things about him.  For whatever he thought of strayed
not one whit from the image of the Fair Woman of the Mountain-side.

He went through the wood swiftlier than yesterday, and made no stay for
noon or aught else, nor did he linger on the road when he was come into
the Dale, either to speak to any or to note what they did.  So he came to
the House of the Face about dusk, and found no man within the hall either
carle or queen.  So he cried out on the folk, and there came in a damsel
of the house, whom he greeted kindly and she him again.  He bade her
bring the washing-water, and she did so and washed his feet and his
hands.  She was a fair maid enough, as were most in the Dale, but he
heeded her little; and when she was done he kissed not her cheek for her
pains, as his wont was, but let her go her ways unthanked.  But he went
to his shut-bed and opened his chest, and drew fair raiment from it, and
did off his wood-gear, and did on him a goodly scarlet kirtle fairly
broidered, and a collar with gems of price therein, and other braveries.
And when he was so attired he came out into the hall, and there was old
Stone-face standing by the hearth, which was blazing brightly with fresh
brands, so that things were clear to see.

Stone-face noted Gold-mane’s gay raiment, for he was not wont to wear
such attire, save on the feasts and high days when he behoved to.  So the
old man smiled and said:

‘Welcome back from the Wood!  But what is it?  Hast thou been wedded
there, or who hath made thee Earl and King?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Foster-father, sooth it is that I have been to the
wood, but there have I seen nought of manfolk worse than myself.  Now as
to my raiment, needs must I keep it from the moth.  And I am weary
withal, and this kirtle is light and easy to me.  Moreover, I look to see
the Bride here again, and I would pleasure her with the sight of gay
raiment upon me.’

‘Nay,’ said Stone-face, ‘hast thou not seen some woman in the wood
arrayed like the image of a God? and hath she not bidden thee thus to
worship her to-night?  For I know that such wights be in the wood, and
that such is their wont.’

Said Gold-mane: ‘I worship nought save the Gods and the Fathers.  Nor saw
I in the wood any such as thou sayest.’

Therewith Stone-face shook his head; but after a while he said:

‘Art thou for the wood to-morrow?’

‘Nay,’ said Gold-mane angrily, knitting his brows.

‘The morrow of to-morrow,’ said Stone-face, ‘is the day when we look to
see the Westland merchants: after all, wilt thou not go hence with them
when they wend their ways back before the first snows fall?’

‘Nay,’ said he, ‘I have no mind to it, fosterer; cease egging me on
hereto.’

Then Stone-face shook his head again, and looked on him long, and
muttered: ‘To the wood wilt thou go to-morrow or next day; or some day
when doomed is thine undoing.’

Therewith entered the service and torches, and presently after came the
Alderman with Hall-face; and Iron-face greeted his son and said to him:
‘Thou hast not hit the time to do on thy gay raiment, for the Bride will
not be here to-night; she bideth still at the Feast at the Apple-tree
House: or wilt thou be there, son?’

‘Nay,’ said Face-of-god, ‘I am over-weary.  And as for my raiment, it is
well; it is for thine honour and the honour of the name.’

So to table they went, and Iron-face asked his son of his ways again, and
whether he was quite fixed in his mind not to go down to the Plain and
the Cities: ‘For,’ said he, ‘the morrow of to-morrow shall the merchants
be here, and this were great news for them if the son of the Alderman
should be their faring-fellow back.’

But Face-of-god answered without any haste or heat: ‘Nay, father, it may
not be: fear not, thou shalt see that I have a good will to work and live
in the Dale.’

And in good sooth, though he was a young man and loved mirth and the ways
of his own will, he was a stalwarth workman, and few could mow a match
with him in the hay-month and win it; or fell trees as certainly and
swiftly, or drive as straight and clean a furrow through the stiff land
of the lower Dale; and in other matters also was he deft and sturdy.




CHAPTER IX.  THOSE BRETHREN FARE TO THE YEWWOOD WITH THE BRIDE.


NEXT morning Face-of-god dight himself for work, and took his axe; for
his brother Hall-face had bidden him go down with him to the Yew-wood and
cut timber there, since he of all men knew where to go straight to the
sticks that would quarter best for bow-staves; whereas the Alderman had
the right of hewing in that wood.  So they went forth, those brethren,
from the House of the Face, but when they were gotten to the gate, who
should be there but the Bride awaiting them, and she with an ass duly
saddled for bearing the yew-sticks.  Because Hall-face had told her that
he and belike Gold-mane were going to hew in the wood, and she thought it
good to be of the company, as oft had befallen erst.  When they met she
greeted Face-of-god and kissed him as her wont was; and he looked upon
her and saw how fair she was, and how kind and friendly were her eyes
that beheld him, and how her whole face was eager for him as their lips
parted.  Then his heart failed him, when he knew that he no longer
desired her as she did him, and he said within himself:

‘Would that she had been of our nighest kindred!  Would that I had had a
sister and that this were she!’

So the three went along the highway down the Dale, and Hall-face and the
Bride talked merrily together and laughed, for she was happy, since she
knew that Gold-mane had been to the wood and was back safe and much as he
had been before.  So indeed it seemed of him; for though at first he was
moody and of few words, yet presently he cursed himself for a mar-sport,
and so fell into the talk, and enforced himself to be merry; and soon he
was so indeed; for he thought: ‘She drew me thither: she hath a deed for
me to do.  I shall do the deed and have my reward.  Soon will the
spring-tide be here, and I shall be a young man yet when it comes.’

So came they to the place where he had met the three maidens yesterday;
there they also turned from the highway; and as they went down the bent,
Gold-mane could not but turn his eyes on the beauty of the Bride and the
lovely ways of her body: but presently he remembered all that had betid,
and turned away again as one who is noting what it behoves him not to
note.  And he said to himself: ‘Where art thou, Gold-mane?  Whose art
thou?  Yea, even if that had been but a dream that I have dreamed, yet
would that this fair woman were my sister!’

So came they to the Yew-wood, and the brethren fell to work, and the
Bride with them, for she was deft with the axe and strong withal.  But at
midday they rested on the green slope without the Yew-wood; and they ate
bread and flesh and onions and apples, and drank red wine of the Dale.
And while they were resting after their meat, the Bride sang to them, and
her song was a lay of time past; and here ye have somewhat of it:

   ’Tis over the hill and over the dale
      Men ride from the city fast and far,
   If they may have a soothfast tale,
      True tidings of the host of war.

   And first they hap on men-at-arms,
      All clad in steel from head to foot:
   Now tell true tale of the new-come harms,
      And the gathered hosts of the mountain-root.

   Fair sirs, from murder-carles we flee,
      Whose fashion is as the mountain-trolls’;
   No man can tell how many they be,
      And the voice of their host as the thunder rolls.

   They were weary men at the ending of day,
      But they spurred nor stayed for longer word.
   Now ye, O merchants, whither away?
      What do ye there with the helm and the sword?

   O we must fight for life and gear,
      For our beasts are spent and our wains are stayed,
   And the host of the Mountain-men draws near,
      That maketh all the world afraid.

   They left the chapmen on the hill,
      And through the eve and through the night
   They rode to have true tidings still,
      And were there on the way when the dawn was bright.

   O damsels fair, what do ye then
      To loiter thus upon the way,
   And have no fear of the Mountain-men,
      The host of the carles that strip and slay?

   O riders weary with the road,
      Come eat and drink on the grass hereby!
   And lay you down in a fair abode
      Till the midday sun is broad and high;

   Then unto you shall we come aback,
      And lead you forth to the Mountain-men,
   To note their plenty and their lack,
      And have true tidings there and then.

   ’Tis over the hill and over the dale
      They ride from the mountain fast and far;
   And now have they learned a soothfast tale,
      True tidings of the host of war.

   It was summer-tide and the Month of Hay,
      And men and maids must fare afield;
   But we saw the place were the bow-staves lay,
      And the hall was hung with spear and shield.

   When the moon was high we drank in the hall,
      And they drank to the guests and were kind and blithe,
   And they said: Come back when the chestnuts fall,
      And the wine-carts wend across the hythe.

   Come oft and o’er again, they said;
      Wander your ways; but we abide
   For all the world in the little stead;
      For wise are we, though the world be wide.

   Yea, come in arms if ye will, they said;
      And despite your host shall we abide
   For life or death in the little stead;
      For wise are we, though the world be wide.

So she made an end and looked at the fairness of the dale spreading wide
before her, and a robin came nigh from out of a thorn-bush and sung his
song also, the sweet herald of coming winter; and the lapwings wheeled
about, black and white, above the meadow by the river, sending forth
their wheedling pipe as they hung above the soft turf.

She felt the brothers near her, and knew their friendliness from of old,
and she was happy; nor had she looked closer at Gold-mane would she have
noted any change in him belike; for the meat and the good wine, and the
fair sunny time, and the Bride’s sweet voice, and the ancient song
softened his heart while it fed the desire therein.

So in a while they arose from their rest and did what was left them of
their work, and so went back to Burgstead through the fair afternoon; by
seeming all three in all content.  But yet Gold-mane, as from time to
time he looked upon the Bride, kept saying to himself: ‘O if she had been
but my sister! sweet had the kinship been!’




CHAPTER X.  NEW TIDINGS IN THE DALE.


IT was three days thereafter that Gold-mane, leading an ass, went along
the highway to fetch home certain fleeces which were needed for the house
from a stead a little west of Wildlake; but he had gone scant half a mile
ere he fell in with a throng of folk going to Burgstead.  They were of
the Shepherds; they had weapons with them, and some were clad in coats of
fence.  They went along making a great noise, for they were all talking
each to each at the same time, and seemed very hot and eager about some
matter.  When they saw Gold-mane anigh, they stopped, and the throng
opened as if to let him into their midmost; so he mingled with them, and
they stood in a ring about him and an old man more ill-favoured than it
was the wont of the Dalesmen to be.

For he was long, stooping, gaunt and spindle-shanked, his hands big and
crippled with gout: his cheeks were red after an old man’s fashion,
covered with a crimson network like a pippin; his lips thin and not well
hiding his few teeth; his nose long like a snipe’s neb.  In short, a
shame and a laughing-stock to the Folk, and a man whom the kindreds had
in small esteem, and that for good reasons.

Face-of-god knew him at once for a notable close-fist and starve-all fool
of the Shepherds; and his name was now become Penny-thumb the Lean,
whatever it might once have been.

So Face-of-god greeted all men, and they him again; and he said: ‘What
aileth you, neighbours?  Your weapons, are bare, but I see not that they
be bloody.  What is it, goodman Penny-thumb?’

Penny-thumb did but groan for all answer; but a stout carle who stood by
with a broad grin on his face answered and said:

‘Face-of-god, evil tidings be abroad; the strong-thieves of the wood are
astir; and some deem that the wood-wights be helping them.’

‘Yea, and what is the deed they have done?’ said Gold-mane.

Said the carle: ‘Thou knowest Penny-thumb’s abode?’

‘Yea surely,’ said Face-of-god; ‘fair are the water-meadows about it;
great gain of cheese can be gotten thence.’

‘Hast thou been within the house?’ said the carle.

‘Nay,’ said Gold-mane.

Then spake Penny-thumb: ‘Within is scant gear: we gather for others to
scatter; we make meat for others’ mouths.’

The carle laughed: ‘Sooth is that,’ said he, ‘that there is little gear
therein now; for the strong-thieves have voided both hall and bower and
byre.’

‘And when was that?’ said Face-of-god.

‘The night before last night,’ said the carle, ‘the door was smitten on,
and when none answered it was broken down.’

‘Yea,’ quoth Penny-thumb, ‘a host entered, and they in arms.’

‘No host was within,’ said the carle, ‘nought but Penny-thumb and his
sister and his sister’s son, and three carles that work for him; and one
of them, Rusty to wit, was the worst man of the hill-country.  These then
the host whereof the goodman telleth bound, but without doing them any
scathe; and they ransacked the house, and took away much gear; yet left
some.’

‘Thou liest,’ said Penny-thumb; ‘they took little and left none.’

Thereat all men laughed, for this seemed to them good game, and another
man said: ‘Well, neighbour Penny-thumb, if it was so little, thou hast
done unneighbourly in giving us such a heap of trouble about it.’

And they laughed again, but the first carle said: ‘True it is, goodman,
that thou wert exceeding eager to raise the hue and cry after that little
when we happed upon thee and thy housemates bound in your chairs
yesterday morning.  Well, Alderman’s son, short is the tale to tell: we
could not fail to follow the gear, and the slot led us into the wood, and
ill is the going there for us shepherds, who are used to the bare downs,
save Rusty, who was a good woodsman and lifted the slot for us; so he
outwent us all, and ran out of sight of us, so presently we came upon him
dead-slain, with the manslayer’s spear in his breast.  What then could we
do but turn back again, for now was the wood blind now Rusty was dead,
and we knew not whither to follow the fray; and the man himself was but
little loss: so back we turned, and told goodman Penny-thumb of all this,
for we had left him alone in his hall lamenting his gear; so we bided
to-day’s morn, and have come out now, with our neighbour and the spear,
and the dead corpse of Rusty.  Stand aside, neighbours, and let the
Alderman’s son see it.’

They did so, and there was the corpse of a thin-faced tall wiry man,
somewhat foxy of aspect, lying on a hand-bier covered with black cloth.

‘Yea, Face-of-god,’ said the carle, ‘he is not good to see now he is
dead, yet alive was he worser: but, look you, though the man was no good
man, yet was he of our people, and the feud is with us; so we would see
the Alderman, and do him to wit of the tidings, that he may call the
neighbours together to seek a blood-wite for Rusty and atonement for the
ransacking.  Or what sayest thou?’

‘Have ye the spear that ye found in Rusty?’ quoth Gold-mane.

‘Yea verily,’ said the carle.  ‘Hither with it, neighbours; give it to
the Alderman’s son.’

So the spear came into his hand, and he looked at it and said:

‘This is no spear of the smiths’ work of the Dale, as my father will tell
you.  We take but little keep of the forging of spearheads here, so that
they be well-tempered and made so as to ride well on the shaft; but this
head, daintily is it wrought, the blood-trench as clean and trim as
though it were an Earl’s sword.  See you withal this inlaying of runes on
the steel?  It is done with no tin or copper, but with very silver; and
these bands about the shaft be of silver also.  It is a fair weapon, and
the owner hath a loss of it greater than his gain in the slaying of
Rusty; and he will have left it in the wound so that he might be known
hereafter, and that he might be said not to have murdered Rusty but to
have slain him.  Or how think ye?’

They all said that this seemed like to be; but that if the man who had
slain Rusty were one of the ransackers they might have a blood-wite of
him, if they could find him.  Gold-mane said that so it was, and
therewithal he gave the shepherds good-speed and went on his way.

But they came to Burgstead and found the Alderman, and in due time was a
Court held, and a finding uttered, and outlawry given forth for the
manslaying and the ransacking against certain men unknown.  As for the
spear, it was laid up in the House of the Face.

But Face-of-god pondered these matters in his mind, for such ransackings
there had been none of in late years; and he said to himself that his
friends of the Mountain must have other folk, of which the Dalesmen knew
nought, whose gear they could lift, or how could they live in that place.
And he marvelled that they should risk drawing the Dalesmen’s wrath upon
them; whereas they of the Dale were strong men not easily daunted, albeit
peaceable enough if not stirred to wrath.  For in good sooth he had no
doubt concerning that spear, whose it was and whence it came: for that
very weapon had been leaning against the panel of his shut-bed the night
he slept on the Mountain, and all the other spears that he saw there were
more or less of the same fashion, and adorned with silver.

Albeit all that he knew, and all that he thought of, he kept in his own
heart and said nothing of it.

So wore the autumn into early winter; and the Westland merchants came in
due time, and departed without Face-of-god, though his father made him
that offer one last time.  He went to and fro about his work in the Dale,
and seemed to most men’s eyes nought changed from what he had been.  But
the Bride noted that he saw her less often than his wont was, and abode
with her a lesser space when he met her; and she could not think what
this might mean; nor had she heart to ask him thereof, though she was
sorry and grieved, but rather withdrew her company from him somewhat; and
when she perceived that he noted it not, and made no question of it, then
was she the sorrier.

But the first winter-snow came on with a great storm of wind from the
north-east, so that no man stirred abroad who was not compelled thereto,
and those who went abroad risked life and limb thereby.  Next morning all
was calm again, and the snow was deep, but it did not endure long, for
the wind shifted to the southwest and the thaw came, and three days
after, when folk could fare easily again up and down the Dale, came
tidings to Burgstead and the Alderman from the Lower Dale, how a house
called Greentofts had been ransacked there, and none knew by whom.  Now
the goodman of Greentofts was little loved of the neighbours: he was
grasping and overbearing, and had often cowed others out of their due: he
was very cross-grained, both at home and abroad: his wife had fled from
his hand, neither did his sons find it good to abide with him:
therewithal he was wealthy of goods, a strong man and a deft man-at-arms.
When his sons and his wife departed from him, and none other of the
Dalesmen cared to abide with him, he went down into the Plain, and got
thence men to be with him for hire, men who were not well seen to in
their own land.  These to the number of twelve abode with him, and did
his bidding whenso it pleased them.  Two more had he had who had been
slain by good men of the Dale for their masterful ways; and no blood-wite
had been paid for them, because of their ill-doings, though they had not
been made outlaws.  This man of Greentofts was called Harts-bane after
his father, who was a great hunter.

Now the full tidings of the ransacking were these: The storm began two
hours before sunset, and an hour thereafter, when it was quite dark, for
without none could see because the wind was at its height and the drift
of the snow was hard and full, the hall-door flew open; and at first men
thought it had been the wind, until they saw in the dimness (for all
lights but the fire on the hearth had been quenched) certain things
tumbling in which at first they deemed were wolves; but when they took
swords and staves against them, lo they were met by swords and axes, and
they saw that the seeming wolves were men with wolf-skins drawn over
them.  So the new-comers cowed them that they threw down their weapons,
and were bound in their places; but when they were bound, and had had
time to note who the ransackers were, they saw that there were but six of
them all told, who had cowed and bound Harts-bane and his twelve
masterful men; and this they deemed a great shaming to them, as might
well be.

So then the stead was ransacked, and those wolves took away what they
would, and went their ways through the fierce storm, and none could tell
whether they had lived or died in it; but at least neither the men nor
their prey were seen again; nor did they leave any slot, for next morning
the snow lay deep over everything.

No doubt had Gold-mane but that these ransackers were his friends of the
Mountain; but he held his peace, abiding till the winter should be over.




CHAPTER XI.  MEN MAKE OATH AT BURGSTEAD ON THE HOLY BOAR.


A WEEK after the ransacking at Greentofts the snow and the winter came on
in earnest, and all the Dale lay in snow, and men went on skids when they
fared up and down the Dale or on the Mountain.

All was now tidingless till Yule over, and in Burgstead was there
feasting and joyance enough; and especially at the House of the Face was
high-tide holden, and the Alderman and his sons and Stone-face and all
the kindred and all their men sat in glorious attire within the hall; and
many others were there of the best of the kindreds of Burgstead who had
been bidden.

Face-of-god sat between his father and Stone-face; and he looked up and
down the tables and the hall and saw not the Bride, and his heart misgave
him because she was not there, and he wondered what had befallen and if
she were sick of sorrow.

But Iron-face beheld him how he gazed about, and he laughed; for he was
exceeding merry that night and fared as a young man.  Then he said to his
son: ‘Whom seekest thou, son? is there someone lacking?’

Face-of-god reddened as one who lies unused to it, and said:

‘Yea, kinsman, so it is that I was seeking the Bride my kinswoman.’

‘Nay,’ said Iron-face, ‘call her not kinswoman: therein is ill-luck, lest
it seem that thou art to wed one too nigh thine own blood.  Call her the
Bride only: to thee and to me the name is good.  Well, son, desirest thou
sorely to see her?’

‘Yea, yea, surely,’ said Face-of-god; but his eyes went all about the
hall still, as though his mind strayed from the place and that home of
his.

Said Iron-face: ‘Have patience, son, thou shalt see her anon, and that in
such guise as shall please thee.’

Therewithal came the maidens with the ewers of wine, and they filled all
horns and beakers, and then stood by the endlong tables on either side
laughing and talking with the carles and the older women; and the hall
was a fair sight to see, for the many candles burned bright and the fire
on the hearth flared up, and those maids were clad in fair raiment, and
there was none of them but was comely, and some were fair, and some very
fair: the walls also were hung with goodly pictured cloths, and the image
of the God of the Face looked down smiling terribly from the gable-end
above the high-seat.

Thus as they sat they heard the sound of a horn winded close outside the
hall door, and the door was smitten on.  Then rose Iron-face smiling
merrily, and cried out:

‘Enter ye, whether ye be friends or foes: for if ye be foemen, yet shall
ye keep the holy peace of Yule, unless ye be the foes of all kindreds and
nations, and then shall we slay you.’

Thereat some who knew what was toward laughed; but Gold-mane, who had
been away from Burgstead some days past, marvelled and knit his brows,
and let his right hand fall on his sword-hilt.  For this folk, who were
of merry ways, were wont to deal diversely with the Yule-tide customs in
the manner of shows; and he knew not that this was one of them.

Now was the Outer door thrown open, and there entered seven men, whereof
two were all-armed in bright war-gear, and two bore slug-horns, and two
bore up somewhat on a dish covered over with a piece of rich cloth, and
the seventh stood before them all wrapped up in a dark fur mantle.

Thus they stood a moment; and when he saw their number, back to
Gold-mane’s heart came the thought of those folk on the Mountain: for
indeed he was somewhat out of himself for doubt and longing, else would
he have deemed that all this was but a Yule-tide play.

Now the men with the slug-horns set them to their mouths and blew a long
blast; while the first of the new-comers set hand to the clasps of the
fur cloak and let it fall to the ground, and lo! a woman exceeding
beauteous, clad in glistering raiment of gold and fine web; her hair
wreathed with bay, and in her hand a naked sword with goodly-wrought
golden hilt and polished blue-gleaming blade.

Face-of-god started up in his sear, and stared like a man new-wakened
from a strange dream: because for one moment he deemed verily that it was
the Woman of the Mountain arrayed as he had last seen her, and he cried
aloud ‘The Friend, the Friend!’

His father brake out into loud laughter thereat, and clapped his son on
the shoulder and said: ‘Yea, yea, lad, thou mayst well say the Friend;
for this is thine old playmate whom thou hast been looking round the hall
for, arrayed this eve in such fashion as is meet for her goodliness and
her worthiness.  Yea, this is the Friend indeed!’

Then waxed Face-of-god as red as blood for shame, and he sat him down in
his place again: for now he wotted what was toward, and saw that this
fair woman was the Bride.

But Stone-face from the other side looked keenly on him.

Then blew the horns again, and the Bride stepped daintily up the hall,
and the sweet odour of her raiment went from her about the fire-warmed
dwelling, and her beauty moved all hearts with love.  So stood she at the
high-table; and those two who bore the burden set it down thereon and
drew off the covering, and lo! there was the Holy Boar of Yule on which
men were wont to make oath of deeds that they would do in the coming
year, according to the custom of their forefathers.  Then the Bride laid
the goodly sword beside the dish, and then went round the table and sat
down betwixt Face-of-god and Stone-face, and turned kindly to Gold-mane,
and was glad; for now was his fair face as its wont was to be.  He in
turn smiled upon her, for she was fair and kind and his fellow for many a
day.

Now the men-at-arms stood each side the Boar, and out from them on each
side stood the two hornsmen: then these blew up again, whereon the
Alderman stood up and cried:

‘Ye sons of the brave who have any deed that ye may be desirous of doing,
come up, come lay your hand on the sword, and the point of the sword to
the Holy Beast, and swear the oath that lieth on your hearts.’

Therewith he sat down, and there strode a man up the hall, strong-built
and sturdy, but short of stature; black-haired, red-bearded, and
ruddy-faced: and he stood on the daïs, and took up the sword and laid its
point on the Boar, and said:

‘I am Bristler, son of Brightling, a man of the Shepherds.  Here by the
Holy Boar I swear to follow up the ransackers of Penny-thumb and the
slayers of Rusty.  And I take this feud upon me, although they be no good
men, because I am of the kin and it falleth to me, since others forbear;
and when the Court was hallowed hereon I was away out of the Dale and the
Downs.  So help me the Warrior, and the God of the Earth.’

Then the Alderman nodded his head to him kindly, and reached him out a
cup of wine, and as he drank there went up a rumour of praise from the
hall; and men said that his oath was manly and that he was like to keep
it; for he was a good man-at-arms and a stout heart.

Then came up three men of the Shepherds and two of the Dale and swore to
help Bristler in his feud, and men thought it well sworn.

After that came a braggart, a man very gay of his raiment, and swore with
many words that if he lived the year through he would be a captain over
the men of the Plain, and would come back again with many gifts for his
friends in the Dale.  This men deemed foolishly sworn, for they knew the
man; so they jeered at him and laughed as he went back to his place
ashamed.

Then swore three others oaths not hard to be kept, and men laughed and
were merry.

At last uprose the Alderman, and said: ‘Kinsmen, and good fellows, good
days and peaceable are in the Dale as now; and of such days little is the
story, and little it availeth to swear a deed of derring-do: yet three
things I swear by this Beast; and first to gainsay no man’s asking if I
may perform it; and next to set right above law and mercy above custom;
and lastly, if the days change and war cometh to us or we go to meet it,
I will be no backwarder in the onset than three fathoms behind the
foremost.  So help me the Warrior, and the God of the Face and the Holy
Earth!’

Therewith he sat down, and all men shouted for joy of him, and said that
it was most like that he would keep his oath.

Last of all uprose Face-of-god and took up the sword and looked at it;
and so bright was the blade that he saw in it the image of the golden
braveries which the Bride bore, and even some broken image of her face.
Then he handled the hilt and laid the point on the Boar, and cried:

‘Hereby I swear to wed the fairest woman of the Earth before the year is
worn to an end; and that whether the Dalesmen gainsay me or the men
beyond the Dale.  So help me the Warrior, and the God of the Face and the
Holy Earth!’

Therewith he sat down; and once more men shouted for the love of him and
of the Bride, and they said he had sworn well and like a chieftain.

But the Bride noted him that neither were his eyes nor his voice like to
their wont as he swore, for she knew him well; and thereat was she ill at
ease, for now whatever was new in him was to her a threat of evil to
come.

Stone-face also noted him, and he knew the young man better than all
others save the Bride, and he saw withal that she was ill-pleased, and he
said to himself: ‘I will speak to my fosterling to-morrow if I may find
him alone.’

So came the swearing to an end, and they fell to on their meat and
feasted on the Boar of Atonement after they had duly given the Gods their
due share, and the wine went about the hall and men were merry till they
drank the parting cup and fared to rest in the shut-beds, and whereso
else they might in the Hall and the House, for there were many men there.




CHAPTER XII.  STONE-FACE TELLETH CONCERNING THE WOOD-WIGHTS.


EARLY on the morrow Gold-mane arose and clad himself and went out-a-doors
and over the trodden snow on to the bridge over the Weltering Water, and
there betook himself into one of the coins of safety built over the
up-stream piles; there he leaned against the wall and turned his face to
the Thorp, and fell to pondering on his case.  And first he thought about
his oath, and how that he had sworn to wed the Mountain Woman, although
his kindred and her kindred should gainsay him, yea and herself also.
Great seemed that oath to him, yet at that moment he wished he had made
it greater, and made all the kindred, yea and the Bride herself, sure of
the meaning of the words of it: and he deemed himself a dastard that he
had not done so.  Then he looked round him and beheld the winter, and he
fell into mere longing that the spring were come and the token from the
Mountain.  Things seemed too hard for him to deal with, and he between a
mighty folk and two wayward women; and he went nigh to wish that he had
taken his father’s offer and gone down to the Cities; and even had he met
his bane: well were that!  And, as young folk will, he set to work making
a picture of his deeds there, had he been there.  He showed himself the
stricken fight in the plain, and the press, and the struggle, and the
breaking of the serried band, and himself amidst the ring of foemen doing
most valiantly, and falling there at last, his shield o’er-heavy with the
weight of foemen’s spears for a man to uphold it.  Then the victory of
his folk and the lamentation and praise over the slain man of the
Mountain Dales, and the burial of the valiant warrior, the praising
weeping folk meeting him at the City-gate, laid stark and cold in his
arms on the gold-hung garlanded bier.

There ended his dream, and he laughed aloud and said: ‘I am a fool!  All
this were good and sweet if I should see it myself; and forsooth that is
how I am thinking of it, as if I still alive should see myself dead and
famous!’

Then he turned a little and looked at the houses of the Thorp lying dark
about the snowy ways under the starlit heavens of the winter morning:
dark they were indeed and grey, save where here and there the half-burned
Yule-fire reddened the windows of a hall, or where, as in one place, the
candle of some early waker shone white in a chamber window.  There was
scarce a man astir, he deemed, and no sound reached him save the crowing
of the cocks muffled by their houses, and a faint sound of beasts in the
byres.

Thus he stood a while, his thoughts wandering now, till presently he
heard footsteps coming his way down the street and turned toward them,
and lo it was the old man Stone-face.  He had seen Gold-mane go out, and
had risen and followed him that he might talk with him apart.  Gold-mane
greeted him kindly, though, sooth to say, he was but half content to see
him; since he doubted, what was verily the case, that his foster-father
would give him many words, counselling him to refrain from going to the
wood, and this was loathsome to him; but he spake and said:

‘Meseems, father, that the eastern sky is brightening toward dawn.’

‘Yea,’ quoth Stone-face.

‘It will be light in an hour,’ said Face-of-god.

‘Even so,’ said Stone-face.

‘And a fair day for the morrow of Yule,’ said the swain.

‘Yea,’ said Stone-face, ‘and what wilt thou do with the fair day?  Wilt
thou to the wood?’

‘Maybe, father,’ said Gold-mane; ‘Hall-face and some of the swains are
talking of elks up the fells which may be trapped in the drifts, and if
they go a-hunting them, I may go in their company.’

‘Ah, son,’ quoth Stone-face, ‘thou wilt look to see other kind of beasts
than elks.  Things may ye fall in with there who may not be impounded in
the snow like to elks, but can go light-foot on the top of the soft drift
from one place to another.’

Said Gold-mane: ‘Father, fear me not; I shall either refrain me from the
wood, or if I go, I shall go to hunt the wood-deer with other hunters.
But since thou hast come to me, tell me more about the wood, for thy
tales thereof are fair.’

‘Yea,’ said Stone-face, ‘fair tales of foul things, as oft it befalleth
in the world.  Hearken now! if thou deemest that what thou seekest shall
come readier to thine hand because of the winter and the snow, thou
errest.  For the wights that waylay the bodies and souls of the mighty in
the wild-wood heed such matters nothing; yea and at Yule-tide are they
most abroad, and most armed for the fray.  Even such an one have I seen
time agone, when the snow was deep and the wind was rough; and it was in
the likeness of a woman clad in such raiment as the Bride bore last
night, and she trod the snow light-foot in thin raiment where it would
scarce bear the skids of a deft snow-runner.  Even so she stood before
me; the icy wind blew her raiment round about her, and drifted the hair
from her garlanded head toward me, and she as fair and fresh as in the
midsummer days.  Up the fell she fared, sweetest of all things to look
on, and beckoned on me to follow; on me, the Warrior, the Stout-heart;
and I followed, and between us grief was born; but I it was that fostered
that child and not she.  Always when she would be, was she merry and
lovely; and even so is she now, for she is of those that be long-lived.
And I wot that thou hast seen even such an one!’

‘Tell me more of thy tales, foster-father,’ said Gold-mane, ‘and fear not
for me!’

‘Ah, son,’ he said, ‘mayst thou have no such tales to tell to those that
shall be young when thou art old.  Yet hearken!  We sat in the hall
together and there was no third; and methought that the birds sang and
the flowers bloomed, and sweet was their savour, though it was midwinter.
A rose-wreath was on her head; grapes were on the board, and fair
unwrinkled summer apples on the day that we feasted together.  When was
the feast? sayst thou.  Long ago.  What was the hall, thou sayest,
wherein ye feasted?  I know not if it were on the earth or under it, or
if we rode the clouds that even.  But on the morrow what was there but
the stark wood and the drift of the snow, and the iron wind howling
through the branches, and a lonely man, a wanderer rising from the
ground.  A wanderer through the wood and up the fell, and up the high
mountain, and up and up to the edges of the ice-river and the green caves
of the ice-hills.  A wanderer in spring, in summer, autumn and winter,
with an empty heart and a burning never-satisfied desire; who hath seen
in the uncouth places many an evil unmanly shape, many a foul hag and
changing ugly semblance; who hath suffered hunger and thirst and wounding
and fever, and hath seen many things, but hath never again seen that fair
woman, or that lovely feast-hall.

‘All praise and honour to the House of the Face, and the bounteous
valiant men thereof! and the like praise and honour to the fair women
whom they wed of the valiant and goodly House of the Steer!’

‘Even so say I,’ quoth Gold-mane calmly; ‘but now wend we aback to the
House, for it is morning indeed, and folk will be stirring there.’

So they turned from the bridge together; and Stone-face was kind and
fatherly, and was telling his foster-son many wise things concerning the
life of a chieftain, and the giving-out of dooms and the gathering for
battle; to all which talk Face-of-god seemed to hearken gladly, but
indeed hearkened not at all; for verily his eyes were beholding that
snowy waste, and the fair woman upon it; even such an one as Stone-face
had told of.




CHAPTER XIII.  THEY FARE TO THE HUNTING OF THE ELK.


WHEN they came into the Hall, the hearth-fire had been quickened, and the
sleepers on the floor had been wakened, and all folk were astir.  So the
old man sat down by the hearth while Gold-mane busied himself in fetching
wood and water, and in sweeping out the Hall, and other such works of the
early morning.  In a little while Hall-face and the other young men and
warriors were afoot duly clad, and the Alderman came from his chamber and
greeted all men kindly.  Soon meat was set upon the boards, and men broke
their fast; and day dawned while they were about it, and ere it was all
done the sun rose clear and golden, so that all men knew that the day
would be fair, for the frost seemed hard and enduring.

Then the eager young men and the hunters, and those who knew the mountain
best drew together about the hearth, and fell to talking of the hunting
of the elk; and there were three there who knew both the woods and also
the fells right up to the ice-rivers better than any other; and these
said that they who were fain of the hunting of the elk would have no
likelier time than that day for a year to come.  Short was the rede
betwixt them, for they said they would go to the work at once and make
the most of the short winter daylight.  So they went each to his place,
and some outside that House to their fathers’ houses to fetch each man
his gear.  Face-of-god for his part went to his shut-bed, and stood by
his chest, and opened it, and drew out of it a fine hauberk of ring-mail
which his father had made for him: for though Face-of-god was a deft
wright, he was not by a long way so deft as his father, who was the
deftest of all men of that time and country; so that the alien merchants
would give him what he would for his hauberks and helms, whenso he would
chaffer with them, which was but seldom.  So Face-of-god did on this
hauberk over his kirtle, and over it he cast his foul-weather weed, so
that none might see it: he girt a strong war-sword to his side, cast his
quiver over his shoulder, and took his bow in his hand, although he had
little lust to shoot elks that day, even as Stone-face had said;
therewithal he took his skids, and went forth of the hall to the gate of
the Burg; whereto gathered the whole company of twenty-three, and
Gold-mane the twenty-fourth.  And each man there had his skids and his
bow and quiver, and whatso other weapon, as short-sword, or wood-knife,
or axe, seemed good to him.

So they went out-a-gates, and clomb the stairway in the cliff which led
to the ancient watch-tower: for it was on the lower slopes of the fells
which lay near to the Weltering Water that they looked to find the elks,
and this was the nighest road thereto.  When they had gotten to the top
they lost no time, but went their ways nearly due east, making way easily
where there were but scattered trees close to the lip of the sheer
cliffs.

They went merrily on their skids over the close-lying snow, and were soon
up on the great shoulders of the fells that went up from the bank of the
Weltering Water: at noon they came into a little dale wherein were a few
trees, and there they abided to eat their meat, and were very merry,
making for themselves tables and benches of the drifted snow, and piling
it up to windward as a defence against the wind, which had now arisen,
little but bitter from the south-east; so that some, and they the wisest,
began to look for foul weather: wherefore they tarried the shorter while
in the said dale or hollow.

But they were scarcely on their way again before the aforesaid south-east
wind began to grow bigger, and at last blew a gale, and brought up with
it a drift of fine snow, through which they yet made their way, but
slowly, till the drift grew so thick that they could not see each other
five paces apart.

Then perforce they made stay, and gathered together under a bent which by
good luck they happened upon, where they were sheltered from the worst of
the drift.  There they abode, till in less than an hour’s space the drift
abated and the wind fell, and in a little while after it was quite clear,
with the sun shining brightly and the young waxing moon white and high up
in the heavens; and the frost was harder than ever.

This seemed good to them; but now that they could see each other’s faces
they fell to telling over their company, and there was none missing save
Face-of-god.  They were somewhat dismayed thereat, but knew not what to
do, and they deemed he might not be far off, either a little behind or a
little ahead; and Hall-face said:

‘There is no need to make this to-do about my brother; he can take good
care of himself; neither does a warrior of the Face die because of a
little cold and frost and snow-drift.  Withal Gold-mane is a wilful man,
and of late days hath been wilful beyond his wont; let us now find the
elks.’

So they went on their ways hoping to fall in with him again.  No long
story need be made of their hunting, for not very far from where they had
taken shelter they came upon the elks, many of them, impounded in the
drifts, pretty much where the deft hunters looked to find them.  There
then was battle between the elks and the men, till the beasts were all
slain and only one man hurt: then they made them sleighs from wood which
they found in the hollows thereby, and they laid the carcasses thereon,
and so turned their faces homeward, dragging their prey with them.  But
they met not Face-of-god either there or on the way home; and Hall-face
said: ‘Maybe Gold-mane will lie on the fell to-night; and I would I were
with him; for adventures oft befall such folk when they abide in the
wilds.’

Now it was late at night by then they reached Burgstead, so laden as they
were with the dead beasts; but they heeded the night little, for the moon
was well-nigh as bright as day for them.  But when they came to the gate
of the Thorp, there were assembled the goodmen and swains to meet them
with torches and wine in their honour.  There also was Gold-mane come
back before them, yea for these two hours; and he stood clad in his
holiday raiment and smiled on them.

Then was there some jeering at him that he was come back empty-handed
from the hunting, and that he was not able to abide the wind and the
drift; but he laughed thereat, for all this was but game and play, since
men knew him for a keen hunter and a stout woodsman; and they had deemed
it a heavy loss of him if he had been cast away, as some feared he had
been: and his brother Hall-face embraced him and kissed him, and said to
him: ‘Now the next time that thou farest to the wood will I be with thee
foot to foot, and never leave thee, and then meseemeth I shall wot of the
tale that hath befallen thee, and belike it shall be no sorry one.’

Face-of-god laughed and answered but little, and they all betook them to
the House of the Face and held high feast therein, for as late as the
night was, in honour of this Hunting of the Elk.

No man cared to question Face-of-god closely as to how or where he had
strayed from the hunt; for he had told his own tale at once as soon as he
came home, to wit, that his right-foot skid-strap had broken, and even
while he stopped to mend it came on that drift and weather; and that he
could not move from that place without losing his way, and that when it
had cleared he knew not whither they had gone because the snow had
covered their slot.  So he deemed it not unlike that they had gone back,
and that he might come up with one or two on the way, and that in any
case he wotted well that they could look after themselves; so he turned
back, not going very swiftly.  All this seemed like enough, and a little
matter except to jest about, so no man made any question concerning it:
only old Stone-face said to himself:

‘Now were I fain to have a true tale out of him, but it is little likely
that anything shall come of my much questioning; and it is ill forcing a
young man to tell lies.’

So he held his peace, and the feast went on merrily and blithely.




CHAPTER XIV.  CONCERNING FACE-OF-GOD AND THE MOUNTAIN.


BUT it must be told of Gold-mane that what had befallen him was in this
wise.  His skid-strap brake in good sooth, and he stayed to mend it; but
when he had done what was needful, he looked up and saw no man nigh, what
for the drift, and that they had gone on somewhat; so he rose to his
feet, and without more delay, instead of keeping on toward the elk-ground
and the way his face had been set, he turned himself north-and-by-east,
and went his ways swiftly towards that aírt, because he deemed that it
might lead him to the Mountain-hall where he had guested.  He abode not
for the storm to clear, but swept off through the thick of it; and indeed
the wind was somewhat at his back, so that he went the swiftlier.  But
when the drift was gotten to its very worst, he sheltered himself for a
little in a hollow behind a thorn-bush he stumbled upon.  As soon as it
began to abate he went on again, and at last when it was quite clear, and
the sun shone out, he found himself on a long slope of the fells covered
deep with smooth white snow, and at the higher end a great crag rising
bare fifty feet above the snow, and more rocks, but none so great, and
broken ground as he judged (the snow being deep) about it on the hither
side; and on the further, three great pine-trees all bent down and
mingled together by their load of snow.

Thitherward he made, as a man might, seeing nothing else to note before
him; but he had not made many strides when forth from behind the crag by
the pine-trees came a man; and at first Face-of-god thought it might be
one of his hunting-fellows gone astray, and he hailed him in a loud
voice, but as he looked he saw the sun flash back from a bright helm on
the new-comer’s head; albeit he kept on his way till there was but a
space of two hundred yards between them; when lo! the helm-bearer notched
a shaft to his bent bow and loosed at Face-of-god, and the arrow came
whistling and passed six inches by his right ear.  Then Face-of-god
stopped perplexed with his case; for he was on the deep snow in his
skids, with his bow unbent, and he knew not how to bend it speedily.  He
was loth to turn his back and flee, and indeed he scarce deemed that it
would help him.  Meanwhile of his tarrying the archer loosed again at
him, and this time the shaft flew close to his left ear.  Then
Face-of-god thought to cast himself down into the snow, but he was
ashamed; till there came a third shaft which flew over his head amidmost
and close to it.  ‘Good shooting on the Mountain!’ muttered he; ‘the next
shaft will be amidst my breast, and who knows whether the Alderman’s
handiwork will keep it out.’

So he cried aloud: ‘Thou shootest well, brother; but art thou a foe?  If
thou art, I have a sword by my side, and so hast thou; come hither to me,
and let us fight it out friendly if we must needs fight.’

A laugh came down the wind to him clear but somewhat shrill, and the
archer came swiftly towards him on his skids with no weapon in his hand
save his bow; so that Face-of-god did not draw his sword, but stood
wondering.

As they drew nearer he beheld the face of the new-comer, and deemed that
he had seen it before; and soon, for all that it was hooded close by the
ill-weather raiment, he perceived it to be the face of Bow-may, ruddy and
smiling.

She laughed out loud again, as she stopped herself within three feet of
him, and said:

‘Yea, friend Yellow-hair, we heard of the elks and looked to see thee
hereabouts, and I knew thee at once when I came out from behind the crag
and saw thee stand bewildered.’

Said Gold-mane: ‘Hail to thee, Bow-may! and glad am I to see thee.  But
thou liest in saying that thou knewest me; else why didst thou shoot
those three shafts at me?  Surely thou art not so quick as that with all
thy friends: these be sharp greetings of you Mountain-folk.’

‘Thou lad with the sweet mouth,’ she said, ‘I like to see thee and hear
thee talk, but now must I hasten thy departure; so stand we here no
longer.  Let us get down into the wood where we can do off our skids and
sit down, and then will I tell thee the tidings.  Come on!’

And she caught his hand in hers, and they went speedily down the slopes
toward the great oak-wood, the wind whistling past their ears.

‘Whither are we going?’ said he.

Said she: ‘I am to show thee the way back home, which thou wilt not know
surely amidst this snow.  Come, no words! thou shalt not have my tale
from me till we are in the wood: so the sooner we are there the sooner
shalt thou be pleased.’

So Face-of-god held his peace, and they went on swiftly side by side.
But it was not Bow-may’s wont to be silent for long, so presently she
said:

‘Thou art good so do as I bid thee; but see thou, sweet playmate, for all
thou art a chieftain’s son, thou wert but feather-brained to ask me why I
shot at thee.  I shoot at thee! that were a fine tale to tell her this
even!  Or dost thou think that I could shoot at a big man on the snow at
two hundred paces and miss him three times?  Unless I aimed to miss.’

‘Yea, Bow-may,’ said he, ‘art thou so deft a Bow-may?  Thou shalt be in
my company whenso I fare to battle.’

‘Indeed,’ she said, ‘therein thou sayest but the bare truth: nowhere else
shall I be, and thou shalt find my bow no worse than a good shield.’

He laughed somewhat lightly; but she looked on him soberly and said:
‘Laugh in that fashion on the day of battle, and we shall be well content
with thee!’

So on they sped very swiftly, for their way was mostly down hill, so that
they were soon amongst the outskirting trees of the wood, and presently
after reached the edge of the thicket, beyond which the ground was but
thinly covered with snow.

There they took off their skids, and went into the thick wood and sat
down under a hornbeam tree; and ere Gold-mane could open his mouth to
speak Bow-may began and said:

‘Well it was that I fell in with thee, Dalesman, else had there been
murders of men to tell of; but ever she ordereth all things wisely,
though unwisely hast thou done to seek to her.  Hearken! dost thou think
that thou hast done well that thou hast me here with my tale?  Well,
hadst thou busied thyself with the slaying of elks, or with sitting
quietly at home, yet shouldest thou have heard my tale, and thou
shouldest have seen me in Burgstead in a day or two to tell thee
concerning the flitting of the token.  And ill it is that I have missed
it, for fain had I been to behold the House of the Face, and to have seen
thee sitting there in thy dignity amidst the kindred of chieftains.’

And she sighed therewith.  But he said: ‘Hold up thine heart, Bow-may!
On the word of a true man that shall befall thee one day.  But come,
playmate, give me thy tale!’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘I must now tell thee in the wild-wood what else I had
told thee in the Hall.  Hearken closely, for this is the message:

‘_Seek not to me again till thou hast the token_; _else assuredly wilt
thou be slain_, _and I shall be sorry for many a day_.  _Thereof as now I
may not tell thee more_.  _Now as to the token_: _When March is worn two
weeks fail not to go to and fro on the place of the Maiden Ward for an
hour before sunrise every day till thou hear tidings_.’

‘Now,’ quoth Bow-may, ‘hast thou hearkened and understood?’

‘Yea,’ said he.

She said: ‘Then tell me the words of my message concerning the token.’
And he did so word for word.  Then she said:

‘It is well, there is no more to say.  Now must I lead thee till thou
knowest the wood; and then mayst thou get on to the smooth snow again,
and so home merrily.  Yet, thou grey-eyed fellow, I will have my pay of
thee before I do that last work.’

Therewith she turned about to him and took his head between her hands,
and kissed him well favouredly both cheeks and mouth; and she laughed,
albeit the tears stood in her eyes as she said: ‘Now smelleth the wood
sweeter, and summer will come back again.  And even thus will I do once
more when we stand side by side in battle array.’

He smiled kindly on her and nodded as they both rose up from the earth:
she had taken off her foul-weather gloves while they spake, and he kissed
her hand, which was shapely of fashion albeit somewhat brown, and hard of
palm, and he said in friendly wise:

‘Thou art a merry faring-fellow, Bow-may, and belike shalt be withal a
true fighting-fellow.  Come now, thou shalt be my sister and I thy
brother, in despite of those three shafts across the snow.’

He laughed therewith; she laughed not, but seemed glad, and said soberly:

‘Yea, I may well be thy sister; for belike I also am of the people of the
Gods, who have come into these Dales by many far ways.  I am of the House
of the Ragged Sword of the Kindred of the Wolf.  Come, brother, let us
toward Wildlake’s Way.’

Therewith she went before him and led through the thicket as by an
assured and wonted path, and he followed hard at heel; but his thought
went from her for a while; for those words of brother and sister that he
had spoken called to his mind the Bride, and their kindness of little
children, and the days when they seemed to have nought to do but to make
the sun brighter, and the flowers fairer, and the grass greener, and the
birds happier each for the other; and a hard and evil thing it seemed to
him that now he should be making all these things nought and dreary to
her, now when he had become a man and deeds lay before him.  Yet again
was he solaced by what Bow-may had said concerning battle to come; for he
deemed that she must have had this from the Friend’s foreseeing; and he
longed sore for deeds to do, wherein all these things might be cleared up
and washen clean as it were.

So passed they through the wood a long way, and it was getting dark
therein, and Gold-mane said:

‘Hold now, Bow-may, for I am at home here.’

She looked around and said: ‘Yea, so it is: I was thinking of many
things.  Farewell and live merrily till March comes and the token!’

Therewith she turned and went her ways and was soon out of sight, and he
went lightly through the wood, and then on skids over the hard snow along
the Dale’s edge till he was come to the watch-tower, when the moon was
bright in heaven.

Thus was he at Burgstead and the House of the Face betimes, and before
the hunters were gotten back.




CHAPTER XV.  MURDER AMONGST THE FOLK OF THE WOODLANDERS.


SO wore away midwinter tidingless.  Stone-face spake no more to
Face-of-god about the wood and its wights, when he saw that the young man
had come back hale and merry, seemed not to crave over-much to go back
thither.  As for the Bride, she was sad, and more than misdoubted all;
but dauntless as she was in matters that try men’s hardihood, she yet
lacked heart to ask of Face-of-god what had befallen him since the
autumn-tide, or where he was with her.  So she put a force upon herself
not to look sad or craving when she was in his company, as full oft she
was; for he rather sought her than shunned her.  For when he saw her
thus, he deemed things were changing with her as they had changed with
him, and he bethought him of what he had spoken to Bow-may, and deemed
that even so he might speak with the Bride when the time came, and that
she would not be grieved beyond measure, and all would be well.

Now came on the thaw, and the snow went, and the grass grew all up and
down the Dale, and all waters were big.  And about this time arose
rumours of strange men in the wood, uncouth, vile, and murderous, and
many of the feebler sort were made timorous thereby.

But a little before March was born came new tidings from the Woodlanders;
to wit: There came on a time to the house of a woodland carle, a worthy
goodman well renowned of all, two wayfarers in the first watch of the
night; and these men said that they were wending down to the Plain from a
far-away dale, Rose-dale to wit, which all men had heard of, and that
they had strayed from the way and were exceeding weary, and they craved a
meal’s meat and lodging for the night.

This the goodman might nowise gainsay, and he saw no harm in it,
wherefore he bade them abide and be merry.

These men, said they who told the tidings, were outlanders, and no man
had seen any like them before: they were armed, and bore short bows made
of horn, and round targets, and coats-of-fence done over with horn
scales; they had crooked swords girt to their sides, and axes of steel
forged all in one piece, right good weapons.  They were clad in scarlet
and had much silver on their raiment and about their weapons, and great
rings of the same on their arms; and all this silver seemed brand-new.

Now the Woodland Carle gave them of such things as he had, and was kind
and blithe to them: there were in his house besides himself five men of
his sons and kindred, and his wife and three daughters and two other
maids.  So they feasted after the Woodlanders’ fashion, and went to bed a
little before midnight.  Two hours after, the carle awoke and heard a
little stir, and he looked and saw the guests on their feet amidst the
hall clad in all their war-gear; and they had betwixt them his two
youngest daughters, maids of fifteen and twelve winters, and had bound
their hands and done clouts over their mouths, so that they might not cry
out; and they were just at point to carry them off.  Thereat the goodman,
naked as he was, caught up his sword and made at these murder-carles, and
or ever they were ware of him he had hewn down one and turned to face the
other, who smote at him with his steel axe and gave him a great wound on
the shoulder, and therewithal fled out at the open door and forth into
the wood.

The Woodlander made no stay to raise the cry (there was no need, for the
hall was astir now from end to end, and men getting to their weapons),
but ran out after the felon even as he was; and, in spite of his grievous
hurt, overran him no long way from the house before he had gotten into
the thicket.  But the man was nimble and strong, and the goodman unsteady
from his wound, and by then the others of the household came up with the
hue and cry he had gotten two more sore wounds and was just making an end
of throttling the felon with his bare hands.  So he fell into their arms
fainting from weakness, and for all they could do he died in two hours’
time from that axe-wound in his shoulder, and another on the side of the
head, and a knife-thrust in his side; and he was a man of sixty winters.

But the stranger he had slain outright; and the one whom he had smitten
in the hall died before the dawn, thrusting all help aside, and making no
sound of speech.

When these tidings came to Burgstead they seemed great to men, and to
Gold-mane more than all.  So he and many others took their weapons and
fared up to Wildlake’s Way, and so came to the Woodland Carles.  But the
Woodlanders had borne out the carcasses of those felons and laid them on
the green before Wood-grey’s door (for that was the name of the dead
goodman), and they were saying that they would not bury such accursed
folk, but would bear them a little way so that they should not be vexed
with the stink of them, and cast them into the thicket for the wolf and
the wild-cat and the stoat to deal with; and they should lie there,
weapons and silver and all; and they deemed it base to strip such
wretches, for who would wear their raiment or bear their weapons after
them.

There was a great ring of folk round about them when they of Burgstead
drew near, and they shouted for joy to see their neighbours, and made way
before them.  Then the Dalesmen cursed these murderers who had slain so
good a man, and they all praised his manliness, whereas he ran out into
the night naked and wounded after his foe, and had fallen like his folk
of old time.

It was a bright spring afternoon in that clearing of the Wood, and they
looked at the two dead men closely; and Gold-mane, who had been somewhat
silent and moody till then, became merry and wordy; for he beheld the men
and saw that they were utterly strange to him: they were short of
stature, crooked-legged, long-armed, very strong for their size: with
small blue eyes, snubbed-nosed, wide-mouthed, thin-lipped, very swarthy
of skin, exceeding foul of favour.  He and all others wondered who they
were, and whence they came, for never had they seen their like; and the
Woodlanders, who often guested outlanders strayed from the way of divers
kindreds and nations, said also that none such had they ever seen.  But
Stone-face, who stood by Gold-mane, shook his head and quoth he:

‘The Wild-wood holdeth many marvels, and these be of them: the spawn of
evil wights quickeneth therein, and at other whiles it melteth away again
like the snow; so may it be with these carcasses.’

And some of the older folk of the Woodlanders who stood by hearkened what
he said, and deemed his words wise, for they remembered their ancient
lore and many a tale of old time.

Thereafter they of Burgstead went into Wood-grey’s hall, or as many of
them as might, for it was but a poor place and not right great.  There
they saw the goodman laid on the daïs in all his war-gear, under the last
tie-beam of his hall, whereon was carved amidst much goodly work of knots
and flowers and twining stems the image of the Wolf of the Waste, his
jaws open and gaping: the wife and daughters of the goodman and other
women of the folk stood about the bier singing some old song in a low
voice, and some sobbing therewithal, for the man was much beloved: and
much people of the Woodlanders was in the hall, and it was somewhat dusk
within.

So the Burgstead men greeted that folk kindly and humbly, and again they
fell to praising the dead man, saying how his deed should long be
remembered in the Dale and wide about; and they called him a fearless man
and of great worth.  And the women hearkened, and ceased their crooning
and their sobbing, and stood up proudly and raised their heads with
gleaming eyes; and as the words of the Burgstead men ended, they lifted
up their voices and sang loudly and clearly, standing together in a row,
ten of them, on the daïs of that poor hall, facing the gable and the
wolf-adorned tie-beam, heeding nought as they sang what was about or
behind them.

And this is some of what they sang:

   Why sit ye bare in the spinning-room?
   Why weave ye naked at the loom?

   Bare and white as the moon we be,
   That the Earth and the drifting night may see.

   Now what is the worst of all your work?
   What curse amidst the web shall lurk?

   The worst of the work our hands shall win
   Is wrack and ruin round the kin.

   Shall the woollen yarn and the flaxen thread
   Be gear for living men or dead?

   The woollen yarn and the flaxen thread
   Shall flare ’twixt living men and dead.

   O what is the ending of your day?
   When shall ye rise and wend away?

   Our day shall end to-morrow morn,
   When we hear the voice of the battle-horn.

   Where first shall eyes of men behold
   This weaving of the moonlight cold?

   There where the alien host abides
   The gathering on the Mountain-sides.

   How long aloft shall the fair web fly
   When the bows are bent and the spears draw nigh?

   From eve to morn and morn till eve
   Aloft shall fly the work we weave.

   What then is this, the web ye win?
   What wood-beast waxeth stark therein?

   We weave the Wolf and the gift of war
   From the men that were to the men that are.

So sang they: and much were all men moved at their singing, and there was
none but called to mind the old days of the Fathers, and the years when
their banner went wide in the world.

But the Woodlanders feasted them of Burgstead what they might, and then
went the Dalesmen back to their houses; but on the morrow’s morrow they
fared thither again, and Wood-grey was laid in mound amidst a great
assemblage of the Folk.

Many men said that there was no doubt that those two felons were of the
company of those who had ransacked the steads of Penny-thumb and
Harts-bane; and so at first deemed Bristler the son of Brightling: but
after a while, when he had had time to think of it, he changed his mind;
for he said that such men as these would have slain first and ransacked
afterwards: and some who loved neither Penny-thumb nor Harts-bane said
that they would not have been at the pains to choose for ransacking the
two worst men about the Dale, whose loss was no loss to any but
themselves.

As for Gold-mane he knew not what to think, except that his friends of
the Mountain had had nought to do with it.

So wore the days awhile.




CHAPTER XVI.  THE BRIDE SPEAKETH WITH FACE-OF-GOD.


FEBRUARY had died into March, and March was now twelve days old, on a
fair and sunny day an hour before noon; and Face-of-god was in a meadow a
scant mile down the Dale from Burgstead.  He had been driving a bull into
a goodman’s byre nearby, and had had to spend toil and patience both in
getting him out of the fields and into the byre; for the beast was hot
with the spring days and the new grass.  So now he was resting himself in
happy mood in an exceeding pleasant place, a little meadow to wit, on one
side whereof was a great orchard or grove of sweet chestnuts, which went
right up to the feet of the Southern Cliffs: across the meadow ran a
clear brook towards the Weltering Water, free from big stones, in some
places dammed up for the flooding of the deep pasture-meadow, and with
the grass growing on its lips down to the very water.  There was a low
bank just outside the chestnut trees, as if someone had raised a dyke
about them when they were young, which had been trodden low and spreading
through the lapse of years by the faring of many men and beasts.  The
primroses bloomed thick upon it now, and here and there along it was a
low blackthorn bush in full blossom; from the mid-meadow and right down
to the lip of the brook was the grass well nigh hidden by the blossoms of
the meadow-saffron, with daffodils sprinkled about amongst them, and in
the trees and bushes the birds, and chiefly the blackbirds, were singing
their loudest.

There sat Face-of-god on the bank resting after his toil, and happy was
his mood; since in two days’ wearing he should be pacing the Maiden Ward
awaiting the token that was to lead him to Shadowy Vale; so he sat
calling to mind the Friend as he had last seen her, and striving as it
were to set her image standing on the flowery grass before him, till all
the beauty of the meadow seemed bare and empty to him without her.  Then
it fell into his mind that this had been a beloved trysting-place betwixt
him and the Bride, and that often when they were little would they come
to gather chestnuts in the grove, and thereafter sit and prattle on the
old dyke; or in spring when the season was warm would they go barefoot
into the brook, seeking its treasures of troutlets and flowers and
clean-washed agate pebbles.  Yea, and time not long ago had they met here
to talk as lovers, and sat on that very bank in all the kindness of good
days without a blemish, and both he and she had loved the place well for
its wealth of blossoms and deep grass and goodly trees and clear running
stream.

As he thought of all this, and how often there he had praised to himself
her beauty, which he scarce dared praise to her, he frowned and slowly
rose to his feet, and turned toward the chestnut-grove, as though he
would go thence that way; but or ever he stepped down from the dyke he
turned about again, and even therewith, like the very image and ghost of
his thought, lo! the Bride herself coming up from out the brook and
wending toward him, her wet naked feet gleaming in the sun as they trod
down the tender meadow-saffron and brushed past the tufts of daffodils.
He stood staring at her discomforted, for on that day he had much to
think of that seemed happy to him, and he deemed that she would now
question him, and his mind pondered divers ways of answering her, and
none seemed good to him.  She drew near and let her skirts fall over her
feet, and came to him, her gown hem dragging over the flowers: then she
stood straight up before him and greeted him, but reached not forth her
hand to him nor touched him.  Her face was paler that its wont, and her
voice trembled as she spake to him and said:

‘Face-of-god, I would ask thee a gift.’

‘All gifts,’ he said, ‘that thou mayest ask, and I may give, lie open to
thee.’

She said: ‘If I be alive when the time comes this gift thou mayst well
give me.’

‘Sweet kinswoman,’ said he, ‘tell me what it is that thou wouldest have
of me.’  And he was ill-at-ease as he waited for her answer.

She said: ‘Ah, kinsman, kinsman!  Woe on the day that maketh kinship
accursed to me because thou desirest it!’

He held his peace and was exceeding sorry; and she said:

‘This is the gift that I ask of thee, that in the days to come when thou
art wedded, thou wilt give me the second man-child whom thou begettest.’

He said: ‘This shalt thou have, and would that I might give thee much
more.  Would that we were little children together other again, as when
we played here in other days.’

She said: ‘I would have a token of thee that thou shalt show to the God,
and swear on it to give me the gift.  For the times change.’

‘What token wilt thou have?’ said he.

She said: ‘When next thou farest to the Wood, thou shalt bring me back,
it maybe a flower from the bank ye sit upon, or a splinter from the daïs
of the hall wherein ye feast, or maybe a ring or some matter that the
strangers are wont to wear.  That shall be the token.’

She spoke slowly, hanging her head adown, but she lifted it presently and
looked into his face and said:

‘Woe’s me, woe’s me, Gold-mane!  How evil is this day, when bewailing me
I may not bewail thee also!  For I know that thine heart is glad.  All
through the winter have I kept this hidden in my heart, and durst not
speak to thee.  But now the spring-tide hath driven me to it.  Let summer
come, and who shall say?’

Great was his grief, and his shame kept him silent, and he had no word to
say; and again she said:

‘Tell me, Gold-mane, when goest thou thither?’

He said: ‘I know not surely, may happen in two days, may happen in ten.
Why askest thou?’

‘O friend!’ she said, ‘is it a new thing that I should ask thee whither
thou goest and whence thou comest, and the times of thy coming and going.
Farewell to-day!  Forget not the token.  Woe’s me, that I may not kiss
thy fair face!’

She spread her arms abroad and lifted up her face as one who waileth, but
no sound came from her lips; then she turned about and went away as she
had come.

But as for him he stood there after she was gone in all confusion, as if
he were undone: for he felt his manhood lessened that he should thus and
so sorely have hurt a friend, and in a manner against his will.  And yet
he was somewhat wroth with her, that she had come upon him so suddenly,
and spoken to him with such mastery, and in so few words, and he with
none to make answer to her, and that she had so marred his pleasure and
his hope of that fair day.  Then he sat him down again on the flowery
bank, and little by little his heart softened, and he once more called to
mind many a time when they had been there before, and the plays and the
games they had had together there when they were little.  And he
bethought him of the days that were long to him then, and now seemed
short to him, and as if they were all grown together into one story, and
that a sweet one.  Then his breast heaved with a sob, and the tears rose
to his eyes and burned and stung him, and he fell a-weeping for that
sweet tale, and wept as he had wept once before on that old dyke when
there had been some child’s quarrel between them, and she had gone away
and left him.

Then after a while he ceased his weeping, and looked about him lest
anyone might be coming, and then he arose and went to and fro in the
chestnut-grove for a good while, and afterwards went his ways from that
meadow, saying to himself: ‘Yet remaineth to me the morrow of to-morrow,
and that is the first of the days of the watching for the token.’

But all that day he was slow to meet the eyes of men; and in the hall
that eve he was silent and moody; for from time to time it came over him
that some of his manhood had departed from him.




CHAPTER XVII.  THE TOKEN COMETH FROM THE MOUNTAIN.


THE next day wore away tidingless; and the day after Face-of-god arose
betimes; for it was the first day of his watch, and he was at the Maiden
Ward before the time appointed on a very fair and bright morning, and he
went to and fro on that place, and had no tidings.  So he came away
somewhat cast down, and said within himself: ‘Is it but a lie and a
mocking when all is said?’

On the morrow he went thither again, and the morn was wild and stormy
with drift of rain, and low clouds hurrying over the earth, though for
the sunrise they lifted a little in the east, and the sun came up over
the passes, amidst the red and angry rack of clouds.  This morn also gave
him no tidings of the token, and he was wroth and perturbed in spirit:
but towards evening he said:

‘It is well: ten days she gave me, so that she might be able to send
without fail on one of them; she will not fail me.’

So again on the morrow he was there betimes, and the morn was windy as on
the day before, but the clouds higher and of better promise for the day.
Face-of-god walked to and fro on the Maiden Ward, and as he turned toward
Burgstead for the tenth time, he heard, as he deemed, a bow-string twang
afar off, and even therewith came a shaft flying heavily like a winged
bird, which smote a great standing stone on the other side of the way,
where of old some chieftain had been buried, and fell to earth at its
foot.  He went up to it and handled it, and saw that there was a piece of
thin parchment wrapped about it, which indeed he was eager to unwrap at
once, but forebore; because he was on the highway, and people were
already astir, and even then passed by him a goodman of the Dale with a
man of his going afield together, and they gave him the sele of the day.
So he went along the highway a little till he came to a place where was a
footbridge over into the meadow.  He crossed thereby and went swiftly
till he reached a rising ground grown over with hazel-trees; there he sat
down among the rabbit-holes, the primrose and wild-garlic blooming about
him, and three blackbirds answering one another from the edges of the
coppice.  Straightway when he had looked and seen none coming he broke
the threads that were wound about the scroll and the arrow, and unrolled
the parchment; and there was writing thereon in black ink of small
letters, but very fair, and this is what he read therein:

    _Come thou to the Mountain Hall by the path which thou knowest of_,
    _on the morrow of the day whereon thou readest this_.  _Rise betimes
    and come armed_, _for there are other men than we in the wood_; _to
    whom thy death should be a gain_.  _When thou art come to the Hall_,
    _thou shalt find no man therein_; _but a great hound only_, _tied to
    a bench nigh the daïs_.  _Call him by his name_, _Sure-foot to wit_,
    _and give him to eat from the meat upon the board_, _and give him
    water __to drink_.  _If the day is then far spent_, _as it is like to
    be_, _abide thou with the hound in the hall through the night_, _and
    eat of what thou shalt find there_; _but see that the hound fares not
    abroad till the morrow’s morn_: _then lead him out and bring him to
    the north-east corner of the Hall_, _and he shall lift the slot for
    thee that leadeth to the Shadowy Yale_.  _Follow him and all good go
    with thee_.

Now when he had read this, earth seemed fair indeed about him, and he
scarce knew whither to turn or what to do to make the most of his joy.
He presently went back to Burgstead and into the House of the Face, where
all men were astir now, and the day was clearing.  He hid the shaft under
his kirtle, for he would not that any should see it; so he went to his
shut-bed and laid it up in his chest, wherein he kept his chiefest
treasures; but the writing on the scroll he set in his bosom and so hid
it.  He went joyfully and proudly, as one who knoweth more tidings and
better than those around him.  But Stone-face beheld him, and said
‘Foster-son, thou art happy.  Is it that the spring-tide is in thy blood,
and maketh thee blithe with all things, or hast thou some new tidings?
Nay, I would not have an answer out of thee; but here is good rede: when
next thou goest into the wood, it were nought so ill for thee to have a
valiant old carle by thy side; one that loveth thee, and would die for
thee if need were; one who might watch when thou wert seeking.  Or else
beware! for there are evil things abroad in the Wood, and moreover the
brethren of those two felons who were slain at Carlstead.’

Then Gold-mane constrained himself to answer the old carle softly; and he
thanked him kindly for his offer, and said that so it should be before
long.  So the talk between them fell, and Stone-face went away somewhat
well-pleased.

And now was Face-of-god become wary; and he would not draw men’s eyes and
speech on him; so he went afield with Hall-face to deal with the lambs
and the ewes, and did like other men.  No less wary was he in the hall
that even, and neither spake much nor little; and when his father spake
to him concerning the Bride, and made game of him as a somewhat sluggish
groom, he did not change countenance, but answered lightly what came to
hand.

On the morrow ere the earliest dawn he was afoot, and he clad himself and
did on his hauberk, his father’s work, which was fine-wrought and a stout
defence, and reached down to his knees; and over that he did on a goodly
green kirtle well embroidered: he girt his war-sword to his side, and it
was the work of his father’s father, and a very good sword: its name was
Dale-warden.  He did a good helm on his head, and slung a targe at his
back, and took two spears in his hand, short but strong-shafted and
well-steeled.  Thus arrayed he left Burgstead before the dawn, and came
to Wildlake’s Way and betook him to the Woodland.  He made no stop or
stay on the path, but ate his meat standing by an oak-tree close by the
half-blind track.  When he came to the little wood-lawn, where was the
toft of the ancient house, he looked all round about him, for he deemed
that a likely place for those ugly wood-wights to set on him; but nought
befell him, though he stooped and drank of the woodland rill warily
enough.  So he passed on; and there were other places also where he fared
warily, because they seemed like to hold lurking felons; though forsooth
the whole wood might well serve their turn.  But no evil befell him, and
at last, when it yet lacked an hour to sunset, he came to the wood-lawn
where Wild-wearer had made his onset that other eve.

He went straight up to the house, his heart beating, and he scarce
believing but that he should find the Friend abiding him there: but when
he pushed the door it gave way before him at once, and he entered and
found no man therein, and the walls stripped bare and no shield or weapon
hanging on the panels.  But the hound he saw tied to a bench nigh the
daïs, and the bristles on the beast’s neck arose, and he snarled on
Face-of-god, and strained on his leathern leash.  Then Face-of-god went
up to him and called him by his name, Sure-foot, and gave him his hand to
lick, and he brought him water, and fed him with flesh from the meat on
the board; so the beast became friendly and wagged his tail and whined
and slobbered his hand.

Then he went all about the house, and saw and heard no living thing
therein save the mice in the panels and Sure-foot.  So he came back to
the daïs, and sat him down at the board and ate his fill, and thought
concerning his case.  And it came into his mind that the Woman of the
Mountain had some deed for him to do which would try his manliness and
exalt his fame; and his heart rose high and he was glad, and he saw
himself sitting beside her on the daïs of a very fair hall beloved and
honoured of all the folk, and none had aught to say against him or owed
him any grudge.  Thus he pleased himself in thinking of the good days to
come, sitting there till the hall grew dusk and dark and the night-wind
moaned about it.

Then after a while he arose and raked together the brands on the hearth,
and made light in the hall and looked to the door.  And he found there
were bolts and bars thereto, so he shot the bolts and drew the bars into
their places and made all as sure as might be.  Then he brought Sure-foot
down from the daïs, and tied him up so that he might lie down athwart the
door, and then lay down his hauberk with his naked sword ready to his
hand, and slept long while.

When he awoke it was darker than when he had lain him for the moon had
set; yet he deemed that the day was at point of breaking.  So he fetched
water and washed the night off him, and saw a little glimmer of the dawn.
Then he ate somewhat of the meat on the board, and did on his helm and
his other gear, and unbarred the door, and led Sure-foot without, and
brought him to the north-east corner of the house, and in a little while
he lifted the slot and they departed, the man and the hound, just as
broke dawn from over the mountains.

Sure-foot led right into the heart of the pine-wood, and it was dark
enough therein, with nought but a feeble glimmer for some while, and long
was the way therethrough; but in two hours’ space was there something of
a break, and they came to the shore of a dark deep tarn on whose windless
and green waters the daylight shone fully.  The hound skirted the water,
and led on unchecked till the trees began to grow smaller and the air
colder for all that the sun was higher; for they had been going up and up
all the way.

So at last after a six hours’ journey they came clean out of the
pine-wood, and before them lay the black wilderness of the bare
mountains, and beyond them, looking quite near now, the great ice-peaks,
the wall of the world.  It was but an hour short of noon by this time,
and the high sun shone down on a barren boggy moss which lay betwixt them
and the rocky waste.  Sure-foot made no stay, but threaded the ways that
went betwixt the quagmires, and in another hour led Face-of-god into a
winding valley blinded by great rocks, and everywhere stony and rough,
with a trickle of water running amidst of it.  The hound fared on up the
dale to where the water was bridged by a great fallen stone, and so over
it and up a steep bent on the further side, on to a marvellously rough
mountain-neck, whiles mere black sand cumbered with scattered rocks and
stones, whiles beset with mires grown over with the cottony mire-grass;
here and there a little scanty grass growing; otherwhere nought but dwarf
willow ever dying ever growing, mingled with moss or red-blossomed
sengreen; and all blending together into mere desolation.

Few living things they saw there; up on the neck a few sheep were grazing
the scanty grass, but there was none to tend them; yet Face-of-god deemed
the sight of them good, for there must be men anigh who owned them.  For
the rest, the whimbrel laughed across the mires; high up in heaven a
great eagle was hanging; once and again a grey fox leapt up before them,
and the heath-fowl whirred up from under Face-of-god’s feet.  A raven who
was sitting croaking on a rock in that first dale stirred uneasily on his
perch as he saw them, and when they were passed flapped his wings and
flew after them croaking still.

Now they fared over that neck somewhat east, making but slow way because
the ground was so broken and rocky; and in another hour’s space Sure-foot
led down-hill due east to where the stony neck sank into another desolate
miry heath still falling toward the east, but whose further side was
walled by a rampart of crags cleft at their tops into marvellous-shapes,
coal-black, ungrassed and unmossed.  Thitherward the hound led straight,
and Gold-mane followed wondering: as he drew near them he saw that they
were not very high, the tallest peak scant fifty feet from the face of
the heath.

They made their way through the scattered rocks at the foot of these
crags, till, just where the rock-wall seemed the closest, the way through
the stones turned into a path going through it skew-wise; and it was now
so clear a path that belike it had been bettered by men’s hands.  Down
thereby Face-of-god followed the hound, deeming that he was come to the
gates of the Shadowy Vale, and the path went down steeply and swiftly.
But when he had gone down a while, the rocks on his right hand sank lower
for a space, so that he could look over and see what lay beneath.

There lay below him a long narrow vale quite plain at the bottom, walled
on the further side as on the hither by sheer rocks of black stone.  The
plain was grown over with grass, but he could see no tree therein: a deep
river, dark and green, ran through the vale, sometimes through its
midmost, sometimes lapping the further rock-wall: and he thought indeed
that on many a day in the year the sun would never shine on that valley.

Thus much he saw, and then the rocks rose again and shut it from his
sight; and at last they drew so close together over head that he was in a
way going through a cave with little daylight coming from above, and in
the end he was in a cave indeed and mere darkness: but with the last
feeble glimmer of light he thought he saw carved on a smooth space of the
living rock at his left hand the image of a wolf.

This cave lasted but a little way, and soon the hound and the man were
going once more between sheer black rocks, and the path grew steeper yet
and was cut into steps.  At last there was a sharp turn, and they stood
on the top of a long stony scree, down which Sure-foot bounded eagerly,
giving tongue as he went; but Face-of-god stood still and looked, for now
the whole Dale lay open before him.

That river ran from north to south, and at the south end the cliffs drew
so close to it that looking thence no outgate could be seen; but at the
north end there was as it were a dreary street of rocks, the river
flowing amidmost and leaving little foothold on either side, somewhat as
it was with the pass leading from the mountains into Burgdale.

Amidmost of the Dale a little toward the north end he saw a doom-ring of
black stones, and hard by it an ancient hall builded of the same black
stone both wall and roof, and thitherward was Sure-foot now running.
Face-of-god looked up and down the Dale and could see no break in the
wall of sheer rock: toward the southern end he saw a few booths and cots
built roughly of stone and thatched with turf; thereabout he saw a few
folk moving about, the most of whom seemed to be women and children;
there were some sheep and lambs near these cots, and a herd of fifty or
so of somewhat goodly mountain-kine were feeding higher up the valley.
He could look down into the river from where he stood, and he saw that it
ran between rocky banks going straight down from the face of the meadow,
which was rather high above the water, so that it seemed little likely
that the water should rise over its banks, either in summer or winter;
and in summer was it like to be highest, because the vale was so near to
the high mountains and their snows.




CHAPTER XVIII.  FACE-OF-GOD TALKETH WITH THE FRIEND IN SHADOWY VALE.


IT was now about two hours after noon, and a broad band of sunlight lay
upon the grass of the vale below Gold-mane’s feet; he went lightly down
the scree, and strode forward over the level grass toward the Doom-ring,
his helm and war-gear glittering bright in the sun.  He must needs go
through the Doom-ring to come to the Hall, and as he stepped out from
behind the last of the big upright-stones, he saw a woman standing on the
threshold of the Hall-door, which was but some score of paces from him,
and knew her at once for the Friend.

She was clad like himself in a green kirtle gaily embroidered and fitting
close to her body, and had no gown or cloak over it; she had a golden
fillet on her head beset with blue mountain stones, and her hair hung
loose behind her.

Her beauty was so exceeding, and so far beyond all memory of her that his
mind had held, that once more fear of her fell upon Face-of-god, and he
stood still with beating heart till she should speak to him.  But she
came forward swiftly with both her hands held out, smiling and
happy-faced, and looking very kindly on him, and she took his hands and
said to him:

‘Now welcome, Gold-mane, welcome, Face-of-god! and twice welcome art thou
and threefold.  Lo! this is the day that thou asked for: art thou happy
in it?’

He lifted her hands to his lips and kissed them timorously, but said
nought; and therewithal Sure-foot came running forth from the Hall, and
fell to bounding round about them, barking noisily after the manner of
dogs who have met their masters again; and still she held his hands and
beheld him kindly.  Then she called the hound to her, and patted him on
the neck and quieted him, and then turned to Face-of-god and laughed
happily and said:

‘I do not bid thee hold thy peace; yet thou sayest nought.  Is well with
thee?’

‘Yea,’ he said, ‘and more than well.’

‘Thou seemest to me a goodly warrior,’ she said; ‘hast thou met any
foemen yesterday or this morning?’

‘Nay,’ said he, ‘none hindered me; thou hast made the ways easy to me.’

She said soberly, ‘Such as I might do, I did.  But we may not wield
everything, for our foes are many, and I feared for thee.  But come thou
into our house, which is ours, and far more ours than the booth before
the pine-wood.’

She took his hand again and led him toward the door, but Face-of-god
looked up, and above the lintel he saw carved on the dark stone that
image of the Wolf, even as he had seen it carved on Wood-grey’s tie-beam;
and therewith such thoughts came into his mind that he stopped to look,
pressing the Friend’s hand hard as though bidding her note it.  The stone
wherein the image was carved was darker than the other building stones,
and might be called black; the jaws of the wood-beast were open and
gaping, and had been painted with cinnabar, but wind and weather had worn
away the most of the colour.

Spake the Friend: ‘So it is: thou beholdest the token of the God and
Father of out Fathers, that telleth the tale of so many days, that the
days which now pass by us be to them but as the drop in the sea of
waters.  Thou beholdest the sign of our sorrow, the memory of our wrong;
yet is it also the token of our hope.  Maybe it shall lead thee far.’

‘Whither?’ said he.  But she answered not a great while, and he looked at
her as she stood a-gazing on the image, and saw how the tears stole out
of her eyes and ran adown her cheeks.  Then again came the thought to him
of Wood-grey’s hall, and the women of the kindred standing before the
Wolf and singing of him; and though there was little comeliness in them
and she was so exceeding beauteous, he could not but deem that they were
akin to her.

But after a while she wiped the tears from her face and turned to him and
said: ‘My friend, the Wolf shall lead thee no-whither but where I also
shall be, whatsoever peril or grief may beset the road or lurk at the
ending thereof.  Thou shalt be no thrall, to labour while I look on.’

His heart swelled within him as she spoke, and he was at point to beseech
her love that moment; but now her face had grown gay and bright again,
and she said while he was gathering words to speak withal:

‘Come in, Gold-mane, come into our house; for I have many things to say
to thee.  And moreover thou art so hushed, and so fearsome in thy mail,
that I think thou yet deemest me to be a Wight of the Waste, such as
Stone-face thy Fosterer told thee tales of, and forewarned thee.  So
would I eat before thee, and sign the meat with the sign of the
Earth-god’s Hammer, to show thee that he is in error concerning me, and
that I am a very woman flesh and fell, as my kindred were before me.’

He laughed and was exceeding glad, and said: ‘Tell me now, kind friend,
dost thou deem that Stone-face’s tales are mere mockery of his dreams,
and that he is beguiled by empty semblances or less?  Or are there such
Wights in the Waste.’

‘Nay,’ she said, ‘the man is a true man; and of these things are there
many ancient tales which we may not doubt.  Yet so it is that such wights
have I never yet seen, nor aught to scare me save evil men: belike it is
that I have been over-much busied in dealing with sorrow and ruin to look
after them: or it may be that they feared me and the wrath-breeding grief
of the kindred.’

He looked at her earnestly, and the wisdom of her heart seemed to enter
into his; but she said: ‘It is of men we must talk, and of me and thee.
Come with me, my friend.’

And she stepped lightly over the threshold and drew him in.  The Hall was
stern and grim and somewhat dusky, for its windows were but small: it was
all of stone, both walls and roof.  There was no timber-work therein save
the benches and chairs, a little about the doors at the lower end that
led to the buttery and out-bowers; and this seemed to have been wrought
of late years; yea, the chairs against the gable on the daïs were of
stone built into the wall, adorned with carving somewhat sparingly, the
image of the Wolf being done over the midmost of them.  He looked up and
down the Hall, and deemed it some seventy feet over all from end to end;
and he could see in the dimness those same goodly hangings on the wall
which he had seen in the woodland booth.

She led him up to the daïs, and stood there leaning up against the arm of
one of those stone seats silent for a while; then she turned and looked
at him, and said:

‘Yea, thou lookest a goodly warrior; yet am I glad that thou camest
hither without battle.  Tell me, Gold-mane,’ she said, taking one of his
spears from his hand, ‘art thou deft with the spear?’

‘I have been called so,’ said he.

She looked at him sweetly and said: ‘Canst thou show me the feat of
spear-throwing in this Hall, or shall we wend outside presently that I
may see thee throw?’

‘The Hall sufficeth,’ he said.  ‘Shall I set this steel in the lintel of
the buttery door yonder?’

‘Yea, if thou canst,’ she said.

He smiled and took the spear from her, and poised it and shook it till it
quivered again, then suddenly drew back his arm and cast, and the shaft
sped whistling down the dim hall, and smote the aforesaid door-lintel and
stuck there quivering: then he sprang down from the daïs, and ran down
the hall, and put forth his hand and pulled it forth from the wood, and
was on the daïs again in a trice, and cast again, and the second time set
the spear in the same place, and then took his other spear from the board
and cast it, and there stood the two staves in the wood side by side;
then he went soberly down the hall and drew them both out of the wood and
came back to her, while she stood watching him, her cheek flushed, her
lips a little parted.

She said: ‘Good spear-casting, forsooth! and far above what our folk can
do, who be no great throwers of the spear.’

Gold-mane laughed: ‘Sooth is that,’ said he, ‘or hardly were I here to
teach thee spear-throwing.’

‘Wilt thou _never_ be paid for that simple onslaught?’ she said.

‘Have I been paid then?’ said he.

She reddened, for she remembered her word to him on the mountain; and he
put his hand on her shoulder and kissed her cheek, but timorously; nor
did she withstand him or shrink aback, but said soberly:

‘Good indeed is thy spear-throwing, and meseems my brother will love thee
when he hath seen thee strike a stroke or two in wrath.  But, fair
warrior, there be no foemen here: so get thee to the lower end of the
Hall, and in the bower beyond shalt thou find fresh water; there wash the
waste from off thee, and do off thine helm and hauberk, and come back
speedily and eat with me; for I hunger, and so dost thou.’

He did as she bade him, and came back presently bearing in his hand both
helm and hauberk, and he looked light-limbed and trim and lissome, an
exceeding goodly man.




CHAPTER XIX.  THE FAIR WOMAN TELLETH FACE-OF-GOD OF HER KINDRED.


WHEN he came back to the daïs he saw that there was meat upon the board,
and the Friend said to him:

‘Now art thou Gold-mane indeed: but come now, sit by me and eat, though
the Wood-woman giveth thee but a sorry banquet, O guest; but from the
Dale it is, and we be too far now from the dwellings of men to have
delicate meat on the board, though to-night when they come back thy cheer
shall be better.  Yet even then thou shalt have no such dainties as
Stone-face hath imagined for thee at the hands of the Wood-wight.’

She laughed therewith, and he no less; and in sooth the meat was but
simple, of curds and new cheese, meat of the herdsmen.  But Face-of-god
said gaily: ‘Sweet it shall be to me; good is all that the Friend
giveth.’

Then she raised her hand and made the sign of the Hammer over the board,
and looked up at him and said:

‘Hath the Earth-god changed my face, Gold-mane, to what I verily am?’

He held his face close to hers and looked into it, and him-seemed it was
as pure as the waters of a mountain lake, and as fine and well-wrought
every deal of it as when his father had wrought in his stithy many days
and fashioned a small piece of great mastery.  He was ashamed to kiss her
again, but he said to himself, ‘This is the fairest woman of the world,
whom I have sworn to wed this year.’  Then he spake aloud and said:

‘I see the face of the Friend, and it will not change to me.’

Again she reddened a little, and the happy look in her face seemed to
grow yet sweeter, and he was bewildered with longing and delight.

But she stood up and went to an ambrye in the wall and brought forth a
horn shod and lipped with silver of ancient fashion, and she poured wine
into it and held it forth and said:

‘O guest from the Dale, I pledge thee! and when thou hast drunk to me in
turn we will talk of weighty matters.  For indeed I bear hopes in my
hands too heavy for the daughters of men to bear; and thou art a
chieftain’s son, and mayst well help me to bear them; so let us talk
simply and without guile, as folk that trust one another.’

So she drank and held out the horn to him, and he took the horn and her
hand both, and he kissed her hand and said:

‘Here in this Hall I drink to the Sons of the Wolf, whosoever they be.’
Therewith he drank and he said: ‘Simply and guilelessly indeed will I
talk with thee; for I am weary of lies, and for thy sake have I told a
many.’

‘Thou shalt tell no more,’ she said; ‘and as for the health thou hast
drunk, it is good, and shall profit thee.  Now sit we here in these
ancient seats and let us talk.’

So they sat them down while the sun was westering in the March afternoon,
and she said:

‘Tell me first what tidings have been in the Dale.’

So he told her of the ransackings and of the murder at Carlstead.

She said: ‘These tidings have we heard before, and some deal of them we
know better than ye do, or can; for we were the ransackers of Penny-thumb
and Harts-bane.  Thereof will I say more presently.  What other tidings
hast thou to tell of?  What oaths were sworn upon the Boar last Yule?’

So he told her of the oath of Bristler the son of Brightling.  She smiled
and said: ‘He shall keep his oath, and yet redden no blade.’

Then he told of his father’s oath, and she said:

‘It is good; but even so would he do and no oath sworn.  All men may
trust Iron-face.  And thou, my friend, what oath didst thou swear?’

His face grew somewhat troubled as he said: ‘I swore to wed the fairest
woman in the world, though the Dalesmen gainsaid me, and they beyond the
Dale.’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘and there is no need to ask thee whom thou didst mean
by thy “fairest woman,” for I have seen that thou deemest me fair enough.
My friend, maybe thy kindred will be against it, and the kindred of the
Bride; and it might be that my kindred would have gainsaid it if things
were not as they are.  But though all men gainsay it, yet will not I.  It
is meet and right that we twain wed.’

She spake very soberly and quietly, but when she had spoken there was
nothing in his heart but joy and gladness: yet shame of her loveliness
refrained him, and he cast down his eyes before hers.  Then she said in a
kind voice:

‘I know thee, how glad thou art of this word of mine, because thou
lookest on me with eyes of love, and thinkest of me as better than I am;
though I am no ill woman and no beguiler.  But this is not all that I
have to say to thee, though it be much; for there are more folk in the
world than thou and I only.  But I told thee this first, that thou
mightest trust me in all things.  So, my friend, if thou canst, refrain
thy joy and thy longing a little, and hearken to what concerneth thee and
me, and thy people and mine.’

‘Fair woman and sweet friend,’ he said, ‘thou knowest of a gladness which
is hard to bear if one must lay it aside for a while; and of a longing
which is hard to refrain if it mingle with another longing—knowest thou
not?’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘I know it.’

‘Yet,’ said Face-of-god, ‘I will forbear as thou biddest me.  Tell me,
then, what were the felons who were slain at Carlstead?  Knowest thou of
them?’

‘Over well,’ she said, ‘they are our foes this many a year; and since we
met last autumn they have become foes of you Dalesmen also.  Soon shall
ye have tidings of them; and it was against them that I bade thee arm
yesterday.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Is it against them that thou wouldst have us do battle
along with thy folk?’

‘So it is,’ she said; ‘no other foemen have we.  And now, Gold-mane, thou
art become a friend of the Wolf, and shalt before long be of affinity
with our House; that other day thou didst ask me to tell thee of me and
mine, and now will I do according to thine asking.  Short shall my tale
be; because maybe thou shalt hear it told again, and in goodly wise,
before thine whole folk.

‘As thou wottest we be now outlaws and Wolves’ Heads; and whiles we lift
the gear of men, but ever if we may of ill men and not of good; there is
no worthy goodman of the Dale from whom we would take one hoof, or a skin
of wine, or a cake of wax.

‘Wherefore are we outlaws?  Because we have been driven from our own, and
we bore away our lives and our weapons, and little else; and for our
lands, thou seest this Vale in the howling wilderness and how narrow and
poor it is, though it hath been the nurse of warriors in time past.

‘Hearken!  Time long ago came the kindred of the Wolf to these Mountains
of the World; and they were in a pass in the stony maze and the utter
wilderness of the Mountains, and the foe was behind them in numbers not
to be borne up against.  And so it befell that the pass forked, and there
were two ways before our Folk; and one part of them would take the way to
the north and the other the way to the south; and they could not agree
which way the whole Folk should take.  So they sundered into two
companies, and one took one way and one another.  Now as to those who
fared by the southern road, we knew not what befell them, nor for long
and long had we any tale of them.

‘But we who took the northern road, we happened on this Vale amidst the
wilderness, and we were weary of fleeing from the over-mastering foe; and
the dale seemed enough, and a refuge, and a place to dwell in, and no man
was there before us, and few were like to find it, and we were but a few.
So we dwelt here in this Vale for as wild as it is, the place where the
sun shineth never in the winter, and scant is the summer sunshine
therein.  Here we raised a Doom-ring and builded us a Hall, wherein thou
now sittest beside me, O friend, and we dwelt here many seasons.

‘We had a few sheep in the wilderness, and a few neat fed down the grass
of the Vale; and we found gems and copper in the rocks about us wherewith
at whiles to chaffer with the aliens, and fish we drew from our river the
Shivering Flood.  Also it is not to be hidden that in those days we did
not spare to lift the goods of men; yea, whiles would our warriors fare
down unto the edges of the Plain and lie in wait there till the time
served, and then drive the spoil from under the very walls of the Cities.
Our men were not little-hearted, nor did our women lament the death of
warriors over-much, for they were there to bear more warriors to the
Folk.

‘But the seasons passed, and the Folk multiplied in Shadowy Vale, and
livelihood seemed like to fail them, and needs must they seek wider
lands.  So by ways which thou wilt one day wot of, we came into a valley
that lieth north-west of Shadowy Vale: a land like thine of Burgdale, or
better; wide it was, plenteous of grass and trees, well watered, full of
all things that man can desire.

‘Were there men before us in this Dale? sayest thou.  Yea, but not very
many, and they feeble in battle, weak of heart, though strong of body.
These, when they saw the Sons of the Wolf with weapons in their hands,
felt themselves puny before us, and their hearts failed them; and they
came to us with gifts, and offered to share the Dale between them and us,
for they said there was enough for both folks.  So we took their offer
and became their friends; and some of our Houses wedded wives of the
strangers, and gave them their women to wife.  Therein they did amiss;
for the blended Folk as the generations passed became softer than our
blood, and many were untrusty and greedy and tyrannous, and the days of
the whoredom fell upon us, and when we deemed ourselves the mightiest
then were we the nearest to our fall.  But the House whereof I am would
never wed with these Westlanders, and other Houses there were who had
affinity with us who chiefly wedded with us of the Wolf, and their
fathers had come with ours into that fruitful Dale; and these were called
the Red Hand, and the Silver Arm, and the Golden Bushel, and the Ragged
Sword.  Thou hast heard those names once before, friend?’

‘Yea,’ he said, and as he spoke the picture of that other day came back
to him, and he called to mind all that he had said, and his happiness of
that hour seemed the more and the sweeter for that memory.

She went on: ‘Fair and goodly is that Dale as mine own eyes have seen,
and plentiful of all things, and up in its mountains to the east are
caves and pits whence silver is digged abundantly; therefore is the Dale
called Silver-dale.  Hast thou heard thereof, my friend?’

‘Nay,’ said Face-of-god, ‘though I have marvelled whence ye gat such
foison of silver.’

He looked on her and marvelled, for now she seemed as if it were another
woman: her eyes were gleaming bright, her lips were parted; there was a
bright red flush on the pommels of her two cheeks as she spake again and
said:

‘Happy lived the Folk in Silver-dale for many and many winters and
summers: the seasons were good and no lack was there: little sickness
there was and less war, and all seemed better than well.  It is strange
that ye Dalesmen have not heard of Silver-dale.’

‘Nay,’ said he, ‘but I have not; of Rose-dale have I heard, as a land
very far away: but no further do we know of toward that aírt.  Lieth
Silver-dale anywhere nigh to Rose-dale?’

She said: ‘It is the next dale to it, yet is it a far journey betwixt the
two, for the ice-sea pusheth a horn in betwixt them; and even below the
ice the mountain-neck is passable to none save a bold crag-climber, and
to him only bearing his life in his hands.  But, my friend, I am but
lingering over my tale, because it grieveth me sore to have to tell it.
Hearken then!  In the days when I had seen but ten summers, and my
brother was a very young man, but exceeding strong, and as beautiful as
thou art now, war fell on us without rumour or warning; for there swarmed
into Silver-dale, though not by the ways whereby we had entered it, a
host of aliens, short of stature, crooked of limb, foul of aspect, but
fierce warriors and armed full well: they were men having no country to
go back to, though they had no women or children with them, as we had
when we were young in these lands, but used all women whom they took as
their beastly lust bade them, making them their thralls if they slew them
not.  Soon we found that these foemen asked no more of us than all we
had, and therewithal our lives to be cast away or used for their service
as beasts of burden or pleasure.  There then we gathered our fighting-men
and withstood them; and if we had been all of the kindreds of the Wolf
and the fruit of the wives of warriors, we should have driven back these
felons and saved the Dale, though it maybe more than half ruined: but the
most part of us were of that mingled blood, or of the generations of the
Dalesmen whom we had conquered long ago, and stout as they were of body
their hearts failed them, and they gave themselves up to the aliens to be
as their oxen and asses.

‘Why make a long tale of it?  We who were left, and could brook death but
not thraldom, fought it out together, women as well as men, till the
sweetness of life and a happy chance for escape bid us flee, vanquished
but free men.  For at the end of three days’ fight we had been driven up
to the easternmost end of the Dale, and up anigh to the jaws of the pass
whereby the Folk had first come into Silver-dale, and we had those with
us who knew every cranny of that way, while to strangers who knew it not
it was utterly impassable; night was coming on also, and even those
murder-carles were weary with slaying; and, moreover, on this last day,
when they saw that they had won all, they were fighting to keep, and not
to slay, and a few stubborn carles and queens, of what use would they be,
or where was the gain of risking life to win them?

‘So they forbore us, and night came on moonless and dark; and it was the
early spring season, when the days are not yet long, and so by night and
cloud we fled away, and back again to Shadowy Vale.

‘Forsooth, we were but a few; for when we were gotten into this Vale,
this strip of grass and water in the wilderness, and had told up our
company, we were but two hundred and thirty and five of men and women and
children.  For there were an hundred and thirty and three grown men of
all ages, and of women grown seventy and five, and one score and seven
children, whereof I was one; for, as thou mayst deem, it was easier for
grown men with weapons in their hands to escape from that slaughter than
for women and children.

‘There sat we in yonder Doom-ring and took counsel, and to some it seemed
good that we should all dwell together in Shadowy Vale, and beset the
skirts of the foemen till the days should better; but others deemed that
there was little avail therein; and there was a mighty man of the
kindred, Stone-wolf by name, a man of middle-age, and he said, that late
in life had he tasted of war, and though the banquet was made bitter with
defeat, yet did the meat seem wholesome to him.  “Come down with me to
the Cities of the Plain,” said he, “all you who are stout warriors; and
leave we here the old men and the swains and the women and children.
Hateful are the folk there, and full of malice, but soft withal and
dastardly.  Let us go down thither and make ourselves strong amongst
them, and sell our valour for their wealth till we come to rule them, and
they make us their kings, and we establish the Folk of the Wolf amongst
the aliens; then will we come back hither and bring away that which we
have left.”

‘So he spake, and the more part of the warriors yea said his rede, and
they went with him to the Westland, and amongst these was my brother
Folk-might (for that is his name in the kindred).  And I sorrowed at his
departure, for he had borne me thither out of the flames and the clash of
swords and the press of battle, and to me had he ever been kind and
loving, albeit he hath had the Words of hard and froward used on him full
oft.

‘So in this Vale abode we that were left, and the seasons passed; some of
the elders died, and some of the children also; but more children were
born, for amongst us were men and women to whom it was lawful to wed with
each other.  Even with this scanty remnant was left some of the life of
the kindred of old days; and after we had been here but a little while,
the young men, yea and the old also, and even some of the women, would
steal through passes that we, and we only, knew of, and would fall upon
the Aliens in Silver-dale as occasion served, and lift their goods both
live and dead; and this became both a craft and a pastime amongst us.
Nor may I hide that we sometimes went lifting otherwhere; for in the
summer and autumn we would fare west a little and abide in the woods the
season through, and hunt the deer thereof, and whiles would we drive the
spoil from the scattered folk not far from your Shepherd-Folk; but with
the Shepherds themselves and with you Dalesmen we meddled not.

‘Now that little wood-lawn with the toft of an ancient dwelling in it,
wherein, saith Bow-may, thou didst once rest, was one of our summer
abodes; and later on we built the hall under the pine-wood that thou
knowest.

‘Thus then grew up our young men; and our maids were little softer; e’en
such as Bow-may is (and kind is she withal), and it seemed in very sooth
as if the Spirit of the Wolf was with us, and the roughness of the Waste
made us fierce; and law we had not and heeded not, though love was
amongst us.’

She stopped awhile and fell a-musing, and her face softened, and she
turned to him with that sweet happy look upon it and said:

‘Desolate and dreary is the Dale, thou deemest, friend; and yet for me I
love it and its dark-green water, and it is to me as if the Fathers of
the kindred visit it and hold converse with us; and there I grew up when
I was little, before I knew what a woman was, and strange communings had
I with the wilderness.  Friend, when we are wedded, and thou art a great
chieftain, as thou wilt be, I shall ask of thee the boon to suffer me to
abide here at whiles that I may remember the days when I was little and
the love of the kindred waxed in me.’

‘This is but a little thing to ask,’ said Face-of-god; ‘I would thou
hadst asked me more.’

‘Fear not,’ she said, ‘I shall ask thee for much and many things; and
some of them belike thou shalt deny me.’

He shook his head; but she smiled in his face and said:

‘Yea, so it is, friend; but hearken.  The seasons passed, and six years
wore, and I was grown a tall slim maiden, fleet of foot and able to
endure toil enough, though I never bore weapons, nor have done.  So on a
fair even of midsummer when we were together, the most of us, round about
this Hall and the Doom-ring, we saw a tall man in bright war-gear come
forth into the Dale by the path that thou camest, and then another and
another till there were two score and seven men-at-arms standing on the
grass below the scree yonder; by that time had we gotten some weapons in
our hands, and we stood together to meet the new-comers, but they drew no
sword and notched no shaft, but came towards us laughing and joyous, and
lo! it was my brother Folk-might and his men, those that were left of
them, come back to us from the Westland.

‘Glad indeed was I to behold him; and for him when he had taken me in his
arms and looked up and down the Dale, he cried out: ‘In many fair places
and many rich dwellings have I been; but this is the hour that I have
looked for.’

‘Now when we asked him concerning Stone-wolf and the others who were
missing (for ten tens of stalwarth men had fared to the Westland), he
swept out his hand toward the west and said with a solemn face: “There
they lie, and grass groweth over their bones, and we who have come aback,
and ye who have abided, these are now the children of the Wolf: there are
no more now on the earth.”

‘Let be!  It was a fair even and high was the feast in the Hall that
night, and sweet was the converse with our folk come back.  A glad man
was my brother Folk-might when he heard that for years past we had been
lifting the gear of men, and chiefly of the Aliens in Silver-dale: and he
himself was become learned in war and a deft leader of men.

‘So the days passed and the seasons, and we lived on as we might; but
with Folk-might’s return there began to grow up in all our hearts what
had long been flourishing in mine, and that was the hope of one day
winning back our own again, and dying amidst the dear groves of
Silver-dale.  Within these years we had increased somewhat in number; for
if we had lost those warriors in the Westland, and some old men who had
died in the Dale, yet our children had grown up (I have now seen twenty
and one summers) and more were growing up.  Moreover, after the first
year, from the time when we began to fall upon the Dusky Men of
Silver-dale, from time to time they who went on such adventures set free
such thralls of our blood as they could fall in with and whom they could
trust in, and they dwelt (and yet dwell) with us in the Dale: first and
last we have taken in three score and twelve of such men, and a score of
women-thralls withal.

‘Now during these seasons, and not very long ago, after I was a woman
grown, the thought came to me, and to Folk-might also, that there were
kindreds of the people dwelling anear us whom we might so deal with that
they should become our friends and brothers in arms, and that through
them we might win back Silver-dale.

‘Of Rose-dale we wotted already that the Folk were nought of our blood,
feeble in the field, cowed by the Dusky Men, and at last made thralls to
them; so nought was to do there.  But Folk-might went to and fro to
gather tidings: at whiles I with him, at whiles one or more of
Wood-father’s children, who with their father and mother and Bow-may have
abided in the Vale ever since the Great Undoing.

‘Soon he fell in with thy Folk, and first of all with the Woodlanders,
and that was a joy to him; for wot ye what?  He got to know that these
men were the children of those of our Folk who had sundered from us in
the mountain passes time long and long ago; and he loved them, for he saw
that they were hardy and trusty, and warriors at heart.

‘Then he went amongst the Shepherd-Folk, and he deemed them good men
easily stirred, and deemed that they might soon be won to friendship; and
he knew that they were mostly come from the Houses of the Woodlanders, so
that they also were of the kindred.

‘And last he came into Burgdale, and found there a merry and happy Folk,
little wont to war, but stout-hearted, and nowise puny either of body or
soul; he went there often and learned much about them, and deemed that
they would not be hard to win to fellowship.  And he found that the House
of the Face was the chiefest house there; and that the Alderman and his
sons were well beloved of all the folk, and that they were the men to be
won first, since through them should all others be won.  I also went to
Burgstead with him twice, as I told thee erst; and I saw thee, and I
deemed that thou wouldest lightly become our friend; and it came into my
mind that I myself might wed thee, and that the House of the Face thereby
might have affinity thenceforth with the Children of the Wolf.’

He said: ‘Why didst thou deem thus of me, O friend?’

She laughed and said: ‘Dost thou long to hear me say the words when thou
knowest my thought well?  So be it.  I saw thee both young and fair; and
I knew thee to be the son of a noble, worthy, guileless man and of a
beauteous woman of great wits and good rede.  And I found thee to be kind
and open-handed and simple like thy father, and like thy mother wiser
than thou thyself knew of thyself; and that thou wert desirous of deeds
and fain of women.’

She was silent for a while, and he also: then he said: ‘Didst thou draw
me to the woods and to thee?’

She reddened and said: ‘I am no spell-wife: but true it is that
Wood-mother made a waxen image of thee, and thrust through the heart
thereof the pin of my girdle-buckle, and stroked it every morning with an
oak-bough over which she had sung spells.  But dost thou not remember,
Gold-mane, how that one day last Hay-month, as ye were resting in the
meadows in the cool of the evening, there came to you a minstrel that
played to you on the fiddle, and therewith sang a song that melted all
your hearts, and that this song told of the Wild-wood, and what was
therein of desire and peril and beguiling and death, and love unto Death
itself?  Dost thou remember, friend?’

‘Yea,’ he said, ‘and how when the minstrel was done Stone-face fell to
telling us more tales yet of the woodland, and the minstrel sang again
and yet again, till his tales had entered into my very heart.’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘and that minstrel was Wood-wont; and I sent him to sing
to thee and thine, deeming that if thou didst hearken, thou would’st seek
the woodland and happen upon us.’

He laughed and said: ‘Thou didst not doubt but that if we met, thou
mightest do with me as thou wouldest?’

‘So it is,’ she said, ‘that I doubted it little.’

‘Therein wert thou wise,’ said Face-of-god; ‘but now that we are talking
without guile to each other, mightest thou tell me wherefore it was that
Folk-might made that onslaught upon me?  For certain it is that he was
minded to slay me.’

She said: ‘It was sooth what I told thee, that whiles he groweth so
battle-eager that whatso edge-tool he beareth must needs come out of the
scabbard; but there was more in it than that, which I could not tell thee
erst.  Two days before thy coming he had been down to Burgstead in the
guise of an old carle such as thou sawest him with me in the
market-place.  There was he guested in your Hall, and once more saw thee
and the Bride together; and he saw the eyes of love wherewith she looked
on thee (for so much he told me), and deemed that thou didst take her
love but lightly.  And he himself looked on her with such love (and this
he told me not) that he deemed nought good enough for her, and would have
had thee give thyself up wholly to her; for my brother is a generous man,
my friend.  So when I told him on the morn of that day whereon we met
that we looked to see thee that eve (for indeed I am somewhat
foreseeing), he said: “Look thou, Sun-beam, if he cometh, it is not
unlike that I shall drive a spear through him.”  “Wherefore?” said I;
“can he serve our turn when he is dead?”  Said he: “I care little.  Mine
own turn will I serve.  Thou sayest _Wherefore_?  I tell thee this
stripling beguileth to her torment the fairest woman that is in the
world—such an one as is meet to be the mother of chieftains, and to stand
by warriors in their day of peril.  I have seen her; and thus have I seen
her.”  Then said I: “Greatly forsooth shalt thou pleasure her by slaying
him!”  And he answered: “I shall pleasure myself.  And one day she shall
thank me, when she taketh my hand in hers and we go together to the
Bride-bed.”  Therewith came over me a clear foresight of the hours to
come, and I said to him: “Yea, Folk-might, cast the spear and draw the
sword; but him thou shalt not slay: and thou shalt one day see him
standing with us before the shafts of the Dusky Men.”  So I spake; but he
looked fiercely at me, and departed and shunned me all that day, and by
good hap I was hard at hand when thou drewest nigh our abode.  Nay,
Gold-mane, what would’st thou with thy sword?  Why art thou so red and
wrathful?  Would’st thou fight with my brother because he loveth thy
friend, thine old playmate, thy kinswoman, and thinketh pity of her
sorrow?’

He said, with knit brow and gleaming eyes: ‘Would the man take her away
from me perforce?’

‘My friend,’ she said, ‘thou art not yet so wise as not to be a fool at
whiles.  Is it not so that she herself hath taken herself from thee,
since she hath come to know that thou hast given thyself to another?
Hath she noted nought of thee this winter and spring?  Is she well
pleased with the ways of thee?’

He said: ‘Thou hast spoken simply with me, and I will do no less with
thee.  It was but four days agone that she did me to wit that she knew of
me how I sought my love on the Mountain; and she put me to sore shame,
and afterwards I wept for her sorrow.’

Therewith he told her all that the Bride had said to him, as he well
might, for he had forgotten no word of it.

Then said the Friend: ‘She shall have the token that she craveth, and it
is I that shall give it to her.’

Therewith she took from her finger a ring wherein was set a very fair
changeful mountain-stone, and gave it to him, and said:

‘Thou shalt give her this and tell her whence thou hadst it; and tell her
that I bid her remember that To-morrow is a new day.’




CHAPTER XX.  THOSE TWO TOGETHER HOLD THE RING OF THE EARTH-GOD.


AND now they fell silent both of them, and sat hearkening the sounds of
the Dale, from the whistle of the plover down by the water-side to the
far-off voices of the children and maidens about the kine in the lower
meadows.  At last Gold-mane took up the word and said:

‘Sweet friend, tell me the uttermost of what thou would’st have of me.
Is it not that I should stand by thee and thine in the Folk-mote of the
Dalesmen, and speak for you when ye pray us for help against your foemen;
and then again that I do my best when ye and we are arrayed for battle
against the Dusky Men?  This is easy to do, and great is the reward thou
offerest me.’

‘I look for this service of thee,’ she said, ‘and none other.’

‘And when I go down to the battle,’ said he, ‘shalt thou be sorry for our
sundering?’

She said: ‘There shall be no sundering; I shall wend with thee.’

Said he: ‘And if I were slain in the battle, would’st thou lament me?’

‘Thou shalt not be slain,’ she said.

Again was there silence betwixt them, till at last he said:

‘This then is why thou didst draw me to thee in the Wild-wood?’

‘Yea,’ said she.

Again for a while no word was spoken, and Face-of-god looked on her till
she cast her eyes down before him.

Then at last he spake, and the colour came and went in his face as he
said: ‘Tell me thy name what it is.’

She said: ‘I am called the Sun-beam.’

Then he said, and his voice trembled therewith: ‘O Sun-beam, I have been
seeking pleasant and cunning words, and can find none such.  But tell me
this if thou wilt: dost thou desire me as I desire thee? or is it that
thou wilt suffer me to wed thee and bed thee at last as mere payment for
the help that I shall give to thee and thine?  Nay, doubt it not that I
will take the payment, if this is what thou wilt give me and nought else.
Yet tell me.’

Her face grew troubled, and she said:

‘Gold-mane, maybe that thou hast now asked me one question too many; for
this is no fair game to be played between us.  For thee, as I deem, there
are this day but two people in the world, and that is thou and I, and the
earth is for us two alone.  But, my friend, though I have seen but twenty
and one summers, it is nowise so with me, and to me there are many in the
world; and chiefly the Folk of the Wolf, amidst whose very heart I have
grown up.  Moreover, I can think of her whom I have supplanted, the Bride
to wit; and I know her, and how bitter and empty her days shall be for a
while, and how vain all our redes for her shall seem to her.  Yea, I know
her sorrow, and see it and grieve for it: so canst not thou, unless thou
verily see her before thee, her face unhappy, and her voice changed and
hard.  Well, I will tell thee what thou askest.  When I drew thee to me
on the Mountain I thought but of the friendship and brotherhood to be
knitted up between our two Folks, nor did I anywise desire thy love of a
young man.  But when I saw thee on the heath and in the Hall that day, it
pleased me to think that a man so fair and chieftain-like should one day
lie by my side; and again when I saw that the love of me had taken hold
of thee, I would not have thee grieved because of me, but would have thee
happy.  And now what shall I say?—I know not; I cannot tell.  Yet am I
the Friend, as erst I called myself.

‘And, Gold-mane, I have seen hitherto but the outward show and image of
thee, and though that be goodly, how would it be if thou didst shame me
with little-heartedness and evil deeds?  Let me see thee in the Folk-mote
and the battle, and then may I answer thee.’

Then she held her peace, and he answered nothing; and she turned her face
from him and said:

‘Out on it! have I beguiled myself as well as thee?  These are but empty
words I have been saying.  If thou wilt drag the truth out of me, this is
the very truth: that to-day is happy to me as it is to thee, and that I
have longed sore for its coming.  O Gold-mane, O speech-friend, if thou
wert to pray me or command me that I lie in thine arms to-night, I should
know not how to gainsay thee.  Yet I beseech thee to forbear, lest thy
death and mine come of it.  And why should we die, O friend, when we are
so young, and the world lies so fair before us, and the happy days are at
hand when the Children of the Wolf and the kindreds of the Dale shall
deliver the Folk, and all days shall be good and all years?’

They had both risen up as she spake, and now he put forth his hands to
her and took her in his arms, wondering the while, as he drew her to him,
how much slenderer and smaller and weaker she seemed in his embrace than
he had thought of her; and when their lips met, he felt that she kissed
him as he her.  Then he held her by the shoulders at arms’ length from
him, and beheld her face how her eyes were closed and her lips quivering.
But before him, in a moment of time, passed a picture of the life to be
in the fair Dale, and all she would give him there, and the days good and
lovely from morn to eve and eve to morn; and though in that moment it was
hard for him to speak, at last he spoke in a voice hoarse at first, and
said:

‘Thou sayest sooth, O friend; we will not die, but live; I will not drag
our deaths upon us both, nor put a sword in the hands of Folk-might, who
loves me not.’

Then he kissed her on the brow and said: ‘Now shalt thou take me by the
hand and lead me forth from the Hall.  For the day is waxing old, and
here meseemeth in this dim hall there are words crossing in the air about
us—words spoken in days long ago, and tales of old time, that keep egging
me on to do my will and die, because that is all that the world hath for
a valiant man; and to such words I would not hearken, for in this hour I
have no will to die, nor can I think of death.’

She took his hand and led him forth without more words, and they went
hand in hand and paced slowly round the Doom-ring, the light air
breathing upon them till their faces were as calm and quiet as their wont
was, and hers especially as bright and happy as when he had first seen
her that day.

The sun was sinking now, and only sent one golden ray into the valley
through a cleft in the western rock-wall, but the sky overhead was bright
and clear; from the meadows came the sound of the lowing of kine and the
voices of children a-sporting, and it seemed to Gold-mane that they were
drawing nigher, both the children and the kine, and somewhat he begrudged
it that he should not be alone with the Friend.

Now when they had made half the circuit of the Doom-ring, the Sun-beam
stopped him, and then led him through the Ring of Stones, and brought him
up to the altar which was amidst of it; and the altar was a great black
stone hewn smooth and clean, and with the image of the Wolf carven on the
front thereof; and on its face lay the gold ring which the priest or
captain of the Folk bore on his arm between the God and the people at all
folk-motes.

So she said: ‘This is the altar of the God of Earth, and often hath it
been reddened by mighty men; and thereon lieth the Ring of the Sons of
the Wolf; and now it were well that we swore troth on that ring before my
brother cometh; for now will he soon be here.’

Then Gold-mane took the Ring and thrust his right hand through it, and
took her right hand in his; so that the Ring lay on both their hands, and
therewith he spake aloud:

‘I am Face-of-god of the House of the Face, and I do thee to wit, O God
of the Earth, that I pledge my troth to this woman, the Sun-beam of the
Kindred of the Wolf, to beget my offspring on her, and to live with her,
and to die with her: so help me, thou God of the Earth, and the Warrior
and the God of the Face!’

Then spake the Sun-beam: ‘I, the Sun-beam of the Children of the Wolf,
pledge my troth to Face-of-god to lie in his bed and to bear his children
and none other’s, and to be his speech-friend till I die: so help me the
Wolf and the Warrior and the God of the Earth!’

Then they laid the Ring on the altar again, and they kissed each other
long and sweetly, and then turned away from the altar and departed from
the Doom-ring, going hand in hand together down the meadow, and as they
went, the noise of the kine and the children grew nearer and nearer, and
presently came the whole company of them round a ness of the rock-wall;
there were some thirty little lads and lasses driving on the milch-kine,
with half a score of older maids and grown women, one of whom was
Bow-may, who was lightly and scantily clad, as one who heeds not the
weather, or deems all months midsummer.

The children came running up merrily when they saw the Sun-beam, but
stopped short shyly when they noted the tall fair stranger with her.
They were all strong and sturdy children, and some very fair, but brown
with the weather, if not with the sun.  Bow-may came up to Gold-mane and
took his hand and greeted him kindly and said:

‘So here thou art at last in Shadowy Vale; and I hope that thou art
content therewith, and as happy as I would wish thee to be.  Well, this
is the first time; and when thou comest the second time it may well be
that the world shall be growing better.’

She held the distaff which she bore in her hand (for she had been
spinning) as if it were a spear; her limbs were goodly and shapely, and
she trod the thick grass of the Vale with a kind of wary firmness, as
though foemen might be lurking nearby.  The Sun-beam smiled upon her
kindly and said:

‘That shall not fail to be, Bow-may: ye have won a new friend to-day.
But tell me, when dost thou look to see the men here, for I was down by
the water when they went away yesterday?’

‘They shall come into the Dale a little after sunset,’ said Bow-may.

‘Shall I abide them, my friend?’ said Gold-mane, turning to the Sun-beam.

‘Yea,’ she said; ‘for what else art thou come hither? or art thou so
pressed to depart from us?  Last time we met thou wert not so hasty to
sunder.’

They smiled on each other; and Bow-may looked on them and laughed
outright; then a flush showed in her cheeks through the tan of them, and
she turned toward the children and the other women who were busied about
the milking of the kine.

But those two sat down together on a bank amidst the plain meadow, facing
the river and the eastern rock-wall, and the Sun-beam said:

‘I am fain to speak to thee and to see thine eyes watching me while I
speak; and now, my friend, I will tell thee something unasked which has
to do with what e’en now thou didst ask me; for I would have thee trust
me wholly, and know me for what I am.  Time was I schemed and planned for
this day of betrothal; but now I tell thee it has become no longer
needful for bringing to pass our fellowship in arms with thy people.  Yea
yesterday, ere he went on a hunt, whereof he shall tell thee, Folk-might
was against it, in words at least; and yet as one who would have it done
if he might have no part in it.  So, in good sooth, this hand that lieth
in thine is the hand of a wilful woman, who desireth a man, and would
keep him for her speech-friend.  Now art thou fond and happy; yet bear in
mind that there are deeds to be done, and the troth we have just plighted
must be paid for.  So hearken, I bid thee.  Dost thou care to know why
the wheedling of thee is no longer needful to us?’

He said: ‘A little while ago I should have said, Yea, If thy lips say the
words.  But now, O friend, it seemeth as if thine heart were already
become a part of mine, and I feel as if the chieftain were growing up in
me and the longing for deeds: so I say, Tell me, for I were fain to hear
what toucheth the welfare of thy Folk and their fellowship with my Folk;
for on that also have I set my heart?’

She said gravely and with solemn eyes:

‘What thou sayest is good: full glad am I that I have not plighted my
troth to a mere goodly lad, but rather to a chieftain and a warrior.  Now
then hearken!  Since I saw thee first in the autumn this hath happened,
that the Dusky Men, increasing both in numbers and insolence, have it in
their hearts to win more than Silver-dale, and it is years since they
have fallen upon Rose-dale and conquered it, rather by murder than by
battle, and made all men thralls there, for feeble were the Folk thereof;
and doubt it not but that they will look into Burgdale before long.  They
are already abroad in the woods, and were it not for the fear of the Wolf
they would be thicker therein, and faring wider; for we have slain many
of them, coming upon them unawares; and they know not where we dwell, nor
who we be: so they fear to spread about over-much and pry into unknown
places lest the Wolf howl on them.  Yet beware! for they will gather in
numbers that we may not meet, and then will they swarm into the Dale; and
if ye would live your happy life that ye love so well, ye must now fight
for it; and in that battle must ye needs join yourselves to us, that we
may help each other.  Herein have ye nought to choose, for now with you
it is no longer a thing to talk of whether ye will help certain strangers
and guests and thereby win some gain to yourselves, but whether ye have
the hearts to fight for yourselves, and the wits to be the fellows of
tall men and stout warriors who have pledged their lives to win or die
for it.’

She was silent a little and then turned and looked fondly on Face-of-god
and said:

‘Therefore, Gold-mane, we need thee no longer; for thou must needs fight
in our battle.  I have no longer aught to do to wheedle thee to love me.
Yet if thou wilt love me, then am I a glad woman.’

He said: ‘Thou wottest well that thou hast all my love, neither will I
fail thee in the battle.  I am not little-hearted, though I would have
given myself to thee for no reward.’

‘It is well,’ said the Sun-beam; ‘nought is undone by that which I have
done.  Moreover, it is good that we have plighted troth to-day.  For
Folk-might will presently hear thereof, and he must needs abide the thing
which is done.  Hearken! he cometh.’

For as she spoke there came a glad cry from the women and children, and
those two stood up and turned toward the west and beheld the warriors of
the Wolf coming down into the Dale by the way that Gold-mane had come.

‘Come,’ said the Sun-beam, ‘here are your brethren in arms, let us go
greet them; they will rejoice in thee.’

So they went thither, and there stood eighty and seven men on the grass
below the scree and Folk-might their captain; and besides some valiant
women, and a few carles who were on watch on the waste, and a half score
who had been left in the Dale, these were all the warriors of the Wolf.
They were clad in no holiday raiment, not even Folk-might, but were in
sheep-brown gear of the coarsest, like to husbandmen late come from the
plough, but armed well and goodly.

But when the twain drew near, the men clashed their spears on their
shields, and cried out for joy of them, for they all knew what
Face-of-god’s presence there betokened of fellowship with the kindreds;
but Folk-might came forward and took Face-of-god’s hand and greeted him
and said:

‘Hail, son of the Alderman!  Here hast thou come into the ancient abode
of chieftains and warriors, and belike deeds await thee also.’

Yet his brow was knitted as he said these words, and he spake slowly, as
one that constraineth himself; but presently his face cleared somewhat
and he said:

‘Dalesman, it behoveth thy people to bestir them if ye would live and see
good days.  Hath my sister told thee what is toward?  Or what sayest
thou?’

‘Hail to thee, son of the Wolf!’ said Face-of-god.  ‘Thy sister hath told
me all; and even if these Dusky Felons were not our foe-men also, yet
could I have my way, we should have given thee all help, and should have
brought back peace and good days to thy folk.’

Then Folk-might flushed red and spake, as he cast out his hand towards
the warriors and up and down toward the Dale:

‘These be my folk, and these only: and as to peace, only those of us know
of it who are old men.  Yet is it well; and if we and ye together be
strong enough to bring back good days to the feeble men whom the Dusky
Ones torment in Silver-dale it shall be better yet.’

Then he turned about to his sister, and looked keenly into her eyes till
she reddened, and took her hand and looked at the wrist and said:

‘O sister, see I not the mark on thy wrist of the Ring of the God of the
Earth?  Have not oaths been sworn since yesterday?’

‘True it is,’ she said, ‘that this man and I have plighted troth together
at the altar of the Doom-ring.’

Said Folk-might: ‘Thou wilt have thy will, and I may not amend it.’
Therewith he turned about to Face-of-god and said:

‘Thou must look to it to keep this oath, whatever other one thou hast
failed in.’

Said Face-of-god somewhat wrathfully: ‘I shall keep it, whether thou
biddest me to keep it or break it.’

‘That is well,’ said Folk-might, ‘and then for all that hath gone before
thou mayest in a manner pay, if thou art dauntless before the foe.’

‘I look to be no blencher in the battle,’ said Face-of-god; ‘that is not
the fashion of our kindred, whosoever may be before us.  Yea, and even
were it thy blade, O mighty warrior of the Wolf, I would do my best to
meet it in manly fashion.’

As he spake he half drew forth Dale-warden from his sheath, looking
steadily into the eyes of Folk-might; and the Sun-beam looked upon him
happily.  But Folk-might laughed and said:

‘Thy sword is good, and I deem that thine heart will not fail thee; but
it is by my side and not in face of me that thou shalt redden the good
blade: I see not the day when we twain shall hew at each other.’

Then in a while he spake again:

‘Thou must pardon us if our words are rough; for we have stood in rough
places, where we had to speak both short and loud, whereas there was much
to do.  But now will we twain talk of matters that concern chieftains who
are going on a hard adventure.  And ye women, do ye dight the Hall for
the evening feast, which shall be the feast of the troth-plight for you
twain.  This indeed we owe thee, O guest; for little shall be thine
heritage which thou shalt have with my sister, over and above that thy
sword winneth for thee.’

But the Sun-beam said: ‘Hast thou any to-night?’

‘Yea,’ he said; ‘Spear-god, how many was it?’

There came forward a tall man bearing an axe in his right hand, and
carrying over his shoulder by his left hand a bundle of silver arm-rings
just such as Gold-mane had seen on the felons who were slain by
Wood-grey’s house.  The carle cast them on the ground and then knelt down
and fell to telling them over; and then looked up and said: ‘Twelve
yesterday in the wood where the battle was going on; and this morning
seven by the tarn in the pine-wood and six near this eastern edge of the
wood: one score and five all told.  But, Folk-might, they are coming nigh
to Shadowy Vale.’

‘Sooth is that,’ said Folk-might; ‘but it shall be looked to.  Come now
apart with me, Face-of-god.’

So the others went their ways toward the Hall, while Folk-might led the
Burgdaler to a sheltered nook under the sheer rocks, and there they sat
down to talk, and Folk-might asked Gold-mane closely of the muster of the
Dalesmen and the Shepherds and the Woodland Caries, and he was well
pleased when Face-of-god told him of how many could march to a stricken
field, and of their archery, and of their weapons and their goodness.

All this took some time in the telling, and now night was coming on
apace, and Folk-might said:

‘Now will it be time to go to the Hall; but keep in thy mind that these
Dusky Men will overrun you unless ye deal with them betimes.  These are
of the kind that ye must cast fear into their hearts by falling on them;
for if ye abide till they fall upon you, they are like the winter wolves
that swarm on and on, how many soever ye slay.  And this above all things
shall help you, that we shall bring you whereas ye shall fall on them
unawares and destroy them as boys do with a wasp’s nest.  Yet shall many
a mother’s son bite the dust.

‘Is it not so that in four weeks’ time is your spring-feast and market at
Burgstead, and thereafter the great Folk-mote?’

‘So it is,’ said Gold-mane.

‘Thither shall I come then,’ said Folk-might, ‘and give myself out for
the slayer of Rusty and the ransacker of Harts-bane and Penny-thumb; and
therefor shall I offer good blood-wite and theft-wite; and thy father
shall take that; for he is a just man.  Then shall I tell my tale.  Yet
it may be thou shalt see us before if battle betide.  And now fair befall
this new year; for soon shall the scabbards be empty and the white swords
be dancing in the air, and spears and axes shall be the growth of this
spring-tide.’

And he leaped up from his seat and walked to and fro before Gold-mane,
and now was it grown quite dark.  Then Folk-might turned to Face-of-god
and said:

‘Come, guest, the windows of the Hall are yellow; let us to the feast.
To-morrow shalt thou get thee to the beginning of this work.  I hope of
thee that thou art a good sword; else have I done a folly and my sister a
worse one.  But now forget that, and feast.’

Gold-mane arose, not very well at ease, for the man seemed overbearing;
yet how might he fall upon the Sun-beam’s kindred, and the captain of
these new brethren in arms?  So he spake not.  But Folk-might said to
him:

‘Yet I would not have thee forget that I was wroth with thee when I saw
thee to-day; and had it not been for the coming battle I had drawn sword
upon thee.’

Then Face-of-god’s wrath was stirred, and he said:

‘There is yet time for that! but why art thou wroth with me?  And I shall
tell thee that there is little manliness in thy chiding.  For how may I
fight with thee, thou the brother of my plighted speech-friend and my
captain in this battle?’

‘Therein thou sayest sooth,’ said Folk-might; ‘but hard it was to see you
two standing together; and thou canst not give the Bride to me as I give
my sister to thee.  For I have seen her, and I have seen her looking at
thee; and I know that she will not have it so.’

Then they went on together toward the Hall, and Face-of-god was silent
and somewhat troubled; and as they drew near to the Hall, Folk-might
spake again:

‘Yet time may amend it; and if not, there is the battle, and maybe the
end.  Now be we merry!’

So they went into the Hall together, and there was the Sun-beam
gloriously arrayed, as erst in the woodland bower, and Face-of-god sat on
the daïs beside her, and the uttermost sweetness of desire entered into
his soul as he noted her eyes and her mouth, that were grown so kind to
him, and her hand that strayed toward his.

The Hall was full of folk, and all those warriors were there with
Wood-father and his sons, and Wood-mother, and Bow-may and many other
women; and Gold-mane looked down the Hall and deemed that he had never
seen such stalwarth bodies of men, or so bold and meet for battle: as for
the women he had seen fairer in Burgdale, but these were fair of their
own fashion, shapely and well-knit, and strong-armed and large-limbed,
yet sweet-voiced and gentle withal.  Nay, the very lads of fifteen
winters or so, whereof a few were there, seemed bold and bright-eyed and
keen of wit, and it seemed like that if the warriors fared afield these
would be with them.

So wore the feast; and Folk-might as aforetime amongst the healths called
on men to drink to the Jaws of the Wolf, and the Red Hand, and the Silver
Arm, and the Golden Bushel, and the Ragged Sword.  But now had
Face-of-god no need to ask what these meant, since he knew that they were
the names of the kindreds of the Wolf.  They drank also to the
troth-plight and to those twain, and shouted aloud over the health and
clashed their weapons: and Gold-mane wondered what echo of that shout
would reach to Burgstead.

Then sang men songs of old time, and amongst them Wood-wont stood with
his fiddle amidst the Hall and Bow-may beside him, and they sang in turn
to it sweetly and clearly; and this is some of what they sang:

                              _She singeth_.

   Wild is the waste and long leagues over;
      Whither then wend ye spear and sword,
   Where nought shall see your helms but the plover,
      Far and far from the dear Dale’s sward?

                              _He singeth_.

   Many a league shall we wend together
      With helm and spear and bended bow.
   Hark! how the wind blows up for weather:
      Dark shall the night be whither we go.

   Dark shall the night be round the byre,
      And dark as we drive the brindled kine;
   Dark and dark round the beacon-fire,
      Dark down in the pass round our wavering line.

   Turn on thy path, O fair-foot maiden,
      And come our ways by the pathless road;
   Look how the clouds hang low and laden
      Over the walls of the old abode!

                              _She singeth_.

   Bare are my feet for the rough waste’s wending,
      Wild is the wind, and my kirtle’s thin;
   Faint shall I be ere the long way’s ending
      Drops down to the Dale and the grief therein.

                              _He singeth_.

   Do on the brogues of the wild-wood rover,
      Do on the byrnies’ ring-close mail;
   Take thou the staff that the barbs hang over,
      O’er the wind and the waste and the way to prevail.

   Come, for how from thee shall I sunder?
      Come, that a tale may arise in the land;
   Come, that the night may be held for a wonder,
      When the Wolf was led by a maiden’s hand!

                              _She singeth_.

   Now will I fare as ye are faring,
      And wend no way but the way ye wend;
   And bear but the burdens ye are bearing,
      And end the day as ye shall end.

   And many an eve when the clouds are drifting
      Down through the Dale till they dim the roof,
   Shall they tell in the Hall of the Maiden’s Lifting,
      And how we drave the spoil aloof.

                          _They sing together_.

   Over the moss through the wind and the weather,
      Through the morn and the eve and the death of the day,
   Wend we man and maid together,
      For out of the waste is born the fray.

Then the Sun-beam spake to Gold-mane softly, and told him how this song
was made by a minstrel concerning a foray in the early days of their
first abode in Shadowy Vale, and how in good sooth a maiden led the fray
and was the captain of the warriors:

‘Erst,’ she said, ‘this was counted as a wonder; but now we are so few
that it is no wonder though the women will do whatsoever they may.’

So they talked, and Gold-mane was very happy; but ere the good-night cup
was drunk, Folk-might spake to Face-of-god and said:

‘It were well that ye rose betimes in the morning: but thou shalt not go
back by the way thou camest.  Wood-wise and another shall go with thee,
and show thee a way across the necks and the heaths, which is rough
enough as far as toil goes, but where thy life shall be safer; and
thereby shalt thou hit the ghyll of the Weltering Water, and so come down
safely into Burgdale.  Now that we are friends and fellows, it is no hurt
for thee to know the shortest way to Shadowy Vale.  What thou shalt tell
concerning us in Burgdale I leave the tale thereof to thee; yet belike
thou wilt not tell everything till I come to Burgstead at the spring
market-tide.  Now must I presently to bed; for before daylight to-morrow
must I be following the hunt along with two score good men of ours.’

‘What beast is afield then?’ said Gold-mane.

Said Folk-might: ‘The beasts that beset our lives, the Dusky Men.  In
these days we have learned how to find companies of them; and forsooth
every week they draw nigher to this Dale; and some day they should happen
upon us if we were not to look to it, and then would there be a murder
great and grim; therefore we scour the heaths round about, and the skirts
of the woodland, and we fall upon these felons in divers guises, so that
they may not know us for the same men; whiles are we clad in homespun, as
to-day, and seem like to field-working carles; whiles in scarlet and
gold, like knights of the Westland; whiles in wolf-skins; whiles in white
glittering gear, like the Wights of the Waste: and in all guises these
felons, for all their fierce hearts, fear us, and flee from us, and we
follow and slay them, and so minish their numbers somewhat against the
great day of battle.’

‘Tell me,’ said Gold-mane; ‘when we fall upon Silver-dale shall their
thralls, the old Dale-dwellers, fight for them or for us?’

Said Folk-might: ‘The Dusky Men will not dare to put weapons into the
hands of their thralls.  Nay, the thralls shall help us; for though they
have but small stomach for the fight, yet joyfully when the fight is over
shall they cut their masters’ throats.’

‘How is it with these thralls?’ said Gold-mane.  ‘I have never seen a
thrall.’

‘But I,’ said Folk-might, ‘have seen a many down in the Cities.  And
there were thralls who were the tyrants of thralls, and held the whip
over them; and of the others there were some who were not very hardly
entreated.  But with these it is otherwise, and they all bear grievous
pains daily; for the Dusky Men are as hogs in a garden of lilies.
Whatsoever is fair there have they defiled and deflowered, and they
wallow in our fair halls as swine strayed from the dunghill.  No delight
in life, no sweet days do they have for themselves, and they begrudge the
delight of others therein.  Therefore their thralls know no rest or
solace; their reward of toil is many stripes, and the healing of their
stripes grievous toil.  To many have they appointed to dig and mine in
the silver-yielding cliffs, and of all the tasks is that the sorest, and
there do stripes abound the most.  Such thralls art thou happy not to
behold till thou hast set them free; as we shall do.’

‘Tell me again,’ said Face-of-god; ‘Is there no mixed folk between these
Dusky Men and the Dalesmen, since they have no women of their own, but
lie with the women of the Dale?  Moreover, do not the poor folk of the
Dale beget and bear children, so that there are thralls born of thralls?’

‘Wisely thou askest this,’ said Folk-might, ‘but thereof shall I tell
thee, that when a Dusky Carle mingles with a woman of the Dale, the child
which she beareth shall oftenest favour his race and not hers; or else
shall it be witless, a fool natural.  But as for the children of these
poor thralls; yea, the masters cause them to breed if so their
masterships will, and when the children are born, they keep them or slay
them as they will, as they would with whelps or calves.  To be short,
year by year these vile wretches grow fiercer and more beastly, and their
thralls more hapless and down-trodden; and now at last is come the time
either to do or to die, as ye men of Burgdale shall speedily find out.
But now must I go sleep if I am to be where I look to be at sunrise
to-morrow.’

Therewith he called for the sleeping-cup, and it was drunk, and all men
fared to bed.  But the Sun-beam took Gold-mane’s hand ere they parted,
and said:

‘I shall arise betimes on the morrow; so I say not farewell to-night;
yea, and after to-morrow it shall not be long ere we meet again.’

So Gold-mane lay down in that ancient hall, and it seemed to him ere he
slept as if his own kindred were slipping away from him and he were
becoming a child of the Wolf.  ‘And yet,’ said he to himself, ‘I am
become a man; for my Friend, now she no longer telleth me to do or
forbear, and I tremble.  Nay, rather she is fain to take the word from
me; and this great warrior and ripe man, he talketh with me as if I were
a chieftain meet for converse with chieftains.  Even so it is and shall
be.’

And soon thereafter he fell asleep in the Hall in Shadowy Vale.




CHAPTER XXI.  FACE-OF-GOD LOOKETH ON THE DUSKY MEN.


WHEN he awoke again he saw a man standing over him, and knew him for
Wood-wise: he was clad in his war-gear, and had his quiver at his back
and his bow in his hand, for Wood-father’s children were all good bowmen,
though not so sure as Bow-may.  He spake to Face-of-god:

‘Dawn is in the sky, Dalesman; there is yet time for thee to wash the
night off of thee in our bath of the Shivering Flood and to put thy mouth
to the milk-bowl; but time for nought else: for I and Bow-may are
appointed thy fellows for the road, and it were well that we were back
home speedily.’

So Face-of-god leapt up and went forth from the Hall, and Wood-wise led
to where was a pool in the river with steps cut down to it in the rocky
bank.

‘This,’ said Wood-wise, ‘is the Carle’s Bath; but the Queen’s is lower
down, where the water is wider and shallower below the little mid-dale
force.’

So Gold-mane stripped off his raiment and leapt into the ice-cold pool;
and they had brought his weapons and war-gear with them; so when he came
out he clad and armed himself for the road, and then turned with
Wood-wise toward the outgate of the Dale; and soon they saw two men
coming from lower down the water in such wise that they would presently
cross their path, and as yet it was little more than twilight, so that
they saw not at first who they were, but as they drew nearer they knew
them for the Sun-beam and Bow-may.  The Sun-beam was clad but in her
white linen smock and blue gown as he had first seen her, her hair was
wet and dripping with the river, her face fresh and rosy: she carried in
her two hands a great bowl of milk, and stepped delicately, lest she
should spill it.  But Bow-may was clad in her war-gear with helm and
byrny, and a quiver at her back, and a bended bow in her hand.  So they
greeted each other kindly, and the Sun-beam gave the bowl to Face-of-god
and said:

‘Drink, guest, for thou hast a long and thirsty road before thee.’

So Face-of-god drank, and gave her the bowl back again, and she smiled on
him and drank, and the others after her till the bowl was empty: then
Bow-may put her hand on Wood-wise’s shoulder, and they led on toward the
outgate, while those twain followed them hand in hand.  But the Sun-beam
said:

‘This then is the new day I spoke of, and lo! it bringeth our sundering
with it; yet shall it be no longer than a day when all is said, and new
days shall follow after.  And now, my friend, I shall see thee no later
than the April market; for doubt not that I shall go thither with
Folk-might, whether he will or not.  Also as I led thee out of the house
when we last met, so shall I lead thee out of the Dale to-day, and I will
go with thee a little way on the waste; and therefore am I shod this
morning, as thou seest, for the ways on the waste are rough.  And now I
bid thee have courage while my hand holdeth thine.  For afterwards I need
not bid thee anything; for thou wilt have enough to do when thou comest
to thy Folk, and must needs think more of warriors then than of maidens.’

He looked at her and longed for her, but said soberly: ‘Thou art kind, O
friend, and thinkest kindly of me ever.  But methinks it were not well
done for thee to wend with me over a deal of the waste, and come back by
thyself alone, when ye have so many foemen nearby.’

‘Nay,’ she said, ‘they be nought so near as that yet, and I wot that
Folk-might hath gone forth toward the north-west, where he looketh to
fall in with a company of the foemen.  His battle shall be a guard unto
us.’

‘I pray thee turn back at the top of the outgate,’ said he, ‘and be not
venturesome.  Thou wottest that the pitcher is not broken the first time
it goeth to the well, nor maybe the twentieth, but at last it cometh not
back.’

She said: ‘Nevertheless I shall have my will herein.  And it is but a
little way I will wend with thee.’

Therewith were they come to the scree, and talk fell down between them as
they clomb it; but when they were in the darksome passage of the rocks,
and could scarce see one another, Face-of-god said:

‘Where then is another outgate from the Dale?  Is it not up the water?’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘and there is none other: at the lower end the rocks
rise sheer from out the water, and a little further down is a great force
thundering betwixt them; so that by no boat or raft may ye come out of
the Dale.  But the outgate up the water is called the Road of War, as
this is named the Path of Peace.  But now are all ways ways of war.’

‘There is peace in my heart,’ said Gold-mane.

She answered not for a while, but pressed his hand, and he felt her
breath on his cheek; and even therewithal they came out of the dark, and
Gold-mane saw that her cheek was flushed; and now she spake:

‘One thing would I say to thee, my friend.  Thou hast seen me amongst men
of war, amongst outlaws who seek violence; thou hast heard me bid my
brother to count the slain, and I shrinking not; thou knowest (for I have
told thee) how I have schemed and schemed for victorious battle.  Yet I
would not have thee think of me as a Chooser of the Slain, a warrior
maiden, or as of one who hath no joy save in the battle whereto she
biddeth others.  O friend, the many peaceful hours that I have had on the
grass down yonder, sitting with my rock and spindle in hand, the children
round about my knees hearkening to some old story so well remembered by
me! or the milking of the kine in the dewy summer even, when all was
still but for the voice of the water and the cries of the happy children,
and there round about me were the dear and beauteous maidens with whom I
had grown up, happy amidst all our troubles, since their life was free
and they knew no guile.  In such times my heart was at peace indeed, and
it seemed to me as if we had won all we needed; as if war and turmoil
were over, after they had brought about peace and good days for our
little folk.

‘And as for the days that be, are they not as that rugged pass, full of
bitter winds and the voice of hurrying waters, that leadeth yonder to
Silver-dale, as thou hast divined? and there is nought good in it save
that the breath of life is therein, and that it leadeth to pleasant
places and the peace and plenty of the fair dale.’

‘Sweet friend,’ he said, ‘what thou sayest is better than well: for time
shall be, if we come alive out of this pass of battle and bitter strife,
when I shall lead thee into Burgdale to dwell there.  And thou wottest of
our people that there is little strife and grudging amongst them, and
that they are merry, and fair to look on, both men and women; and no man
there lacketh what the earth may give us, and it is a saying amongst us
that there may a man have that which he desireth save the sun and moon in
his hands to play with: and of this gladness, which is made up of many
little matters, what story may be told?  Yet amongst it shall I live and
thou with me; and ill indeed it were if it wearied thee and thou wert
ever longing for some day of victorious strife, and to behold me coming
back from battle high-raised on the shields of men and crowned with bay;
if thine ears must ever be tickled with the talk of men and their songs
concerning my warrior deeds.  For thus it shall not be.  When I drive the
herds it shall be at the neighbours’ bidding whereso they will; not necks
of men shall I smite, but the stalks of the tall wheat, and the boles of
the timber-trees which the woodreeve hath marked for felling; the stilts
of the plough rather than the hilts of the sword shall harden my hands;
my shafts shall be for the deer, and my spears for the wood-boar, till
war and sorrow fall upon us, and I fight for the ceasing of war and
trouble.  And though I be called a chief and of the blood of chiefs, yet
shall I not be masterful to the goodman of the Dale, but rather to my
hound; for my chieftainship shall be that I shall be well beloved and
trusted, and that no man shall grudge against me.  Canst thou learn to
love such a life, which to me seemeth lovely?  And thou? of whom I say
that thou art as if thou wert come down from the golden chairs of the
Burg of the Gods.’

They were well-nigh out of the steep path by now, and the daylight was
bright about them; there she stayed her feet a moment and turned to him
and said:

‘All this should I love even now, if the grief of our Folk were but
healed, and hereafter shall I learn yet more of thy well-beloved face.’

Therewith she laid her face to his and kissed him fondly, and put his
hand to her side and held it there, saying: ‘Soon shall we be one in body
and in soul.’

And he laughed with joy and pride of life, and took her hand and led her
on again, and said:

‘Yet feel the cold rings of my hauberk, my friend; look at the spears
that cumber my hand, and at Dale-warden hanging by my side.  Thou shalt
yet see me as the Slain’s Chooser would see her speech-friend; for there
is much to do ere we win wheat-harvest in Burgdale.’

Therewith they stepped together on to the level ground of the waste, and
saw Bow-may sitting on a stone hard by, and Wood-wise standing beside her
bending his bow.  Bow-may smiled on Gold-mane and rose up, and they all
went on together, turning so that they went nearly alongside the wall of
the Vale, but westering a little; then the Sun-beam said:

‘Many a time have I trodden this heath alongside our rock-wall; for if ye
wend a little further as our faces are turned, ye come to the crags over
the place where the Shivering Flood goeth out of Shadowy Vale.  There
when ye have clomb a little may’st thou stand on the edge of the
rock-wall, and look down and behold the Flood swirling and eddying in the
black gorge of the rocks, and see presently the reek of the force go up,
and hear the thunder of the waters as they pour over it: and all this
about us now is as the garden of our house—is it not so, Bow-may?’

‘Yea,’ said she, ‘and there are goodly cluster-berries to be gotten
hereabout in the autumn; many a time have the Sun-beam and I reddened our
lips with them.  Yet is it best to be wary when war is abroad and hot
withal.’

‘Yea,’ said the Sun-beam, ‘and all this place comes into the story of our
House: lo!  Gold-mane, two score paces before us a little on our right
hand those five grey stones.  They are called the Rocks of the Elders:
for there in the first days of our abiding in Shadowy Vale the Elders
were wont to come together to talk privily upon our matters.’

Face-of-god looked thither as she spoke, but therewith saw Bow-may, who
went on the left hand of the Sun-beam, as Face-of-god on her right hand,
notch a shaft on her bent bow, and Wood-wise, who was on his right hand,
saw it also and did the like, and therewithal Face-of-god got his target
on to his arm, and even as he did so Bow-may cried out suddenly:

‘Yea, yea!  Cast thyself on to the ground, Sun-beam!  Gold-mane, targe
and spear, targe and spear!  For I see steel gleaming yonder out from
behind the Elders’ Rocks.’

Scarce were the words out of her mouth ere three shafts came flying, and
the bow-strings twanged.  Gold-mane felt that one smote his helm and
glanced from it.  Therewithal he saw the Sun-beam fall to earth, though
he knew not if she had but cast herself down as Bow-may bade.  Bow-may’s
string twanged at once, and a yell came from the foemen: but Wood-wise
loosed not, but set his hand to his mouth and gave a loud wild cry—Ha!
ha! ha! ha!  How-ow-ow!—ending in a long and exceeding great whoop like
nought but the wolf’s howl.  Now Gold-mane thinking swiftly, in a moment
of time, as war-meet men do, judged that if the Sun-beam were hurt (and
she had made no cry), it were yet wiser to fall on the foe before turning
to tend her, or else all might be lost; so he rushed forward spear in
hand and target on arm, and saw, as he opened up the flank of the Elders’
Rocks, six men, whereof one leaned aback on the rock with Bow-may’s shaft
in his shoulder, and two others were just in act of loosing at him.  In a
moment, as he rushed at them, one shaft went whistling by him, and the
other glanced from off his target; he cast a spear as he bounded on, and
saw it smite one of the shooters full in the naked face, and saw the
blood spout out and change his face and the man roll over, and then in
another moment four men were hewing at him with their short steel axes.
He thrust out his target against them, and then let the weight of his
body come on his other spear, and drave it through the second shooter’s
throat, and even therewith was smitten on the helm so hard that, though
the Alderman’s work held out, he fell to his knees, holding his target
over his head and striving to draw forth Dale-warden; in that nick of
time a shaft whistled close by his ear, and as he rose to his feet again
he saw his foeman rolling over and over, clutching at the ling with both
hands.  Then rang out again the terrible wolf-whoop from Wood-wise’s
mouth, and both he and Bow-may loosed a shaft, for the two other foes had
turned their backs and were fleeing fast.  Again Bow-may hit the clout,
and the Dusky Man fell dead at once, but Wood-wise’s arrow flew over the
felon’s shoulder as he ran.  Then in a trice was Gold-mane bounding after
him like the hare just roused from her form; for it came into his head
that these felons had beheld them coming up out of the Vale, and that if
even this one man escaped, he would bring his company down upon the
Vale-dwellers.

Strong and light-foot as any was Face-of-god, and though he was cumbered
with his hauberk, yet was Iron-face’s handiwork far lighter than the
war-coat of the Dusky Man, and the race was soon over.  The felon turned
breathless to meet Gold-mane, who drave his target against him and cast
him to earth, and as he strove to rise smote off his head at one stroke;
for Dale-warden was a good sword and the Dalesman as fierce of mood as
might be.  There he let the felon lie, and, turning, walked back swiftly
toward the Elders’ Rocks, and found there Wood-wise and the dead foemen,
for the carle had slain the wounded, and he was now drawing the silver
arm-rings off the slain men; for all these Dusky Felons bore silver
arm-rings.  But Bow-may was walking towards the Sun-beam, and thitherward
followed Gold-mane speedily.

He found her sitting on a tussock of grass close by where she had fallen,
her face pale, her eyes eager and gleaming; she looked up at him as he
drew nigher and said:

‘Friend, art thou hurt?’

‘Nay,’ he said, ‘and thou?  Thou art pale.’

‘I am not hurt,’ she said.  Then she smiled and said again:

‘Did I not tell thee that I am no warrior like Bow-may here?  Such deeds
make maidens pale.’

Said Bow-may: ‘If ye will have the truth, Gold-mane, she is not wont to
grow pale when battle is nigh her.  Look you, she hath had the gift of a
new delight, and findeth it sweeter and softer than she had any thought
of; and now hath she feared lest it should be taken from her.’

‘Bow-may saith but the sooth,’ said the Sun-beam simply, ‘and kind it is
of her to say it.  I saw thee, Bow-may, and good was thy shooting, and I
love thee for it.’

Said Bow-may: ‘I never shoot otherwise than well.  But those idle
shooters of the Dusky Ones, whereabouts nigh to thee went their shafts?’

Said the Sun-beam: ‘One just lifted the hair by my left ear, and that was
not so ill-aimed; as for the other, it pierced my raiment by my right
knee, and pinned me to the earth, so that I tottered and fell, and my
gown and smock are grievously wounded, both of them.’

And she took the folds of the garments in her hands to show the rents
therein; and her colour was come again, and she was glad.

‘What were best to do now?’ she said.

Said Face-of-god: ‘Let us tarry a little; for some of thy carles shall
surely come up from the Vale: because they will have heard Wood-wise’s
whoop, since the wind sets that way.’

‘Yea, they will come,’ said the Sun-beam.

‘Good is that,’ said Face-of-god; ‘for they shall take the dead felons
and cast them where they be not seen if perchance any more stray hereby.
For if they wind them, they may well happen on the path down to the Vale.
Also, my friend, it were well if thou wert to bid a good few of the
carles that are in the Vale to keep watch and ward about here, lest there
be more foemen wandering about the waste.’

She said: ‘Thou art wise in war, Gold-mane; I will do as thou biddest me.
But soothly this is a perilous thing that the Dusky Men are gotten so
close to the Vale.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘This will Folk-might look to when he cometh home; and
it is most like that he will deem it good to fall on them somewhere a
good way aloof, so as to draw them off from wandering over the waste.
Also I will do my best to busy them when I am home in Burgdale.’

Therewith came up Wood-wise, and fell to talk with them; and his mind it
was that these foemen were but a band of strayers, and had had no inkling
of Shadowy Vale till they had heard them talking together as they came up
the path from the Vale, and that then they had made that ambush behind
the Elders’ Rocks, so that they might slay the men, and then bear off the
woman.  He said withal that it would be best to carry their corpses
further on, so that they might be cast over the cliffs into the fierce
stream of the Shivering Flood.

Amidst this talk came up men from the Vale, a score of them, well armed;
and they ran to meet the wayfarers; and when they heard what had
befallen, they rejoiced exceedingly, and were above all glad that
Face-of-god had shown himself doughty and deft; and they deemed his rede
wise, to set a watch thereabouts till Folk-might came home, and said that
they would do even so.

Then spake the Sun-beam and said:

‘Now must ye wayfarers depart; for the road is but rough, and the day not
over-long.’

Then she turned to Face-of-god and put her hand on his shoulder, and
brought her face close to his and spake to him softly:

‘Doth this second parting seem at all strange to thee, and that I am now
so familiar to thee, I whom thou didst once deem to be a very goddess?
And now thou hast seen me redden before thine eyes because of thee; and
thou hast seen me grow pale with fear because of thee; and thou hast felt
my caresses which I might not refrain; even as if I were altogether such
a maiden as ye warriors hang about for a nine days’ wonder, and then all
is over save an aching heart—wilt thou do so with me?  Tell me, have I
not belittled myself before thee as if I asked thee to scorn me?  For
thus desire dealeth both with maid and man.’

He said: ‘In all this there is but one thing for me to say, and that is
that I love thee; and surely none the less, but rather the more, because
thou lovest me, and art of my kind, and mayest share in my deeds and
think well of them.  Now is my heart full of joy, and one thing only
weigheth on it; and that is that my kinswoman the Bride begrudgeth our
love together.  For this is the thing that of all things most misliketh
me, that any should bear a grudge against me.’

She said: ‘Forget not the token, and my message to her.’

‘I will not forget it,’ said he.  ‘And now I bid thee to kiss me even
before all these that are looking on; for there is nought to belittle us
therein, since we be troth-plight.’

And indeed those folk stood all round about them gazing on them, but a
little aloof, that they might not hear their words if they were minded to
talk privily.  For they had long loved the Sun-beam, and now the love of
Face-of-god had begun to spring up in their hearts.

So the twain embraced and kissed one another, and made no haste
thereover; and those men deemed that but meet and right, and clashed
their weapons on their shields in token of their joy.

Then Face-of-god turned about and strode out of the ring of men, with
Bow-may and Wood-wise beside him, and they went on their journey over the
necks towards Burgstead.  But the Sun-beam turned slowly from that place
toward the Vale, and two of the stoutest carles went along with her to
guard her from harm, and she went down into the Vale pondering all these
things in her heart.

Then the other carles dragged off the corpses of the Dusky Men till they
had brought them to the sheer rocks above the Shivering Flood, and there
they tossed them over into the boiling caldron of the force, and so
departed taking with them the silver arm-rings of the slain to add to the
tale.

But when they came back into the Vale the Sun-beam duly ordered that
watch and ward to keep the ingate thereto, and note all that should
befall till Folk-might came home.




CHAPTER XXII.  FACE-OF-GOD COMETH HOME TO BURGSTEAD.


BUT Face-of-god with Bow-may and Wood-wise fared over the waste, going at
first alongside the cliffs of the Shivering Flood, and then afterwards
turning somewhat to the west.  They soon had to climb a very high and
steep bent going up to a mountain-neck; and the way over the neck was
rough indeed when they were on it, and they toiled out of it into a
barren valley, and out of the valley again on to a rough neck; and
such-like their journey the day long, for they were going athwart all
those great dykes that went from the ice-mountains toward the lower dales
like the outspread fingers of a hand or the roots of a great tree.  And
the ice-mountains they had on their left hands and whiles at their backs.

They went very warily, with their bows bended and spear in hand, but saw
no man, good or bad, and but few living things.  At noon they rested in a
valley where was a stream, but no grass, nought but stones and sand; but
where they were at least sheltered from the wind, which was mostly very
great in these high wastes; and there Bow-may drew meat and wine from a
wallet she bore, and they ate and drank, and were merry enough; and
Bow-may said:

‘I would I were going all the way with thee, Gold-mane; for I long sore
to let my eyes rest a while on the land where I shall one day live.’

‘Yea,’ said Face-of-god, ‘art thou minded to dwell there?  We shall be
glad of that.’

‘Whither are thy wits straying?’ said she; ‘whether I am minded to it or
not, I shall dwell there.’

And Wood-wise nodded a yea to her.  But Face-of-god said:

‘Good will be thy dwelling; but wherefore must it be so?’

Then Wood-wise laughed and said: ‘I shall tell thee in fewer words than
she will, and time presses now: Wood-father and Wood-mother, and I and my
two brethren and this woman have ever been about and anigh the Sun-beam;
and we deem that war and other troubles have made us of closer kin to her
than we were born, whether ye call it brotherhood or what not, and never
shall we sunder from her in life or in death.  So when thou goest to
Burgdale with her, there shall we be.’

Then was Face-of-god glad when he found that they deemed his wedding so
settled and sure; but Wood-wise fell to making ready for the road.  And
Face-of-god said to him:

‘Tell me one thing, Wood-wise; that whoop that thou gavest forth when we
were at handy-strokes e’en now—is it but a cry of thine own or is it of
thy Folk, and shall I hear it again?’

‘Thou may’st look to hear it many a time,’ said Wood-wise, ‘for it is the
cry of the Wolf.  Seldom indeed hath battle been joined where men of our
blood are, but that cry is given forth.  Come now, to the road!’

So they went their ways and the road worsened upon them, and toilsome was
the climbing up steep bents and the scaling of doubtful paths in the
cliff-sides, so that the journey, though the distance of it were not so
long to the fowl flying, was much eked out for them, and it was not till
near nightfall that they came on the ghyll of the Weltering Water some
six miles above Burgstead.  Forsooth Wood-wise said that the way might be
made less toilsome though far longer by turning back eastward a little
past the vale where they had rested at midday; and that seemed good to
Gold-mane, in case they should be wending hereafter in a great company
between Burgdale and Shadowy Vale.

But now those two went with Face-of-god down a path in the side of the
cliff whereby him-seemed he had gone before; and they came down into the
ghyll and sat down together on a stone by the water-side, and Face-of-god
spake to them kindly, for he deemed them good and trusty faring-fellows.

‘Bow-may,’ said he, ‘thou saidst a while ago that thou wouldst be fain to
look on Burgdale; and indeed it is fair and lovely, and ye may soon be in
it if ye will.  Ye shall both be more than welcome to the house of my
father, and heartily I bid you thither.  For night is on us, and the way
back is long and toilsome and beset with peril.  Sister Bow-may, thou
wottest that it would be a sore grief to me if thou camest to any harm,
and thou also, fellow Wood-wise.  Daylight is a good faring-fellow over
the waste.’

Said Bow-may: ‘Thou art kind, Gold-mane, and that is thy wont, I know;
and fain were I to-night of the candles in thine hall.  But we may not
tarry; for thou wottest how busy we be at home; and Sun-beam needeth me,
if it were only to make her sure that no Dusky Man is bearing off thine
head by its lovely locks.  Neither shall we journey in the mirk night;
for look you, the moon yonder.’

‘Well,’ said Face-of-god, ‘parting is ill at the best, and I would I
could give you twain a gift, and especially to thee, my sister Bow-may.’

Said Wood-wise: ‘Thou may’st well do that; or at least promise the gift;
and that is all one as if we held it in our hands.’

‘Yea,’ said Bow-may, ‘Wood-wise and I have been thinking in one way
belike; and I was at point to ask a gift of thee.’

‘What is it?’ said Gold-mane.  ‘Surely it is thine, if it were but a
guerdon for thy good shooting.’

She laughed and handled the skirts of his hauberk as she said:

‘Show us the dint in thine helm that the steel axe made this morning.’

‘There is no such great dint,’ said he; ‘my father forged that helm, and
his work is better than good.’

‘Yea,’ said Bow-may, ‘and might I have hauberk and helm of his handiwork,
and Wood-wise a good sword of the same, then were I a glad woman, and
this man a happy carle.’

Said Gold-mane: ‘I am well pleased at thine asking, and so shall
Iron-face be when he heareth of thine archery; and how that Hall-face
were now his only son but for thy close shooting.  But now must I to the
way; for my heart tells me that there may have been tidings in Burgstead
this while I have been aloof.’

So they rose all three, and Bow-may said:

‘Thou art a kind brother, and soon shall we meet again; and that will be
well.’

Then he put his hands on her shoulders and kissed both her cheeks; and he
kissed Wood-wise, and turned and went his ways, threading the stony
tangle about the Weltering Water, which was now at middle height, and
running clear and strong; so turning once he beheld Wood-wise and Bow-may
climbing the path up the side of the ghyll, and Bow-may turned to him
also and waved her bow as token of farewell.  Then he went upon his way,
which was rough enough to follow by night, though the moon was shining
brightly high aloft.  Yet as he knew his road he made but little of it
all, and in somewhat more than an hour and a half was come out of the
pass into the broken ground at the head of the Dale, and began to make
his way speedily under the bright moonlight toward the Gate, still going
close by the water.  But as he went he heard of a sudden cries and rumour
not far from him, unwonted in that place, where none dwelt, and where the
only folk he might look to see were those who cast an angle into the
pools and eddies of the Water.  Moreover, he saw about the place whence
came the cries torches moving swiftly hither and thither; so that he
looked to hear of new tidings, and stayed his feet and looked keenly
about him on every side; and just then, between his rough path and the
shimmer of the dancing moonlit water, he saw the moon smite on something
gleaming; so, as quietly as he could, he got his target on his arm, and
shortened his spear in his right hand, and then turned sharply toward
that gleam.  Even therewith up sprang a man on his right hand, and then
another in front of him just betwixt him and the water; an axe gleamed
bright in the moon, and he caught a great stroke on his target, and
therewith drave his left shoulder straight forward, so that the man
before him fell over into the water with a mighty splash; for they were
at the very edge of the deepest eddy of the Water.  Then he spun round on
his heel, heeding not that another stroke had fallen on his right
shoulder, yet ill-aimed, and not with the full edge, so that it ran down
his byrny and rent it not.  So he sent the thrust of his spear crashing
through the face and skull of the smiter, and looked not to him as he
fell, but stood still, brandishing his spear and crying out, ‘For the
Burg and the Face!  For the Burg and the Face!’

No other foe came against him, but like to the echo of his cry rose a
clear shout not far aloof, ‘For the Face, for the Face!  For the Burg and
the Face!’  He muttered, ‘So ends the day as it begun,’ and shouted loud
again, ‘For the Burg and the Face!’  And in a minute more came breaking
forth from the stone-heaps into the moonlit space before the water the
tall shapes of the men of Burgstead, the red torchlight and the moonlight
flashing back from their war-gear and weapons; for every man had his
sword or spear in hand.

Hall-face was the first of them, and he threw his arms about his brother
and said: ‘Well met, Gold-mane, though thou comest amongst us like
Stone-fist of the Mountain.  Art thou hurt?  With whom hast thou dealt?
Where be they?  Whence comest thou?’

‘Nay, I am not hurt,’ said Face-of-god.  ‘Stint thy questions then, till
thou hast told me whom thou seekest with spear and sword and candle.’

‘Two felons were they,’ said Hall-face, ‘even such as ye saw lying dead
at Wood-grey’s the other day.’

‘Then may ye sheathe your swords and go home,’ said Gold-mane, ‘for one
lieth at the bottom of the eddy, and the other, thy feet are well-nigh
treading on him, Hall-face.’

Then arose a rumour of praise and victory, and they brought the torches
nigh and looked at the fallen man, and found that he was stark dead; so
they even let him lie there till the morrow, and all turned about toward
the Thorp; and many looked on Face-of-god and wondered concerning him,
whence he was and what had befallen him.  Indeed, they would have asked
him thereof, but could not get at him to ask; but whoso could, went as
nigh to Hall-face and him as they might, to hearken to the talk between
the brothers.

So as they went along Hall-face did verily ask him whence he came: ‘For
was it not so,’ said he, ‘that thou didst enter into the wood seeking
some adventure early in the morning the day before yesterday?’

‘Sooth is that,’ said Face-of-god, ‘and I came to Shadowy Vale, and
thence am I come this morning.’

Said Hall-face: ‘I know not Shadowy Vale, nor doth any of us.  This is a
new word.  How say ye, friends, doth any man here know of Shadowy Vale?’

They all said, ‘Nay.’

Then said Hall-face: ‘Hast thou been amongst mere ghosts and marvels,
brother, or cometh this tale of thy minstrelsy?’

‘For all your words,’ said Gold-mane, ‘to that Vale have I been; and, to
speak shortly (for I desire to have your tale, and am waiting for it), I
will tell thee that I found there no marvels or strange wights, but a
folk of valiant men; a folk small in numbers, but great of heart; a folk
come, as we be, from the Fathers and the Gods.  And this, moreover, is to
be said of them, that they are the foes of these felons of whom ye were
chasing these twain.  And these same Dusky Men of Silver-dale would slay
them every man if they might; and if we look not to it they will soon be
doing the same by us; for they are many, and as venomous as adders, as
fierce as bears, and as foul as swine.  But these valiant men, who bear
on their banner the image of the Wolf, should be our fellows in arms, and
they have good will thereto; and they shall show us the way to
Silver-dale by blind paths, so that we may fall upon these felons while
they dwell there tormenting the poor people of the land, and thus may we
destroy them as lads a hornet’s nest.  Or else the days shall be hard for
us.’

The men who hung about them drank in his words greedily.  But Hall-face
was silent a little while, and then he said: ‘Brother Gold-mane, these be
great tidings.  Time was when we might have deemed them but a minstrel’s
tale; for Silver-dale we know not, of which thou speakest so glibly, nor
the Dusky Men, any more than the Shadowy Vale.  Howbeit, things have
befallen these two last days so strange and new, that putting them
together with the murder at Wood-grey’s, and thy words which seem
somewhat wild, it may well seem to us that tidings unlooked for are
coming our way.’

‘Come, then,’ said Face-of-god, ‘give me what thou hast in thy scrip, and
trust me, I shall not jeer at thy tale.’

Said Hall-face: ‘I also will be short with the tale; and that the more,
as meseemeth it is not yet done, and that thou thyself shalt share in the
ending of it.  It was the day before yesterday, that is the day when thou
departedst into the woods on that adventure whereof thou shalt one day
tell me more, wilt thou not?’

‘Yea, in good time,’ said Face-of-god.

‘Well,’ quoth Hall-face, ‘we went into the woods that day and in the
morning, but after sunrise, to the number of a score: we looked to meet a
bear and a she-bear with cubs in a certain place; for one of the
Woodlanders, a keen hunter, had told us of their lair.  Also we were
wishful to slay some of the wild-swine, the yearlings, if we might.
Therefore, though we had no helms or shields or coats of fence, we had
bowshot a plenty, and good store of casting-weapons, besides our
wood-knives and an axe or so; and some of us, of whom I was one, bore our
battle-swords, as we are wont ever to do, be the foe beast or man.

‘Thus armed we went up Wildlake’s Way and came to Carlstead, where
half-a-score Woodlanders joined themselves to us, so that we became a
band.  We went up the half-cleared places past Carlstead for a mile, and
then turned east into the wood, and went I know not how far, for the
Woodlanders led us by crooked paths, but two hours wore away in our
going, till we came to the place where they looked to find the bears.  It
is a place that may well be noted, for it is unlike the wood round about.
There is a close thicket some two furlongs about of thorn and briar and
ill-grown ash and oak and other trees, planted by the birds belike; and
it stands as it were in an island amidst of a wide-spreading woodlawn of
fine turf, set about in the most goodly fashion with great tall
straight-boled oak-trees, that seem to have been planted of set purpose
by man’s hand.  Yea, dost thou know the place?’

‘Methinks I do,’ said Gold-mane, ‘and I seem to have heard the
Woodlanders give it a name and call it Boars-bait.’

‘That may be,’ said Hall-face.  ‘Well, there we were, the dogs and the
men, and we drew nigh the thicket and beset it, and doubted not to find
prey therein: but when we would set the dogs at the thicket to enter it,
they were uneasy, and would not take up the slot, but growled and turned
about this way and that, so that we deemed that they winded some fierce
beast at our flanks or backs.

‘Even so it was, and fierce enough and deadly was the beast; for suddenly
we heard bow-strings twang, and shafts came flying; and Iron-shield of
the Upper Dale, who was close beside me, leapt up into the air and fell
down dead with an arrow through his back.  Then I bethought me in the
twinkling of an eye, and I cried out, “The foe are on us! take the cover
of the tree-boles and be wary!  For the Burg and the Face!  For the Burg
and the Face!”

‘So we scattered and covered ourselves with the oak-boles, but besides
Iron-shield, who was slain outright, two goodmen were sorely hurt, to wit
Bald-face, a man of our house, and Stonyford of the Lower Dale.

‘I looked from behind my tree-bole, a great one; and far off down the
glades I saw men moving, clad in gay raiment; but nearer to me, not a
hundred yards from my cover, I saw an arm clad in scarlet come out from
behind a tree-bole, so I loosed at it, and missed not; for straight there
tottered out from behind the tree one of those dusky foul-favoured men
like to those that were slain by Wood-grey.  I had another shaft ready
notched, so I loosed and set the shaft in his throat, and he fell.

‘Straightway was a yelling and howling about us like the cries of scalded
curs, and the oak-wood swarmed thick with these felons rushing on us; for
it seems that the man whom I had slain was a chief amongst them, or we
judged so by his goodly raiment.

‘Methought then our last day was come.  What could we do but run together
again after we had loosed at a venture, and so withstand them sword and
spear in hand?  Some fell beneath our shot, but not many, for they came
on very swiftly.

‘So they fell on us; but for all their fierceness and their numbers they
might not break our array, and we slew four and hurt many by sword-hewing
and spear-casting and push of spear; and five of us were hurt and one
slain by their dart-casting.  So they drew off from us a little, and
strove to spread out and fall to shooting at us again; but this we would
not suffer, but pushed on as they fell back, keeping as close together as
we might for the trees.  For we said that we would all die together if
needs must; and verily the stour was hard.

‘Yet hearken!  In that nick of time rose up a strange cry not far from
us, Ha! ha! ha! ha!  How-ow-ow! ending like the howl of a wolf, and then
another and another and another, till the whole wood rang again.

‘At first we deemed that here were come fresh foemen, and that we were
undone indeed; but when they heard it, the foe-men before us faltered and
gave way, and at last turned their backs and fled, and we followed,
keeping well together still: thereby the more part of these men escaped
us, for they fled wildly here and there from those who bore that cry with
them; so we knew that our work was being done for us; therefore we stood,
and saw tall men clad in sheep-brown weed running through the glades
pursuing those felons and smiting them down, till both fleers and
pursuers passed out of our sight like men in a dream, or as when ye roll
up a pictured cloth to lay it in the coffer.

‘But to Stone-face’s mind those brown-clad men were the Wights of the
Wood that be of the Fathers’ blood, and our very friends; and when some
of us would yet have gone forward and foregathered with them, and
followed the chase along with them, Stone-face gainsaid it, bidding us
not to run into the arms of a second death, when we had but just escaped
from the first.  Sooth to say, moreover, we had divers hurt men that
needed looking to.

‘So what with one thing, what with another, we turned back: but
War-cliff’s brother, a tall man, had felled two of those felons with an
oak sapling which he had torn from the thicket; but he had not slain
them, and by now they were just awakening from their swoon, and were
sitting up looking round them with fierce rolling eyes, expecting the
stroke, for Raven of Longscree was standing over them with a naked
war-sword in his hand.  But now that our blood was cool, we were loth to
slay them as they lay in our hands; so we bound them and brought them
away with us; and our own dead we carried also on such biers as we might
lightly make there, and with them three that were so grievously hurt that
they might not go afoot, these we left at Carlstead: they were Tardy the
Son of the Untamed, and Swan of Bull-meadow, both of the Lower Dale, and
a Woodlander, Undoomed to wit.  But the dead were Iron-shield aforesaid,
and Wool-sark, and the Hewer, a Woodlander.

‘So came we sadly at eventide to Burgstead with the two dead Burgdalers,
and the captive felons, and the wounded of us that might go afoot; and ye
may judge that they of Burgdale and our father deemed these tidings great
enough, and wotted not what next should befall.  Stone-face would have
had those two felons slain there and then; for no true tale could we get
out of them, nor indeed any word at all.  But the Alderman would not have
it so; and he deemed they might serve our turn as hostages if any of our
folk should be taken: for one and all we deemed, and still deem, that war
is on us and that new folk have gathered on our skirts.

‘So the captives were shut up in the red out-bower of our house; and our
father was minded that thou mightest tell us somewhat of them when thou
wert come home.  But about dusk to-day the word went that they had broken
out and gotten them weapons and fled up the Dale; and so it was.

‘But to-morrow morning will a Gate-thing be holden, and there it will be
looked for of thee that thou tell us a true tale of thy goings.  For it
is deemed, and it is my deeming especially, that thou may’st tell us more
of these men than thou hast yet told us.  Is it not so?’

‘Yea, surely,’ said Gold-mane, ‘I can make as many words as ye will about
it; yet when all is said, it will come to much the same tale as I have
already told thee.  Yet belike, if ye are minded to take up the sword to
defend you, I may tell you in what wise to lay hold on the hilts.’

‘And that is well,’ said Hall-face, ‘and no less do I look for of thee.
But lo! here are we come to the Gate of the Burg that abideth battle.’




CHAPTER XXIII.  TALK IN THE HALL OF THE HOUSE OF THE FACE.


IN sooth they were come to the very Gate of Burgstead, and the great
gates were shut, and only a wicket was open, and a half score of stout
men in all their war-gear were holding ward thereby.  They gave place to
Hall-face and his company, albeit some of the warders followed them
through the wicket that they might hear the story told.

The street was full of folk, both men and women, talking together eagerly
concerning all these tidings, and when they saw the men of the
Hue-and-cry they came thronging about them, so that they might scarce get
to the door of the House of the Face because of the press; so Hall-face
(who was a very tall man) cried out:

‘Good people, all is well! the runaways are slain, and Face-of-god is
come back with us; give place a little, that we may come into our house.’

Then the throng set up a shout, and made way a little, so that Hall-face
and Gold-mane and the others could get to the door.  And they entered
into the Hall, and saw much folk therein; and men were sitting at table,
for supper was not yet over.  But when they saw the new-comers they
mostly rose up from the board and stood silent to hear the tale, for they
had been talking many together each to each, so that the Hall was full of
confused noise.

So Hall-face again cried out: ‘Men in this hall, good is the tidings.
The runaways are slain; and it was Face-of-god who slew them as he came
back safe from the waste.’

Then they shouted for joy, and the brethren and Stone-face with them (for
he had entered with them from the street) went up on to the daïs, while
the others of the Hue-and-cry gat them seats where they might at the
endlong tables.

But when Face-of-god came up on to the daïs, there sat Iron-face looking
down on the thronged Hall with a ruddy cheerful countenance, and beside
him sat the Bride; for he had caused her to be brought thither when he
had heard of the tidings of battle.  She was daintily clad in a
flame-coloured kirtle embroidered with gold about the bosom and sleeves,
and there was a fillet of golden roses on her ruddy hair.  Her eyes shone
bright and eager, and the pommels of her cheeks were flushed and red
contrary to their wont.  Needs must Gold-mane sit by her, and when he
came close to her he knew not what to do, but he put forth his hand to
her, yet with a troubled countenance; for he feared her grief mingled
with her beauty: as for her, she wavered in her mind whether she should
forbear to touch him or not; but she saw that men about were looking at
them, and especially was Iron-face looking on her: therefore she stood up
and took Gold-mane’s hand and kissed his face as she had been wont to do,
and by then was her face as white as paper; and her anguish pierced his
heart, so that he well-nigh groaned for grief of her.  But Iron-face
looked on her and said kindly:

‘Kinswoman, thou art pale; thou hast feared for thy mate amidst all these
tidings of war, and still fearest for him.  But pluck up a heart; for the
man is a deft warrior for all his fair face, which thou lovest as a woman
should, and his hands may yet save his head.  And if he be slain, yet are
there other men of the kindred, and the earth will not be a desert to
thee even then.’

She looked at Iron-face, and the colour was come back to her face
somewhat, and she said:

‘It is true; I have feared for him; for he goeth into perilous places.
But for thee, thou art kind, and I thank thee for it.’

And therewith she kissed Iron-face and sat down in her place, and strove
to overmaster her grief, that her face might not be changed by it; for
now were thoughts of battle, and valiant hopes arising in men’s hearts;
and it seemed to her too grievous if she should mar that feast on the eve
of battle.

But Iron-face kissed and embraced his son and said: ‘Art thou late come
from the waste?  Hast thou seen new things?  We look to have a notable
tale from thee; though here also have been tidings, and it is not unlike
that we shall presently have new work on our hands.’

‘Father,’ quoth Face-of-god, ‘I deem that when thou hast heard my tale
thou wilt think no less of it than that there are valiant folk to be
holpen, poor folk to be delivered, and evil folk to be swept from off the
face of the earth.’

‘It is well, son,’ said Iron-face.  ‘I see that thy tale is long; let it
alone for to-night.  To-morrow shall we hold a Gate-thing, and then shall
we hear all that thou hast to tell.  Now eat thy meat and drink a bowl of
wine, and comfort thy troth-plight maiden.’

So Gold-mane sat down by the Bride, and ate and drank as he needs must;
but he was ill at ease and he durst not speak to her.  For, on the one
hand, he thought concerning his love for the Sun-beam, and how sweet and
good a thing it was that she should take him by the hand and lead him
into noble deeds and great fame, caressing him so softly and sweetly the
while; and, on the other hand, there sat the Bride beside him, sorrowful
and angry, begrudging all that sweetness of love, as though it were
something foul and unseemly; and heavy on him lay the weight of that
grudge, for he was a man of a friendly heart.

Stone-face sat outward from him on the other side of the Bride; and he
leaned across her towards Gold-mane and said:

‘Fair shall be thy tale to-morrow, if thou tellest us all thine
adventure.  Or wilt thou tell us less than all?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘In good time shalt thou know it all, foster-father;
but it is not unlike that by the time that thou hast heard it, there
shall be so many other things to tell of, that my tale shall seem of
little account to thee—even as the saw saith that one nail driveth out
the other.’

‘Yea,’ said Stone-face, ‘but one tale belike shall be knit up with the
others, as it fareth with the figures that come one after other on the
weaver’s cloth; though one maketh not the other, yet one cometh of the
other.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Wise art thou now, foster-father, but thou shalt be
wiser yet in this matter by then a month hath worn: and to-morrow shalt
thou know enough to set thine hands a-work.’

So the talk fell between them; and the night wore, and the men of
Burgdale feasted in their ancient hall with merry hearts, little weighed
down by thought of the battle that might be and the trouble to come; for
they were valorous and kindly folk.




CHAPTER XXIV.  FACE-OF-GOD GIVETH THAT TOKEN TO THE BRIDE.


NOW on the morrow, when Face-of-god arose and other men with him, and the
Hall was astir and there was no little throng therein, the Bride came up
to him; for she had slept in the House of the Face by the bidding of the
Alderman; and she spake to him before all men, and bade him come forth
with her into the garden, because she would speak to him apart.  He
yeasaid her, though with a heavy heart; and to the folk about that seemed
meet and due, since those twain were deemed to be troth-plight, and they
smiled kindly on them as they went out of the Hall together.

So they came into the garden, where the pear-trees were blossoming over
the spring lilies, and the cherries were showering their flowers on the
deep green grass, and everything smelled sweetly on the warm windless
spring morning.

She led the way, going before him till they came by a smooth grass path
between the berry bushes, to a square space of grass about which were
barberry trees, their first tender leaves bright green in the sun against
the dry yellowish twigs.  There was a sundial amidmost of the grass, and
betwixt the garden-boughs one could see the long grey roof of the ancient
hall; and sweet familiar sounds of the nesting birds and men and women
going on their errands were all about in the scented air.  She turned
about at the sundial and faced Face-of-god, her hand lightly laid on the
scored brass, and spake with no anger in her voice:

‘I ask thee if thou hast brought me the token whereon thou shalt swear to
give me that gift.’

‘Yea,’ said he; and therewith drew the ring from his bosom, and held it
out to her.  She reached out her hand to him slowly and took it, and
their fingers met as she did so, and he noted that her hand was warm and
firm and wholesome as he well remembered it.

She said: ‘Whence hadst thou this fair finger-ring?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘My friend there in the mountain-valley drew it from
off her finger for thee, and bade me bear thee a message.’

Her face flushed red: ‘Yea,’ she said, ‘and doth she send me a message?
Then doth she know of me, and ye have talked of me together.  Well, give
the message!’

Said Face-of-god: ‘She saith, that thou shalt bear in mind, That
to-morrow is a new day.’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘for her it is so, and for thee; but not for me.  But
now I have brought thee here that thou mightest swear thine oath to me;
lay thine hand on this ring and on this brazen plate whereby the sun
measures the hours of the day for happy folk, and swear by the
spring-tide of the year and all glad things that find a mate, and by the
God of the Earth that rejoiceth in the life of man.’

Then he laid his hand on the finger-ring as it lay on the dial-plate and
said:

‘By the spring-tide and the live things that long to multiply their kind;
by the God of the Earth that rejoiceth in the life of man, I swear to
give to my kinswoman the Bride the second man-child that I beget; to be
hers, to leave or cherish, to love or hate, as her will may bid her.’
Then he looked on her soberly and said: ‘It is duly sworn; is it enough?’

‘Yea,’ she said; but he saw how the tears ran out of her eyes and wetted
the bosom of her kirtle, and she hung her head for shame of her grief.
And Gold-mane was all abashed, and had no word to say; for he knew that
no word of his might comfort her; and he deemed it ill done to stay there
and behold her sorrow; and he knew not how to get him gone, and be glad
elsewhere, and leave her alone.

Then, as if she had read his thought, she looked up at him and said
smiling a little amidst of her tears:

‘I bid thee stay by me till the flood is over; for I have yet a word to
say to thee.’

So he stood there gazing down on the grass in his turn, and not daring to
raise his eyes to her face, and the minutes seemed long to him: till at
last she said in a voice scarcely yet clear of weeping:

‘Wilt thou say anything to me, and tell me what thou hast done, and why,
and what thou deemest will come of it?’

He said: ‘I will tell the truth as I know it, because thou askest it of
me, and not because I would excuse myself before thee.  What have I done?
Yesterday I plighted my troth to wed the woman that I met last autumn in
the wood.  And why?  I wot not why, but that I longed for her.  Yet I
must tell thee that it seemed to me, and yet seemeth, that I might do no
otherwise—that there was nothing else in the world for me to do.  What do
I deem will come of it, sayest thou?  This, that we shall be happy
together, she and I, till the day of our death.’

She said: ‘And even so long shall I be sorry: so far are we sundered now.
Alas! who looked for it?  And whither shall I turn to now?’

Said Gold-mane: ‘She bade me tell thee that to-morrow is a new day:
meseemeth I know her meaning.’

‘No word of hers hath any meaning to me,’ said the Bride.

‘Nay,’ said he, ‘but hast thou not heard these rumours of war that are in
the Dale?  Shall not these things avail thee?  Much may grow out of them;
and thou with the mighty heart, so faithful and compassionate!’

She said: ‘What sayest thou?  What may grow out of them?  Yea, I have
heard those rumours as a man sick to death heareth men talk of their
business down in the street while he lieth on his bed; and already he
hath done with it all, and hath no world to mend or mar.  For me nought
shall grow out of it.  What meanest thou?’

Said Gold-mane: ‘Is there nought in the fellowship of Folks, and the
aiding of the valiant, and the deliverance of the hapless?’

‘Nay,’ she said, ‘there is nought to me.  I cannot think of it to-day nor
yet to-morrow belike.  Yet true it is that I may mingle in it, though
thinking nought of it.  But this shall not avail me.’

She was silent a little, but presently spake and said: ‘Thou sayest
right; it is not thou that hast done this, but the woman who sent me the
ring and the message of an old saw.  O that she should be born to sunder
us!  How hath it befallen that I am now so little to thee and she so
much?’

And again she was silent; and after a while Face-of-god spake kindly and
softly and said: ‘Kinswoman, wilt thou for ever begrudge our love? this
grudge lieth heavy on my soul, and it is I alone that have to bear it.’

She said: ‘This is but a light burden for thee to bear, when thou hast
nought else to bear!  But do I begrudge thee thy love, Gold-mane?  I know
not that.  Rather meseemeth I do not believe in it—nor shall do ever.’

Then she held her peace a long while, nor did he speak one word: and they
were so still, that a robin came hopping about them, close to the hem of
her kirtle, and a starling pitched in the apple-tree hard by and whistled
and chuckled, turning about and about, heeding them nought.  Then at last
she lifted up her face from looking on the grass and said: ‘These are
idle words and avail nothing: one thing only I know, that we are
sundered.  And now it repenteth me that I have shown thee my tears and my
grief and my sickness of the earth and those that dwell thereon.  I am
ashamed of it, as if thou hadst smitten me, and I had come and shown thee
the stripes, and said, See what thou hast done! hast thou no pity?  Yea,
thou pitiest me, and wilt try to forget thy pity.  Belike thou art right
when thou sayest, To-morrow is a new day; belike matters will arise that
will call me back to life, and I shall once more take heed of the joy and
sorrow of my people.  Nay, it is most like that this I shall feign to do
even now.  But if to-morrow be a new day, it is to-day now and not
to-morrow, and so shall it be for long.  Hereof belike we shall talk no
more, thou and I.  For as the days wear, the dealings between us shall be
that thou shalt but get thee away from my life, and I shall be nought to
thee but the name of a kinswoman.  Thus should it be even wert thou to
strive to make it otherwise; and thou shalt _not_ strive.  So let all
this be; for this is not the word I had to say to thee.  But hearken! now
are we sundered, and it irketh me beyond measure that folk know it not,
and are kind, and rejoice in our love, and deem it a happy thing for the
folk; and this burden I may bear no longer.  So I shall declare unto men
that I will not wed thee; and belike they may wonder why it is, till they
see thee wedded to the Woman of the Mountain.  Art thou content that so
it shall be?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Nay, thou shalt not take this all upon thyself; I also
shall declare unto the Folk that I will wed none but her, the
Mountain-Woman.’

She said: ‘This shalt thou not do; I forbid it thee.  And I _will_ take
it all upon myself.  Shall I have it said of me that I am unmeet to wed
thee, and that thou hast found me out at last and at latest?  I lay this
upon thee, that wheresoever I declare this and whatsoever I may say, thou
shalt hold thy peace.  This at least thou may’st do for me.  Wilt thou?’

‘Yea,’ he said, ‘though it shall put me to shame.’

Again she was silent for a little; then she said:

‘O Gold-mane, this would I take upon myself not soothly for any shame of
seeming to be thy cast-off; but because it is I who needs must bear all
the sorrow of our sundering; and I have the will to bear it greater and
heavier, that I may be as the women of old time, and they that have come
from the Gods, lest I belittle my life with malice and spite and
confusion, and it become poisonous to me.  Be at peace! be at peace!  And
leave all to the wearing of the years; and forget not that which thou
hast sworn!’

Therewith she turned and went from that green place toward the House of
the Face, walking slowly through the garden amongst the sweet odours,
beneath the fair blossoms, a body most dainty and beauteous of fashion,
but the casket of grievous sorrow, which all that goodliness availed not.

But Face-of-god lingered in that place a little, and for that little
while the joy of his life was dulled and overworn; and the days before
his wandering on the mountain seemed to him free and careless and happy
days that he could not but regret.  He was ashamed, moreover, that this
so unquenchable grief should come but of him, and the pleasure of his
life, which he himself had found out for himself, and which was but such
a little portion of the Earth and the deeds thereof.  But presently his
thought wandered from all this, and as he turned away from the sundial
and went his ways through the garden, he called to mind his longing for
the day of the spring market, when he should see the Sun-beam again and
be cherished by the sweetness of her love.




CHAPTER XXV.  OF THE GATE-THING AT BURGSTEAD.


BUT now must he hasten, for the Gate-thing was to be holden two hours
before noon; so he betook him speedily to the Hall, and took his shield
and did on a goodly helm and girt his sword to his side, for men must
needs go to all folk-motes with their weapons and clad in war-gear.  Thus
he went forth to the Gate with many others, and there already were many
folk assembled in the space aforesaid betwixt the Gate of the Burg and
the sheer rocks on the face of which were the steps that led up to the
ancient Tower on the height.  The Alderman was sitting on the great stone
by the Gate-side which was his appointed place, and beside him on the
stone bench were the six Wardens of the Burg; but of the six Wardens of
the Dale there were but three, for the others had not yet heard tell of
the battle or had got the summons to the Thing, since they had been about
their business down the Dale.

Face-of-god took his place silently amongst the neighbours, but men made
way for him, so that he must needs stand in front, facing his father and
the Wardens; and there went up a murmur of expectation round about him,
both because the word had gone about that he had a tale of new tidings to
tell, and also because men deemed him their best and handiest man, though
he was yet so young.

Now the Alderman looked around and beheld a great throng gathered
together, and he looked on the shadow of the Gate which the southering
sun was casting on the hard white ground of the Thing-stead, and he saw
that it had just taken in the standing-stone which was in the midst of
the place.  On the face of the said stone was carven the image of a
fighting man with shield on arm and axe in hand; for it had been set
there in old time in memory of the man who had bidden the Folk build the
Gate and its wall, and had showed them how to fashion it: for he was a
deft house-smith as well as a great warrior; and his name was Iron-hand.
So when the Alderman saw that this stone was wholly within the shadow of
the Gate he knew that it was the due time for the hallowing-in of the
Thing.  So he bade one of the wardens who sat beside him and had a great
slug-horn slung about him, to rise and set the horn to his mouth.

So that man arose and blew three great blasts that went bellowing about
the towers and down the street, and beat back again from the face of the
sheer rocks and up them and over into the wild-wood; and the sound of it
went on the light west-wind along the lips of the Dale toward the
mountain wastes.  And many a goodman, when he heard the voice of the horn
in the bright spring morning, left spade or axe or plough-stilts, or the
foddering of the ewes and their younglings, and turned back home to fetch
his sword and helm and hasten to the Thing, though he knew not why it was
summoned: and women wending over the meadows, who had not yet heard of
the battle in the wood, hearkened and stood still on the green grass or
amidst the ripples of the ford, and the threat of coming trouble smote
heavy on their hearts, for they knew that great tidings must be towards
if a Thing must needs be summoned so close to the Great Folk-mote.

But now the Alderman stood up and spake amidst the silence that followed
the last echoes of the horn:

‘Now is hallowed in this Gate-thing of the Burgstead Men and the Men of
the Dale, wherein they shall take counsel concerning matters late
befallen, that press hard upon them.  Let no man break the peace of the
Holy Thing, lest he become a man accursed in holy places from the plain
up to the mountain, and from the mountain down to the plain; a man not to
be cherished of any man of good will, not be holpen with victuals or
edge-tool or draught-beast; a man to be sheltered under no roof-tree, and
warmed at no hearth of man: so help us the Warrior and the God of the
Earth, and Him of the Face, and all the Fathers!’

When he had spoken men clashed their weapons in token of assent; and he
sat down again, and there was silence for a space.  But presently came
thrusting forward a goodman of the Dale, who seemed as if he had come
hurriedly to the Thing; for his face was running down with sweat, his
wide-rimmed iron cap sat awry over his brow, and he was girt with a rusty
sword without a scabbard, and the girdle was ill-braced up about his
loins.  So he said:

‘I am Red-coat of Waterless of the Lower Dale.  Early this morning as I
was going afield I met on the way a man akin to me, Fox of Upton to wit,
and he told me that men were being summoned to a Gate-thing.  So I turned
back home, and caught up any weapon that came handy, and here I am,
Alderman, asking thee of the tidings which hath driven thee to call this
Thing so hard on the Great Folk-mote, for I know them nothing so.’

Then stood up Iron-face the Alderman and said: ‘This is well asked, and
soon shall ye be as wise as I am on this matter.  Know ye, O men of
Burgstead and the Dale, that we had not called this Gate-thing so hard on
the Great Folk-mote had not great need been to look into troublous
matters.  Long have ye dwelt in peace, and it is years on years now since
any foeman hath fallen on the Dale: but, as ye will bear in mind, last
autumn were there ransackings in the Dale and amidst of the Shepherds
after the manner of deeds of war; and it troubleth us that none can say
who wrought these ill deeds.  Next, but a little while agone, was
Wood-grey, a valiant goodman of the Woodlanders, slain close to his own
door by evil men.  These men we took at first for mere gangrel felons and
outcasts from their own folk: though there were some who spoke against
that from the beginning.

‘But thirdly are new tidings again: for three days ago, while some of the
folk were hunting peaceably in the Wild-wood and thinking no evil, they
were fallen upon of set purpose by a host of men-at-arms, and nought
would serve but mere battle for dear life, so that many of our neighbours
were hurt, and three slain outright; and now mark this, that those who
there fell upon our folk were clad and armed even as the two felons that
slew Wood-grey, and moreover were like them in aspect of body.  Now stand
forth Hall-face my son, and answer to my questions in a loud voice, so
that all may hear thee.’

So Hall-face stood forth, clad in gleaming war-gear, with an axe over his
shoulder, and seemed a doughty warrior.  And Iron-face said to him:

‘Tell me, son, those whom ye met in the wood, and of whom ye brought home
two captives, how much like were they to the murder-carles at
Wood-grey’s?’

Said Hall-face: ‘As like as peas out of the same cod, and to our eyes all
those whom we saw in the wood might have been sons of one father and one
mother, so much alike were they.’

‘Yea,’ said the Alderman; ‘now tell me how many by thy deeming fell upon
you in the wood?’

Said Hall-face: ‘We deemed that if they were any less than threescore,
they were little less.’

‘Great was the odds,’ said the Alderman.  ‘Or how many were ye?’

‘One score and seven,’ said Hall-face.

Said the Alderman: ‘And yet ye escaped with life all save those three?’

Hall-face said: ‘I deem that scarce one should have come back alive, had
it not been that as we fought came a noise like the howling of wolves,
and thereat the foemen turned and fled, and there followed on the fleers
tall men clad in sheep-brown raiment, who smote them down as they fled.’

‘Here then is the story, neighbours,’ said the Alderman, ‘and ye may see
thereby that if those slayers of Wood-grey were outcast, their band is a
great one; but it seemeth rather that they were men of a folk whose craft
it is to rob with the armed hand, and to slay the robbed; and that they
are now gathering on our borders for war.  Yet, moreover, they have
foemen in the woods who should be fellows-in-arms of us.  How sayest
thou, Stone-face?  Thou art old, and hast seen many wars in the Dale, and
knowest the Wild-wood to its innermost.

‘Alderman,’ said Stone-face, ‘and ye neighbours of the Dale, maybe these
foes whom ye have met are not of the race of man, but are trolls and
wood-wights.  Now if they be trolls it is ill, for then is the world
growing worser, and the wood shall be right perilous for those who needs
must fare therein.  Yet if they be men it is a worse matter; for the
trolls would not come out of the waste into the sunlight of the Dale.
But these foes, if they be men, are lusting after our fair Dale to eat it
up, and it is most like that they are gathering a huge host to fall upon
us at home.  Such things I have heard of when I was young, and the aspect
of the evil men who overran the kindreds of old time, according to all
tales and lays that I have heard, is even such as the aspect of those
whom we have seen of late.  As to those wolves who saved the neighbours
and chased their foemen, there is one here who belike knoweth more of all
this than we do, and that, O Alderman, is thy son whom I have fostered,
Face-of-god to wit.  Bid him answer to thy questioning, and tell us what
he hath seen and heard of late; then shall we verily know the whole story
as far as it can be known.’

Then men pressed round, and were eager to hear what Face-of-god would be
saying.  But or ever the Alderman could begin to question him, the throng
was cloven by new-comers, and these were the men who had been sent to
bring home the corpses of the Dusky Men: so they had cast loaded hooks
into the Weltering Water, and had dragged up him whom Face-of-god had
shoved into the eddy, and who had sunk like a stone just where he fell,
and now they were bringing him on a bier along with him who had been
slain a-land.  They were set down in the place before the Alderman, and
men who had not seen them before looked eagerly on them that they might
behold the aspect of their foemen; and nought lovely were they to look
on; for the drowned man was already bleached and swollen with the water,
and the other, his face was all wryed and twisted with that spear-thrust
in the mouth.

Then the Alderman said: ‘I would question my son Face-of-god.  Let him
stand forth!’

And therewith he smiled merrily in his son’s face, for he was standing
right in front of him; and he said:

‘Ask of me, Alderman, and I will answer.’

‘Kinsman,’ said Iron-face, ‘look at these two dead men, and tell me, if
thou hast seen any such besides those two murder-carles who were slain at
Carlstead; or if thou knowest aught of their folk?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Yesterday I saw six others like to these both in array
and of body, and three of them I slew, for we were in battle with them
early in the morning.’

There was a murmur of joy at this word, since all men took these felons
for deadly foemen; but Iron-face said: ‘What meanest thou by “we”?’

‘I and the men who had guested me overnight,’ said Face-of-god, ‘and they
slew the other three; or rather a woman of them slew the felons.’

‘Valiant she was; all good go with her hand!’ said the Alderman.  ‘But
what be these people, and where do they dwell?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘As to what they are, they are of the kindred of the
Gods and the Fathers, valiant men, and guest-cherishing: rich have they
been, and now are poor: and their poverty cometh of these same felons,
who mastered them by numbers not to be withstood.  As to where they
dwell: when I say the name of their dwelling-place men mock at me, as if
I named some valley in the moon: yet came I to Burgdale thence in one day
across the mountain-necks led by sure guides, and I tell thee that the
name of their abode is Shadowy Vale.’

‘Yea,’ said Iron-face, ‘knoweth any man here of Shadowy Vale, or where it
is?’

None answered for a while; but there was an old man who was sitting on
the shafts of a wain on the outskirts of the throng, and when he heard
this word he asked his neighbour what the Alderman was saying, and he
told him.  Then said that elder:

‘Give me place; for I have a word to say hereon.’  Therewith he arose,
and made his way to the front of the ring of men, and said: ‘Alderman,
thou knowest me?’

‘Yea,’ said Iron-face, ‘thou art called the Fiddle, because of thy sweet
speech and thy minstrelsy; whereof I mind me well in the time when I was
young and thou no longer young.’

‘So it is,’ said the Fiddle.  ‘Now hearken!  When I was very young I
heard of a vale lying far away across the mountain-necks; a vale where
the sun shone never in winter and scantily in summer; for my sworn
foster-brother, Fight-fain, a bold man and a great hunter, had happened
upon it; and on a day in full midsummer he brought me thither; and even
now I see the Vale before me as in a picture; a marvellous place, well
grassed, treeless, narrow, betwixt great cliff-walls of black stone, with
a green river running through it towards a yawning gap and a huge force.
Amidst that Vale was a doom-ring of black stones, and nigh thereto a
feast-hall well builded of the like stones, over whose door was carven
the image of a wolf with red gaping jaws, and within it (for we entered
into it) were stone benches on the daïs.  Thence we came away, and
thither again we went in late autumn, and so dusk and cold it was at that
season, that we knew not what to call it save the valley of deep shade.
But its real name we never knew; for there was no man there to give us a
name or tell us any tale thereof; but all was waste there; the wimbrel
laughed across its water, the raven croaked from its crags, the eagle
screamed over it, and the voices of its waters never ceased; and thus we
left it.  So the seasons passed, and we went thither no more: for
Fight-fain died, and without him wandering over the waste was irksome to
me; so never have I seen that valley again, or heard men tell thereof.

‘Now, neighbours, have I told you of a valley which seemeth to be Shadowy
Vale; and this is true and no made-up story.’

The Alderman nodded kindly to him, and then said to Face-of-god:
‘Kinsman, is this word according with what thou knowest of Shadowy Vale?’

‘Yea, on all points,’ said Face-of-god; ‘he hath put before me a picture
of the valley.  And whereas he saith, that in his youth it was waste,
this also goeth with my knowledge thereof.  For once was it peopled, and
then was waste, and now again is it peopled.’

‘Tell us then more of the folk thereof,’ said the Alderman; ‘are they
many?’

‘Nay,’ said Face-of-god, ‘they are not.  How might they be many, dwelling
in that narrow Vale amid the wastes?  But they are valiant, both men and
women, and strong and well-liking.  Once they dwelt in a fair dale called
Silver-dale, the name whereof will be to you as a name in a lay; and
there were they wealthy and happy.  Then fell upon them this murderous
Folk, whom they call the Dusky Men; and they fought and were overcome,
and many of them were slain, and many enthralled, and the remnant of them
escaped through the passes of the mountains and came back to dwell in
Shadowy Vale, where their forefathers had dwelt long and long ago; and
this overthrow befell them ten years agone.  But now their old foemen
have broken out from Silver-dale and have taken to scouring the wood
seeking prey; so they fall upon these Dusky Men as occasion serves, and
slay them without pity, as if they were adders or evil dragons; and
indeed they be worse.  And these valiant men know for certain that their
foemen are now of mind to fall upon this Dale and destroy it, as they
have done with others nigher to them.  And they will slay our men, and
lie with our women against their will, and enthrall our children, and
torment all those that lie under their hands till life shall be worse
than death to them.  Therefore, O Alderman and Wardens, and ye neighbours
all, it behoveth you to take counsel what we shall do, and that
speedily.’

There was again a murmur, as of men nothing daunted, but intent on taking
some way through the coming trouble.  But no man said aught till the
Alderman spake:

‘When didst thou first happen upon this Earl-folk, son?’

‘Late last autumn,’ said Face-of-god.

Said Iron-face: ‘Then mightest thou have told us of this tale before.’

‘Yea,’ said his son, ‘but I knew it not, or but little of it, till two
days agone.  In the autumn I wandered in the woodland, and on the fell I
happened on a few of this folk dwelling in a booth by the pine-wood; and
they were kind and guest-fain with me, and gave me meat and drink and
lodging, and bade me come to Shadowy Vale in the spring, when I should
know more of them.  And that was I fain of; for they are wise and goodly
men.  But I deemed no more of those that I saw there save as men who had
been outlawed by their own folk for deeds that were unlawful belike, but
not shameful, and were biding their time of return, and were living as
they might meanwhile.  But of the whole Folk and their foemen knew I no
more than ye did, till two days agone, when I met them again in Shadowy
Vale.  Also I think before long ye shall see their chieftain in
Burgstead, for he hath a word for us.  Lastly, my mind it is that those
brown-clad men who helped Hall-face and his company in the wood were
nought but men of this Earl-kin seeking their foemen; for indeed they
told me that they had come upon a battle in the woodland wherein they had
slain their foemen.  Now have I told you all that ye need to know
concerning these matters.’

Again was there silence as Iron-face sat pondering a question for his
son; then a goodman of the Upper Dale, Gritgarth to wit, spake and said:

‘Gold-mane mine, tell us how many is this folk; I mean their
fighting-men?’

‘Well asked, neighbour,’ said Iron-face.

Said Face-of-god: ‘Their fighting-men of full age may be five score; but
besides that there shall be some two or three score of women that will
fight, whoever says them nay; and many of these are little worse in the
field than men; or no worse, for they shoot well in the bow.  Moreover,
there will be a full score of swains not yet twenty winters old whom ye
may not hinder to fight if anything is a-doing.’

‘This is no great host,’ said the Alderman; ‘yet if they deem there is
little to lose by fighting, and nought to gain by sitting still, they may
go far in winning their desire; and that more especially if they may draw
into their quarrel some other valiant Folk more in number than they be.
I marvel not, though, they were kind to thee, son Gold-mane, if they knew
who thou wert.’

‘They knew it,’ said Face-of-god.

‘Neighbours,’ said the Alderman, ‘have ye any rede hereon, and aught to
say to back your rede?’

Then spake the Fiddle: ‘As ye know and may see, I am now very old, and,
as the word goes, unmeet for battle: yet might I get me to the field,
either on mine own legs or on the legs of some four-foot beast, I would
strike, if it were but one stroke, on these pests of the earth.  And,
Alderman, meseemeth we shall do amiss if we bid not the Earl-folk of
Shadowy Vale to be our fellows in arms in this adventure.  For look you,
how few soever they be, they will be sure to know the ways of our foemen,
and the mountain passes, and the surest and nighest roads across the
necks and the mires of the waste; and though they be not a host, yet
shall they be worth a host to us?’

When men heard his words they shouted for joy of them; for hatred of the
Dusky Men who should so mar their happy life in the Dale was growing up
in them, and the more that hatred waxed, the more waxed their love of
those valiant ones.

Now Red-coat of Waterless spake again: he was a big man, both tall and
broad, ruddy-faced and red-haired, some forty winters old.  He said:

‘Life hath been well with us of the Lower Dale, and we deem that we have
much to lose in losing it.  Yet ill would the bargain be to buy life with
thralldom: we have been over-merry hitherto for that.  Therefore I say,
to battle!  And as to these men, these well-wishers of Face-of-god, if
they also are minded for battle with our foes, we were fools indeed if we
did not join them to our company, were they but one score instead of
six.’

Men shouted again, and they said that Red-coat had spoken well.  Then one
after other the goodmen of the Dale came and gave their word for
fellowship in arms with the Men of Shadowy Vale, if there were such as
Face-of-god had said, which they doubted not; and amongst them that spake
were Fox of Nethertown, and Warwell, and Gritgarth, and Bearswain, and
Warcliff, and Hart of Highcliff, and Worm of Willowholm, and Bullsbane,
and Highneb of the Marsh: all these were stout men-at-arms and men of
good counsel.

Last of all the Alderman spake and said:

‘As to the war, that must we needs meet if all be sooth that we have
heard, and I doubt it not.

‘Now therefore let us look to it like wise men while time yet serves.  Ye
shall know that the muster of the Dalesmen will bring under shield eight
long hundreds of men well-armed, and of the Shepherd-Folk four hundreds,
and of the Woodlanders two hundreds; and this is a goodly host if it be
well ordered and wisely led.  Now am I your Alderman and your Doomster,
and I can heave up a sword as well as another maybe, nor do I think that
I shall blench in the battle; yet I misdoubt me that I am no leader or
orderer of men-of-war: therefore ye will do wisely to choose a wiser
man-at-arms than I be for your War-leader; and if at the Great Folk-mote,
when all the Houses and Kindreds are gathered, men yeasay your choosing,
then let him abide; but if they naysay it, let him give place to another.
For time presses.  Will ye so choose?’

‘Yea, yea!’ cried all men.

‘Good is that, neighbours,’ said the Alderman.  ‘Whom will ye have for
War-leader?  Consider well.’

Short was their rede, for every man opened his mouth and cried out
‘Face-of-god!’  Then said the Alderman:

‘The man is young and untried; yet though he is so near akin to me, I
will say that ye will do wisely to take him; for he is both deft of his
hands and brisk; and moreover, of this matter he knoweth more than all we
together.  Now therefore I declare him your War-leader till the time of
the Great Folk-mote.’

Then all men shouted with great glee and clashed their weapons; but some
few put their heads together and spake apart a little while, and then one
of them, Red-coat of Waterless to wit, came forward and said: ‘Alderman,
some of us deem it good that Stone-face, the old man wise in war and in
the ways of the Wood, should be named as a counsellor to the War-leader;
and Hall-face, a very brisk and strong young man, to be his right hand
and sword-bearer.’

‘Good is that,’ said Iron-face.  ‘Neighbours, will ye have it so?’  This
also they yeasaid without delay, and the Alderman declared Stone-face and
Hall-face the helpers of Face-of-god in this business.  Then he said:

‘If any hath aught to say concerning what is best to be done at once, it
were good that he said it now before all and not to murmur and grudge
hereafter.’

None spake save the Fiddle, who said: ‘Alderman and War-leader, one thing
would I say: that if these foemen are anywise akin to those overrunners
of the Folks of whom the tales went in my youth (for I also as well as
Stone-face mind me well of those tales concerning them), it shall not
avail us to sit still and await their onset.  For then may they not be
withstood, when they have gathered head and burst out and over the folk
that have been happy, even as the waters that overtop a dyke and cover
with their muddy ruin the deep green grass and the flower-buds of spring.
Therefore my rede is, as soon as may be to go seek these folk in the
woodland and wheresoever else they may be wandering.  What sayest thou,
Face-of-god?’

‘My rede is as thine,’ said he; ‘and to begin with, I do now call upon
ten tens of good men to meet me in arms at the beginning of Wildlake’s
Way to-morrow morning at daybreak; and I bid my brother Hall-face to
summon such as are most meet thereto.  For this I deem good, that we
scour the wood daily at present till we hear fresh tidings from them of
Shadowy Vale, who are nigher than we to the foemen.  Now, neighbours, are
ye ready to meet me?’

Then all shouted, ‘Yea, we will go, we will go!’

Said the Alderman: ‘Now have we made provision for the war in that which
is nearest to our hands.  Yet have we to deal with the matter of the
fellowship with the Folk whom Face-of-god hath seen.  This is a matter
for thee, son, at least till the Great Folk-mote is holden.  Tell me
then, shall we send a messenger to Shadowy Vale to speak with this folk,
or shall we abide the chieftain’s coming?’

‘By my rede,’ said Face-of-god, ‘we shall abide his coming: for first,
though I might well make my way thither, I doubt if I could give any the
bearings, so that he could come there without me; and belike I am needed
at home, since I am become War-leader.  Moreover, when your messenger
cometh to Shadowy Vale, he may well chance to find neither the chieftain
there, nor the best of his men; for whiles are they here, and whiles
there, as they wend following after the Dusky Men.’

‘It is well, son,’ said the Alderman, ‘let it be as thou sayest: soothly
this matter must needs be brought before the Great Folk-mote.  Now will I
ask if any other hath any word to say, or any rede to give before this
Gate-thing sundereth?’

But no man came forward, and all men seemed well content and of good
heart; and it was now well past noontide.




CHAPTER XXVI.  THE ENDING OF THE GATE-THING.


BUT just as the Alderman was on the point of rising to declare the
breaking-up of the Thing, there came a stir in the throng and it opened,
and a warrior came forth into the innermost of the ring of men, arrayed
in goodly glittering War-gear; clad in such wise that a tunicle of
precious gold-wrought web covered the hauberk all but the sleeves
thereof, and the hem of it beset with blue mountain-stones smote against
the ankles and well-nigh touched the feet, shod with sandals
gold-embroidered and gemmed.  This warrior bore a goodly gilded helm on
the head, and held in hand a spear with gold-garlanded shaft, and was
girt with a sword whose hilts and scabbard both were adorned with gold
and gems: beardless, smooth-cheeked, exceeding fair of face was the
warrior, but pale and somewhat haggard-eyed: and those who were nearby
beheld and wondered; for they saw that there was come the Bride arrayed
for war and battle, as if she were a messenger from the House of the
Gods, and the Burg that endureth for ever.

Then she fell to speech in a voice which at first was somewhat hoarse and
broken, but cleared as she went on, and she said:

‘There sittest thou, O Alderman of Burgdale!  Is Face-of-god thy son
anywhere nigh, so that he can hear me?’

But Iron-face wondered at her word, and said: ‘He is beside thee, as he
should be.’  For indeed Face-of-god was touching her, shoulder to
shoulder.  But she looked not to the right hand nor the left, but said:

‘Hearken, Iron-face!  Chief of the House of the Face, Alderman of the
Dale, and ye also, neighbours and goodmen of the Dale: I am a woman
called the Bride, of the House of the Steer, and ye have heard that I
have plighted my troth to Face-of-god to wed with him, to love him, and
lie in his bed.  But it is not so: we are not troth-plight; nor will I
wed with him, nor any other, but will wend with you to the war, and play
my part therein according to what might is in me; nor will I be worser
than the wives of Shadowy Vale.’

Face-of-god heard her words with no change of countenance; but Iron-face
reddened over all his face, and stared at her, and knit his brows and
said:

‘Maiden, what are these words?  What have we done to thee?  Have I not
been to thee as a father, and loved thee dearly?  Is not my son goodly
and manly and deft in arms?  Hath it not ever been the wont of the House
of the Face to wed in the House of the Steer? and in these two Houses
there hath never yet been a goodlier man and a lovelier maiden than are
ye two.  What have we done then?’

‘Ye have done nought against me,’ she said, ‘and all that thou sayest is
sooth; yet will I not wed with Face-of-god.’

Yet fiercer waxed the face of the Alderman, and he said in a loud voice:

‘But how if I tell thee that I will speak with thy kindred of the Steer,
and thou shalt do after my bidding whether thou wilt or whether thou wilt
not?’

‘And how will ye compel me thereto?’ she said.  ‘Are there thralls in the
Dale?  Or will ye make me an outlaw?  Who shall heed it?  Or I shall
betake me to Shadowy Vale and become one of their warrior-maidens.’

Now was the Alderman’s face changing from red to white, and belike he
forgat the Thing, and what he was doing there, and he cried out:

‘This is an evil day, and who shall help me?  Thou, Face-of-god, what
hast thou to say?  Wilt thou let this woman go without a word?  What hath
bewitched thee?’

But never a word spake his son, but stood looking straight forward, cold
and calm by seeming.  Then turned Iron-face again to the Bride, and said
in a softer voice:

‘Tell me, maiden, whom I erst called daughter, what hath befallen, that
thou wilt leave my son; thou who wert once so kind and loving to him;
whose hand was always seeking his, whose eyes were ever following his;
who wouldst go where he bade, and come when he called.  What hath betid
that ye have cast him out, and flee from our House?’

She flushed red beneath her helm and said:

‘There is war in the land, and I have seen it coming, and that things
shall change around us.  I have looked about me and seen men happy and
women content, and children weary for mere mirth and joy.  And I have
thought, in a day, or two days or three, all this shall be changed, and
the women shall be, some anxious and wearied with waiting, some casting
all hope away; and the men, some shall come back to the garth no more,
and some shall come back maimed and useless, and there shall be loss of
friends and fellows, and mirth departed, and dull days and empty hours,
and the children wandering about marvelling at the sorrow of the house.
All this I saw before me, and grief and pain and wounding and death; and
I said: Shall I be any better than the worst of the folk that loveth me?
Nay, this shall never be; and since I have learned to be deft with mine
hands in all the play of war, and that I am as strong as many a man, and
as hardy-hearted as any, I will give myself to the Warrior and the God of
the Face; and the battle-field shall be my home, and the after-grief of
the fight my banquet and holiday, that I may bear the burden of my
people, in the battle and out of it; and know every sorrow that the Dale
hath; and cast aside as a grievous and ugly thing the bed of the warrior
that the maiden desires, and the toying of lips and hands and soft words
of desire, and all the joy that dwelleth in the Castle of Love and the
Garden thereof; while the world outside is sick and sorry, and the fields
lie waste and the harvest burneth.  Even so have I sworn, even so will I
do.’

Her eyes glittered and her cheek was flushed, and her voice was clear and
ringing now; and when she ended there arose a murmur of praise from the
men round about her.  But Iron-face said coldly:

‘These are great words; but I know not what they mean.  If thou wilt to
the field and fight among the carles (and that I would not naysay, for it
hath oft been done and praised aforetime), why shouldest thou not go side
by side with Face-of-god and as his plighted maiden?’

The light which the sweetness of speech had brought into her face had
died out of it now, and she looked weary and hapless as she answered him
slowly:

‘I will not wed with Face-of-god, but will fare afield as a virgin of
war, as I have sworn to the Warrior.’

Then waxed Iron-face exceeding wroth, and he rose up before all men and
cried loudly and fiercely:

‘There is some lie abroad, that windeth about us as the gossamers in the
lanes of an autumn morning.’

And therewith he strode up to Face-of-god as though he had nought to do
with the Thing; and he stood before him and cried out at him while all
men wondered:

‘Thou! what hast thou done to turn this maiden’s heart to stone?  Who is
it that is devising guile with thee to throw aside this worthy wedding in
a worthy House, with whom our sons are ever wont to wed?  Speak, tell the
tale!’

But Face-of-god held his peace and stood calm and proud before all men.

Then the blood mounted to Iron-face’s head, and he forgat folk and
kindred and the war to come, and he cried so that all the place rang with
the words of his anger:

‘Thou dastard!  I see thee now; it is thou that hast done this, and not
the maiden; and now thou hast made her bear a double burden, and set her
on to speak for thee, whilst thou standest by saying nought, and wilt
take no scruple’s weight of her shame upon thee!’

But his son spake never a word, and Iron-face cried: ‘Out on thee!  I
know thee now, and why thou wouldest not to the West-land last winter.  I
am no fool; I know thee.  Where hast thou hidden the stranger woman?’

Therewith he drew forth his sword and hove it aloft as if to hew down
Face-of-god, who spake not nor flinched nor raised a hand from his side.
But the Bride threw herself in front of Gold-mane, while there arose an
angry cry of ‘The Peace of the Holy Thing!  Peace-breaking,
peace-breaking!’ and some cried, ‘For the War-leader, the War-leader!’
and as men could for the press they drew forth their swords, and there
was tumult and noise all over the Thing-stead.

But Stone-face caught hold of the Alderman’s right arm and dragged down
the sword, and the big carle, Red-coat of Waterless, came up behind him
and cast his arms about his middle and drew him back; and presently he
looked around him, and slowly sheathed his sword, and went back to his
place and sat him down; and in a little while the noise abated and swords
were sheathed, and men waxed quiet again, and the Alderman arose and said
in a loud voice, but in the wonted way of the head man of the Thing:

‘Here hath been trouble in the Holy Thing; a violent man hath troubled
it, and drawn sword on a neighbour; will the neighbours give the dooming
hereof into the hands of the Alderman?’

Now all knew Iron-face, and they cried out, ‘That will we.’  So he spake
again:

‘I doom the troubler of the Peace of the Holy Thing to pay a fine, to wit
double the blood-wite that would be duly paid for a full-grown freeman of
the kindreds.’

Then the cry went up and men yeasaid his doom, and all said that it was
well and fairly doomed; and Iron-face sat still.

But Stone-face stood forth and said:

‘Here have been wild words in the air; and dreams have taken shape and
come amongst us, and have bewitched us, so that friends and kin have
wrangled.  And meseemeth that this is through the wizardry of these
felons, who, even dead as they are, have cast spells over us.  Good it
were to cast them into the Death Tarn, and then to get to our work; for
there is much to do.’

All men yeasaid that; and Forkbeard of Lea went with those who had borne
the corpses thither to cast them into the black pool.

But the Fiddle spake and said:

‘Stone-face sayeth sooth.  O Alderman, thou art no young man, yet am I
old enough to be thy father; so will I give thee a rede, and say this:
Face-of-god thy son is no liar or dastard or beguiler, but he is a young
man and exceeding goodly of fashion, well-spoken and kind; so that few
women may look on him and hear him without desiring his kindness and
love, and to such men as this many things happen.  Moreover, he hath now
become our captain, and is a deft warrior with his hands, and as I deem,
a sober and careful leader of men; therefore we need him and his courage
and his skill of leading.  So rage not against him as if he had done an
ill deed not to be forgiven—whatever he hath done, whereof we know
not—for life is long before him, and most like we shall still have to
thank him for many good deeds towards us.  As for the maiden, she is both
lovely and wise.  She hath a sorrow at her heart, and we deem that we
know what it is.  Yet hath she not lied when she said that she would bear
the burden of the griefs of the people.  Even so shall she do; and
whether she will, or whether she will not, that shall heal her own
griefs.  For to-morrow is a new day.  Therefore, if thou do after my
rede, thou wilt not meddle betwixt these twain, but wilt remember all
that we have to do, and that war is coming upon us.  And when that is
over, we shall turn round and behold each other, and see that we are not
wholly what we were before; and then shall that which were hard to
forgive, be forgotten, and that which is remembered be easy to forgive.’

So he spake; and Iron-face sat still and put his left hand to his beard
as one who pondereth; but the Bride looked in the face of the old man the
Fiddle, and then she turned and looked at Gold-mane, and her face
softened, and she stood before the Alderman, and bent down before him and
held out both her hands to him the palms upward.  Then she said: ‘Thou
hast been wroth with me, and I marvel not; for thy hope, and the hope
which we all had, hath deceived thee.  But kind indeed hast thou been to
me ere now: therefore I pray thee take it not amiss if I call to thy mind
the oath which thou swearedst on the Holy Boar last Yule, that thou
wouldst not gainsay the prayer of any man if thou couldest perform it;
therefore I bid thee naysay not mine: and that is, that thou wilt ask me
no more about this matter, but wilt suffer me to fare afield like any
swain of the Dale, and to deal so with my folk that they shall not hinder
me.  Also I pray thee that thou wilt put no shame upon Face-of-god my
playmate and my kinsman, nor show thine anger to him openly, even if for
a little while thy love for him be abated.  No more than this will I ask
of thee.’

All men who heard her were moved to the heart by her kindness and the
sweetness of her voice, which was like to the robin singing suddenly on a
frosty morning of early winter.  But as for Gold-mane, his heart was
smitten sorely by it, and her sorrow and her friendliness grieved him out
of measure.

But Iron-face answered after a little while, speaking slowly and
hoarsely, and with the shame yet clinging to him of a man who has been
wroth and has speedily let his wrath run off him.  So he said:

‘It is well, my daughter.  I have no will to forswear myself; nor hast
thou asked me a thing which is over-hard.  Yet indeed I would that to-day
were yesterday, or that many days were worn away.’

Then he stood up and cried in a loud voice over the throng:

‘Let none forget the muster; but hold him ready against the time that the
Warden shall come to him.  Let all men obey the War-leader, Face-of-god,
without question or delay.  As to the fine of the peace-breaker, it shall
be laid on the altar of the God at the Great Folk-mote.  Herewith is the
Thing broken up.’

Then all men shouted and clashed their weapons, and so sundered, and went
about their business.

And the talk of men it was that the breaking of the troth-plight between
those twain was ill; for they loved Face-of-god, and as for the Bride
they deemed her the Dearest of the kindreds and the Jewel of the Folk,
and as if she were the fairest and the kindest of all the Gods.  Neither
did the wrath of Iron-face mislike any; but they said he had done well
and manly both to be wroth and to let his wrath run off him.  As to the
war which was to come, they kept a good heart about it, and deemed it as
a game to be played, wherein they might show themselves deft and valiant,
and so get back to their merry life again.

So wore the day through afternoon to even and night.




CHAPTER XXVII.  FACE-OF-GOD LEADETH A BAND THROUGH THE WOOD.


NEXT morning tryst was held faithfully, and an hundred and a half were
gathered together on Wildlake’s Way; and Face-of-god ordered them into
three companies.  He made Hall-face leader over the first one, and bade
him hold on his way northward, and then to make for Boars-bait and see if
he should meet with anything thereabout where the battle had been.
Red-coat of Waterless he made captain of the second band; and he had it
in charge to wend eastward along the edge of the Dale, and not to go deep
into the wood, but to go as far as he might within the time appointed,
toward the Mountains.  Furthermore, he bade both Hall-face and Red-coat
to bring their bands back to Wildlake’s Way by the morrow at sunset,
where other goodmen should be come to take the places of their men; and
then if he and his company were back again, he would bid them further
what to do; but if not, as seemed likely, then Hall-face’s band to go
west toward the Shepherd country half a day’s journey, and so back, and
Red-coat’s east along the Dale’s lip again for the like time, and then
back, so that there might be a constant watch and ward of the Dale kept
against the Felons.

All being ordered Gold-mane led his own company north-east through the
thick wood, thinking that he might so fare as to come nigh to
Silver-dale, or at least to hear tidings thereof.  This intent he told to
Stone-face, but the old man shook his head and said:

‘Good is this if it may be done; but it is not for everyone to go down to
Hell in his lifetime and come back safe with a tale thereof.  However,
whither thou wilt lead, thither will I follow, though assured death
waylayeth us.’

And the old carle was joyous and proud to be on this adventure, and said,
that it was good indeed that his foster-son had with him a man well
stricken in years, who had both seen many things, and learned many, and
had good rede to give to valiant men.

So they went on their ways, and fared very warily when they were gotten
beyond those parts of the wood which they knew well.  By this time they
were strung out in a long line; and they noted their road carefully,
blazing the trees on either side when there were trees, and piling up
little stone-heaps where the trees failed them.  For Stone-face said that
oft it befell men amidst the thicket and the waste to be misled by wights
that begrudged men their lives, so that they went round and round in a
ring which they might not depart from till they died; and no man doubted
his word herein.

All day they went, and met no foe, nay, no man at all; nought but the
wild things of the wood; and that day the wood changed little about them
from mile to mile.  There were many thickets across their road which they
had to go round about; so that to the crow flying over the tree-tops the
journey had not been long to the place where night came upon them, and
where they had to make the wood their bedchamber.

That night they lighted no fire, but ate such cold victual as they might
carry with them; nor had they shot any venison, since they had with them
more than enough; they made little noise or stir therefore and fell
asleep when they had set the watch.

On the morrow they arose betimes, and broke their fast and went their
ways till noon: by then the wood had thinned somewhat, and there was
little underwood betwixt the scrubby oak and ash which were pretty nigh
all the trees about: the ground also was broken, and here and there
rocky, and they went into and out of rough little dales, most of which
had in them a brook of water running west and southwest; and now
Face-of-god led his men somewhat more easterly; and still for some while
they met no man.

At last, about four hours after noon, when they were going less warily,
because they had hitherto come across nothing to hinder them, rising over
the brow of a somewhat steep ridge, they saw down in the valley below
them a half score of men sitting by the brook-side eating and drinking,
their weapons lying beside them, and along with them stood a woman with
her hands tied behind her back.

They saw at once that these men were of the Felons, so they that had
their bows bent, loosed at them without more ado, while the others ran in
upon them with sword and spear.  The felons leapt up and ran scattering
down the dale, such of them as were not smitten by the shafts; but he who
was nighest to the woman, ere he ran, turned and caught up a sword from
the ground and thrust it through her, and the next moment fell across the
brook with an arrow in his back.

No one of the felons was nimble enough to escape from the fleet-foot
hunters of Burgdale, and they were all slain there to the number of
eleven.

But when they came back to the woman to tend her, she breathed her last
in their hands: she was a young and fair woman, black-haired and
dark-eyed.  She had on her body a gown of rich web, but nought else: she
had been bruised and sore mishandled, and the Burgdale carles wept for
pity of her, and for wrath, as they straightened her limbs on the turf of
the little valley.  They let her lie there a little, whilst they searched
round about, lest there should be any other poor soul needing their help,
or any felon lurking thereby; but they found nought else save a bundle
wherein was another rich gown and divers woman’s gear, and sundry rings
and jewels, and therewithal the weapons and war-gear of a knight,
delicately wrought after the Westland fashion: these seemed to them to
betoken other foul deeds of these murder-carles.  So when they had abided
a while, they laid the dead woman in mould by the brook-side, and buried
with her the other woman’s attire and the knight’s gear, all but his
sword and shield, which they had away with them: then they cast the
carcasses of the felons into the brake, but brought away their weapons
and the silver rings from their arms, which they wore like all the others
of them whom they had fallen in with; and so went on their way to the
north-east, full of wrath against those dastards of the Earth.

It was hard on sunset when they left the valley of murder, and they went
no long way thence before they must needs make stay for the night; and
when they had arrayed their sleeping-stead the moon was up, and they saw
that before them lay the close wood again, for they had made their lair
on the top of a little ridge.

There then they lay, and nought stirred them in the night, and betimes on
the morrow they were afoot, and entered the abovesaid thicket, wherein
two of them, keen hunters, had been aforetime, but had not gone deep into
it.  Through this wood they went all day toward the north-east, and met
nought but the wild things therein.  At last, when it was near sunset,
they came out of the thicket into a small plain, or shallow dale rather,
with no great trees in it, but thorn-brakes here and there where the
ground sank into hollows; a little river ran through the midst of it, and
winded round about a height whose face toward the river went down sheer
into the water, but away from it sank down in a long slope to where the
thick wood began again: and this height or burg looked well-nigh west.

Thitherward they went; but as they were drawing nigh to the river, and
were on the top of a bent above a bushy hollow between them and the
water, they espied a man standing in the river near the bank, who saw
them not, because he was stooping down intent on something in the bank or
under it: so they gat them speedily down into the hollow without noise,
that they might get some tidings of the man.

Then Face-of-god bade his men abide hidden under the bushes and stole
forward quietly up the further bank of the hollow, his target on his arm
and his spear poised.  When he was behind the last bush on the top of the
bent he was within half a spear-cast of the water and the man; so he
looked on him and saw that he was quite naked except for a clout about
his middle.

Face-of-god saw at once that he was not one of the Dusky Men; he was a
black-haired man, but white-skinned, and of fair stature, though not so
tall as the Burgdale folk.  He was busied in tickling trouts, and just as
Face-of-god came out from the bush into the westering sunlight, he threw
up a fish on to the bank, and looked up therewithal, and beheld the
weaponed man glittering, and uttered a cry, but fled not when he saw the
spear poised for casting.

Then Face-of-god spake to him and said: ‘Come hither, Woodsman! we will
not harm thee, but we desire speech of thee: and it will not avail thee
to flee, since I have bowmen of the best in the hollow yonder.’

The man put forth his hands towards him as if praying him to forbear
casting, and looked at him hard, and then came dripping from out the
water, and seemed not greatly afeard; for he stooped down and picked up
the trouts he had taken, and came towards Face-of-god stringing the
last-caught one through the gills on to the withy whereon were the
others: and Face-of-god saw that he was a goodly man of some thirty
winters.

Then Face-of-god looked on him with friendly eyes and said:

‘Art thou a foemen? or wilt thou be helpful to us?’

He answered in the speech of the kindreds with the hoarse voice of a much
weather-beaten man:

‘Thou seest, lord, that I am naked and unarmed.’

‘Yet may’st thou bewray us,’ said Face-of-god.  ‘What man art thou?’

Said the man: ‘I am the runaway thrall of evil men; I have fled from
Rose-dale and the Dusky Men.  Hast thou the heart to hurt me?’

‘We are the foemen of the Dusky Men,’ said Face-of-God; ‘wilt thou help
us against them?’

The man knit his brows and said: ‘Yea, if ye will give me your word not
to suffer me to fall into their hands alive.  But whence art thou, to be
so bold?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘We are of Burgdale; and I will swear to thee on the
edge of the sword that thou shalt not fall alive into the hands of the
Dusky Men.’

‘Of Burgdale have I heard,’ said the man; ‘and in sooth thou seemest not
such a man as would bewray a hapless man.  But now had I best bring you
to some lurking-place where ye shall not be easily found of these devils,
who now oft-times scour the woods hereabout.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Come first and see my fellows; and then if thou
thinkest we have need to hide, it is well.’

So the man went side by side with him towards their lair, and as they
went Gold-mane noted marks of stripes on his back and sides, and said:
‘Sorely hast thou been mishandled, poor man!’

Then the man turned on him and said somewhat fiercely: ‘Said I not that I
had been a thrall of the Dusky Men? how then should I have escaped
tormenting and scourging, if I had been with them for but three days?’

As he spake they came about a thorn-bush, and there were the Burgdale men
down in the hollow; and the man said: ‘Are these thy fellows?  Call to
mind that thou hast sworn by the edge of the sword not to hurt me.’

‘Poor man!’ said Face-of-god; ‘these are thy friends, unless thou
bewrayest us.’

Then he cried aloud to his folk: ‘Here is now a good hap! this is a
runaway thrall of the Dusky Men; of him shall we hear tidings; so cherish
him all ye may.’

So the carles thronged about him and bestirred themselves to help him,
and one gave him his surcoat for a kirtle, and another cast a cloak about
him; and they brought him meat and drink, such as they had ready to hand:
and the man looked as if he scarce believed in all this, but deemed
himself to be in a dream.  But presently he turned to Face-of-god and
said:

‘Now I see so many men and weapons I deem that ye have no need to skulk
in caves to-night, though I know of good ones: yet shall ye do well not
to light a fire till moon-setting; for the flame ye may lightly hide, but
the smoke may be seen from far aloof.’

But they bade him to meat, and he needed no second bidding but ate
lustily, and they gave him wine, and he drank a great draught and sighed
as for joy.  Then he said in a trembling voice, as though he feared a
naysay:

‘If ye are from Burgdale ye shall be faring back again presently; and I
pray you to take me with you.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Yea surely, friend, that will we do, and rejoice in
thee.’

Then he drank another cup which Warcliff held out to him, and spake
again: ‘Yet if ye would abide here till about noon to-morrow, or
mayhappen a little later, I would bring other runaways to see you; and
them also might ye take with you: ye may think when ye see them that ye
shall have small gain of their company; for poor wretched folk they be,
like to myself.  Yet since ye seek for tidings, herein might they do you
more service than I; for amongst them are some who came out of the
hapless Dale within this moon; and it is six months since I escaped.
Moreover, though they may look spent and outworn now, yet if ye give them
a little rest, and feed them well, they shall yet do many a day’s work
for you: and I tell you that if ye take them for thralls, and put collars
on their necks, and use them no worse than a goodman useth his oxen and
his asses, beating them not save when they are idle or at fault, it shall
be to them as if they were come to heaven out of hell, and to such
goodhap as they have not thought of, save in dreams, for many and many a
day.  And thus I entreat you to do because ye seem to me to be happy and
merciful men, who will not begrudge us this happiness.’

The carles of Burgdale listened eagerly to what he said, and they looked
at him with great eyes and marvelled; and their hearts were moved with
pity towards him; and Stone-face said:

‘Herein, O War-leader, need I give thee no rede, for thou mayst see
clearly that all we deem that we should lose our manhood and become the
dastards of the Warrior if we did not abide the coming of these poor men,
and take them back to the Dale, and cherish them.’

‘Yea,’ said Wolf of Whitegarth, ‘and great thanks we owe to this man that
he biddeth us this: for great will be the gain to us if we become so like
the Gods that we may deliver the poor from misery.  Now must I needs
think how they shall wonder when they come to Burgdale and find out how
happy it is to dwell there.’

‘Surely,’ said Face-of-god, ‘thus shall we do, whatever cometh of it.
But, friend of the wood, as to thralls, there be none such in the Dale,
but therein are all men friends and neighbours, and even so shall ye be.’

And he fell a-musing, when he bethought him of how little he had known of
sorrow.

But that man, when he beheld the happy faces of the Burgdalers, and
hearkened to their friendly voices, and understood what they said, and he
also was become strong with the meat and drink, he bowed his head adown
and wept a long while; and they meddled not with him, till he turned
again to them and said:

‘Since ye are in arms, and seem to be seeking your foemen, I suppose ye
wot that these tyrants and man-quellers will fall upon you in Burgdale
ere the summer is well worn.’

‘So much we deem indeed,’ said Face-of-god, ‘but we were fain to hear the
certainty of it, and how thou knowest thereof.’

Said the man: ‘It was six moons ago that I fled, as I have told you; and
even then it was the common talk amongst our masters that there were fair
dales to the south which they would overrun.  Man would say to man: We
were over many in Silver-dale, and we needed more thralls, because those
we had were lessening, and especially the women; now are we more at ease
in Rose-dale, though we have sent thralls to Silver-dale; but yet we can
bear no more men from thence to eat up our stock from us: let them fare
south to the happy dales, and conquer them, and we will go with them and
help therein, whether we come back to Rose-dale or no.  Such talk did I
hear then with mine own ears: but some of those whom I shall bring to you
to-morrow shall know better what is doing, since they have fled from
Rose-dale but a few days.  Moreover, there is a man and a woman who have
fled from Silver-dale itself, and are but a month from it, journeying all
the time save when they must needs hide; and these say that their masters
have got to know the way to Burgdale, and are minded for it before the
winter, as I said; and nought else but the ways thither do they desire to
know, since they have no fear.’

By then was night come, and though the moon was high in heaven, and
lighted all that waste, the Burgdalers must needs light a fire for
cooking their meat, whatsoever that woodsman might say; moreover, the
night was cold and somewhat frosty.  A little before they had come to
that place they had shot a fat buck and some smaller deer, but of other
meat they had no great store, though there was wine enough.  So they lit
their fire in the thickest of the thorn-bush to hide it all they might,
and thereat they cooked their venison and the trouts which the runaway
had taken, and they fell to, and ate and drank and were merry, making
much of that poor man till him-seemed he was gotten into the company of
the kindest of the Gods.

But when they were full, Face-of-god spake to him, and asked him his
name; and he named himself Dallach; but said he: ‘Lord, this is according
to the naming of men in Rose-dale before we were enthralled: but now what
names have thralls?  Also I am not altogether of the blood of them of
Rose-dale, but of better and more warrior-like kin.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Thou hast named Silver-dale; knowest thou it?’

Dallach answered: ‘I have never seen it.  It is far hence; in a week’s
journey, making all diligence, and not being forced to hide and skulk
like those runaways, ye shall come to the mouth thereof lying west, where
its rock-walls fall off toward the plain.’

‘But,’ said Face-of-god, ‘is there no other way into that Dale?’

‘Nay, none that folk wot of,’ said Dallach, ‘except to bold cragsmen with
their lives in their hands.’

‘Knowest thou aught of the affairs of Silver-dale?’ said Face-of-god.

Said Dallach: ‘Somewhat I know: we wot that but a few years ago there was
a valiant folk dwelling therein, who were lords of the whole dale, and
that they were vanquished by the Dusky Men: but whether they were all
slain and enthralled we wot not; but we deem it otherwise.  As for me it
is of their blood that I am partly come; for my father’s father came
thence to settle in Rose-dale, and wedded a woman of the Dale, who was my
father’s mother.’

‘When was it that ye fell under the Dusky Men?’ said Face-of-god.

Said Dallach: ‘It was five years ago.  They came into the Dale a great
company, all in arms.’

‘Was there battle betwixt you?’ said Face-of-god.

‘Alas! not so,’ said Dallach.  ‘We were a happy folk there; but soft and
delicate: for the Dale is exceeding fertile, and beareth wealth in
abundance, both corn and oil and wine and fruit, and of beasts for man’s
service the best that may be.  Would that there had been battle, and that
I had died therein with those that had a heart to fight; and even so
saith now every man, yea, every woman in the Dale.  But it was not so
when the elders met in our Council-House on the day when the Dusky Men
bade us pay them tribute and give them houses to dwell in and lands to
live by.  Then had we weapons in our hands, but no hearts to use them.’

‘What befell then?’ said the goodman of Whitegarth.

Said Dallach: ‘Look ye to it, lords, that it befall not in Burgdale!  We
gave them all they asked for, and deemed we had much left.  What befell,
sayst thou?  We sat quiet; we went about our work in fear and trembling,
for grim and hideous were they to look on.  At first they meddled not
much with us, save to take from our houses what they would of meat and
drink, or raiment, or plenishing.  And all this we deemed we might bear,
and that we needed no more than to toil a little more each day so as to
win somewhat more of wealth.  But soon we found that it would not be so;
for they had no mind to till the teeming earth or work in the acres we
had given them, or to sit at the loom, or hammer in the stithy, or do any
manlike work; it was we that must do all that for their behoof, and it
was altogether for them that we laboured, and nought for ourselves; and
our bodies were only so much our own as they were needful to be kept
alive for labour.  Herein were our tasks harder than the toil of any
mules or asses, save for the younger and goodlier of the women, whom they
would keep fair and delicate to be their bed-thralls.

‘Yet not even so were our bodies safe from their malice: for these men
were not only tyrants, but fools and madmen.  Let alone that there were
few days without stripes and torments to satiate their fury or their
pleasure, so that in all streets and nigh any house might you hear
wailing and screaming and groaning; but moreover, though a wise man would
not willingly slay his own thrall any more than his own horse or ox, yet
did these men so wax in folly and malice, that they would often hew at
man or woman as they met them in the way from mere grimness of soul; and
if they slew them it was well.  Thereof indeed came quarrels enough
betwixt master and master, for they are much given to man-slaying amongst
themselves: but what profit to us thereof?  Nay, if the dead man were a
chieftain, then woe betide the thralls! for thereof must many an one be
slain on his grave-mound to serve him on the hell-road.  To be short: we
have heard of men who be fierce, and men who be grim; but these we may
scarce believe us to be men at all, but trolls rather; and ill will it be
if their race waxeth in the world.’

The Burgdale men hearkened with all their ears, and wondered that such
things could befall; and they rejoiced at the work that lay before them,
and their hearts rose high at the thought of battle in that behalf, and
the fame that should come of it.  As for the runaway, they made so much
of him that the man marvelled; for they dealt with him like a woman
cherishing a son, and knew not how to be kind enough to him.




CHAPTER XXVIII.  THE MEN OF BURGDALE MEET THE RUNAWAYS.


NOW ere the night was far spent, Dallach arose and said:

‘Kind folk, ye will presently be sleeping; but I bid you keep a good
watch, and if ye will be ruled by me, ye will kindle no fire on the
morrow, for the smoke riseth thick in the morning air, and is as a
beacon.  As for me, I shall leave you here to rest, and I myself will
fare on mine errand.’

They bade him sleep and rest him after so many toils and hardships,
saying that they were not tied to an hour to be back in Burgdale; but he
said: ‘Nay, the moon is high, and it is as good as daylight to me, who
could find my way even by starlight; and your tarrying here is nowise
safe.  Moreover, if I could find those folk and bring them part of the
way by night and cloud it were well; for if we were taken again, burning
quick would be the best death by which we should die.  As for me, now am
I strong with meat and drink and hope; and when I come to Burgdale there
will be time enough for resting and slumber.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Shall I not wend with thee to see these people and the
lairs wherein they hide?’

The man smiled: ‘Nay, earl,’ said he, ‘that shall not be.  For wot ye
what?  If they were to see me in company of a man-at-arms they would deem
that I was bringing the foe upon them, and would flee, or mayhappen would
fall upon us.  For as for me, when I saw thee, thou wert close anigh me,
so I knew thee to be no Dusky Man; but they would see the glitter of
thine arms from afar, and to them all weaponed men are foemen.  Thou,
lord, knowest not the heart of a thrall, nor the fear and doubt that is
in it.  Nay, I myself must cast off these clothes that ye have given me,
and fare naked, lest they mistrust me.  Only I will take a spear in my
hand, and sling a knife round my neck, if ye will give them to me; for if
the worst happen, I will not be taken alive.’

Therewith he cast off his raiment, and they gave him the weapons and
wished him good speed, and he went his way twixt moonlight and shadow;
but the Burgdalers went to sleep when they had set a watch.

Early in the morning they awoke, and the sun was shining and the thrushes
singing in the thorn-brake, and all seemed fair and peaceful, and a
little haze still hung about the face of the burg over the river.  So
they went down to the water and washed the night from off them; and
thence the most part of them went back to their lair among the
thorn-bushes: but four of them went up the dale into the oak-wood to
shoot a buck, and five more they sent out to watch their skirts around
them; and Face-of-god with old Stone-face went over a ford of the stream,
and came on to the lower slope of the burg, and so went up it to the top.
Thence they looked about to see if aught were stirring, but they saw
little save the waste and the wood, which on the north-east was thick of
big trees stretching out a long way.  Their own lair was clear to see
over its bank and the bushes thereof, and that misliked Face-of-god, lest
any foe should climb the burg that day.  The morning was clear, and
Face-of-god looking north-and-by-west deemed he saw smoke rising into the
air over the tree-covered ridges that hid the further distance toward
that aírt, though further east uphove the black shoulders of the Great
that Waste and the snowy peaks behind them.  The said smoke was not such
as cometh from one great fire, but was like a thin veil staining the pale
blue sky, as when men are burning ling on the heath-side and it is seen
aloof.

He showed that smoke to Stone-face, who smiled and said:

‘Now will they be lighting the cooking fires in Rose-dale: would I were
there with a few hundreds of axes and staves at my back!’

‘Yea,’ said Face-of-god, smiling in his face, ‘but where I pray thee are
these elves and wood-wights, that we meet them not?  Grim things there
are in the woods, and things fair enough also: but meseemeth that the
trolls and the elves of thy young years have been frighted away.’

Said Stone-face: ‘Maybe, foster-son; that hath been seen ere now, that
when one race of man overrunneth the land inhabited by another, the
wights and elves that love the vanquished are seen no more, or get them
away far off into the outermost wilds, where few men ever come.’

‘Yea,’ said Face-of-god, ‘that may well be.  But deemest thou by that
token that we shall be vanquished?’

‘As for us, I know not,’ said Stone-face; ‘but thy friends of Shadowy
Vale have been vanquished.  Moreover, concerning these felons whom now we
are hunting, are we all so sure that they be men?  Certain it is, that
when I go into battle with them, I shall smite with no more pity than my
sword, as if I were smiting things that may not feel the woes of man.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Yea, even so shall it be with me.  But what thinkest
thou of these runaways?  Shall we have tidings of them, or shall Dallach
bring the foe upon us?  It was for the sake of that question that I have
clomb the burg: and that we might watch the land about us.’

‘Nay,’ said Stone-face, ‘I have seen many men, and I deem of Dallach that
he is a true man.  I deem we shall soon have tidings of his fellows; and
they may have seen the elves and wood-wights: I would fain ask them
thereof, and am eager to see them.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘And I somewhat dread to see them, and their rags and
their misery and the weals of their stripes.  It irked me to see Dallach
when he first fell to his meat last night, how he ate like a dog for fear
and famine.  How shall it be, moreover, when we have them in the Dale,
and they fall to the deed of kind there, as they needs must.  Will they
not bear us evil and thrall-like men?’

‘Maybe,’ said Stone-face, ‘and maybe not; for they have been thralls but
for a little while: and I deem that in no long time shall ye see them
much bettered by plenteous meat and rest.  And after all is said, this
Dallach bore him like a valiant man; also it was valiant of him to flee;
and of the others may ye say the like.  But look you! there are men going
down yonder towards our lair: belike those shall be our guests, and there
be no Dusky Men amongst them.  Come, let us home!’

So Face-of-god looked and beheld from the height of the burg shapes of
men grey and colourless creeping toward the lair from sunshine to shadow,
like wild creatures shy and fearful of the hunter, or so he deemed of
them.

So he turned away, angry and sad of heart, and the twain went down the
burg and across the water to their camp, having seen little to tell of
from the height.

When they came to their campment there were their folk standing in a ring
round about Dallach and the other runaways.  They made way for the
War-leader and Stone-face, who came amongst them and beheld the Runaways,
that they were many more than they looked to see; for they were of carles
one score and three, and of women eighteen, all told save Dallach.  When
they saw those twain come through the ring of men and perceived that they
were chieftains, some of them fell down on their knees before them and
held out their joined hands to them, and kissed the Burgdalers’ feet and
the hems of their garments, while the tears streamed out of their eyes:
some stood moving little and staring before them stupidly: and some kept
glancing from face to face of the well-liking happy Burgdale carles,
though for a while even their faces were sad and downcast at the sight of
the poor men: some also kept murmuring one or two words in their country
tongue, and Dallach told Face-of-god that these were crying out for
victual.

It must be said of these poor folk that they were of divers conditions,
and chiefly of three: and first there were seven of Rose-dale and five of
Silver-dale late come to the wood (of these Silver-dalers Dallach had
told but of two, for the other three were but just come).  Of these
twelve were seven women, and all, save two of the women, were clad in one
scanty kirtle or shirt only; for such was the wont of the Dusky Men with
their thralls.  They had brought away weapons, and had amongst them six
axes and a spear, and a sword, and five knives, and one man had a shield.

Yet though these were clad and armed, yet in some wise were they the
worst of all; they were so timorous and cringing, and most of them
heavy-eyed and sullen and down-looking.  Many of them had been grievously
mishandled: one man had had his left hand smitten off; another was docked
of three of his toes, and the gristle of his nose slit up; one was halt,
and four had been ear-cropped, nor did any lack weals of whipping.  Of
the Silver-dale new-comers the three men were the worst of all the
Runaways, with wild wandering eyes, but sullen also, and cringing if any
drew nigh, and would not look anyone in the face, save presently
Face-of-god, on whom they were soon fond to fawn, as a dog on his master.
But the women who were with them, and who were well-nigh as timorous as
the men, were those two gaily-dad ones, and they were soft-handed and
white-skinned, save for the last days of weather in the wood; for they
had been bed-thralls of the Dusky Men.

Such were the new-comers to the wood.  But others had been, like Dallach,
months therein; it may be said that there were eighteen of these, carles
and queens together.  Little raiment they had amongst them, and some were
all but stark naked, so that on these might well be seen as on Dallach
the marks of old stripes, and of these also were there men who had been
shorn of some member or other, and they were all burnt and blackened by
the weather of the woodland; yet for all their nakedness, they bore
themselves bolder and more manlike than the later comers, nor did they
altogether lack weapons taken from their foemen, and most of them had
some edge-tool or another.  Of these folk were four from Silver-dale,
though Dallach knew it not.

Besides these were a half score and one who had been years in the wood
instead of months; weather-beaten indeed were these, shaggy and
rough-skinned like wild men of kind.  Some of them had made themselves
skin breeches or clouts, some went stark naked; of weapons of the Dale
had they few, but they bore bows of hazel or wych-elm strung with
deer-gut, and shafts headed with flint stones; staves also of the same
fashion, and great clubs of oak or holly: some of them also had made them
targets of skin and willow-twigs, for these were the warriors of the
Runaways: they had a few steel knives amongst them, but had mostly
learned the craft of using sharp flints for knives: but four of these
were women.

Three of these men were of the kindreds of the Wolf from Silver-dale, and
had been in the wood for hard upon ten years, and wild as they were, and
without hope of meeting their fellows again, they went proudly and boldly
amongst the others, overtopping them by the head and more.  For the
greater part of these men were somewhat short of stature, though by
nature strong and stout of body.

It must be told that though Dallach had thus gotten all these many
Runaways together, yet had they not been dwelling together as one folk;
for they durst not, lest the Dusky Men should hear thereof and fall upon
them, but they had kept themselves as best they could in caves and in
brakes three together or two, or even faring alone as Dallach did: only
as he was a strong and stout-hearted man, he went to and fro and wandered
about more than the others, so that he foregathered with most of them and
knew them.  He said also that he doubted not but that there were more
Runaways in the wood, but these were all he could come at.  Divers who
had fled had died from time to time, and some had been caught and cruelly
slain by their masters.  They were none of them old; the oldest, said
Dallach, scant of forty winters, though many from their aspect might have
been old enough.

So Face-of-god looked and beheld all these poor people; and said to
himself, that he might well have dreaded that sight.  For here was he
brought face to face with the Sorrow of the Earth, whereof he had known
nought heretofore, save it might be as a tale in a minstrel’s song.  And
when he thought of the minutes that had made the hours, and the hours
that had made the days that these men had passed through, his heart
failed him, and he was dumb and might not speak, though he perceived that
the men of Burgdale looked for speech from him; but he waved his hand to
his folk, and they understood him, for they had heard Dallach say that
some of them were crying for victual.  So they set to work and dighted
for them such meat as they had, and they set them down on the grass and
made themselves their carvers and serving-men, and bade them eat what
they would of such as there was.  Yet, indeed, it grieved the Burgdalers
again to note how these folk were driven to eat; for they themselves,
though they were merry folk, were exceeding courteous at table, and of
great observance of manners: whereas these poor Runaways ate, some of
them like hungry dogs, and some hiding their meat as if they feared it
should be taken from them, and some cowering over it like falcons, and
scarce any with a manlike pleasure in their meal.  And, their eating
over, the more part of them sat dull and mopish, and as if all things
were forgotten for the time present.

Albeit presently Dallach bestirred him and said to Face-of-god: ‘Lord of
the Earl-folk, if I might give thee rede, it were best to turn your faces
to Burgdale without more tarrying.  For we are over-nigh to Rose-dale,
being but thus many in company.  But when we come to our next
resting-place, then shall bring thee to speech with the last-comers from
Silver-dale; for there they talk with the tongue of the kindreds; but we
of Rose-dale for the more part talk otherwise; though in my house it came
down from father to son.’

‘Yea,’ said Face-of-god, gazing still on that unhappy folk, as they sat
or lay upon the grass at rest for a little while: but him-seemed as he
gazed that some memories of past time stirred in some of them; for some,
they hung their heads and the tears stole out of their eyes and rolled
down their cheeks.  But those older Runaways of Silver-dale were not
crouched down like most of the others, but strode up and down like beasts
in a den; yet were the tears on the face of one of these.  Then
Face-of-god constrained himself, and spake to the folk, and said: ‘We are
now over-nigh to our foes of Rose-dale to lie here any longer, being too
few to fall upon them.  We will come hither again with a host when we
have duly questioned these men who have sought refuge with us: and let us
call yonder height the Burg of the Runaways, and it shall be a landmark
for us when we are on the road to Rose-dale.’

Then the Burgdalers bade the Runaways courteously and kindly to arise and
take the road with them; and by that time were their men all come in; and
four of them had venison with them, which was needful, if they were to
eat that night or the morrow, as the guests had eaten them to the bone.

So they tarried no more, but set out on the homeward way; and Face-of-god
bade Dallach walk beside him, and asked him such concerning Rose-dale and
its Dusky Men.  Dallach told him that these were not so many as they were
masterful, not being above eight hundreds of men, all fighting-men.  As
to women, they had none of their own race, but lay with the Daleswomen at
their will, and begat children of them; and all or most of the said
children favoured the race of their begetters.  Of the men-children they
reared most, but the women-children they slew at once; for they valued
not women of their own blood: but besides the women of the Dale, they
would go at whiles in bands to the edges of the Plain and beguile
wayfarers, and bring back with them thence women to be their bed-thralls;
albeit some of these were bought with a price from the Westland men.

As to the number of the folk of Rose-dale, its own folk, he said they
would number some five thousand souls, one with another; of whom some
thousand might be fit to bear arms if they had the heart thereto, as they
had none.  Yet being closely questioned, he deemed that they might fall
on their masters from behind, if battle were joined.

He said that the folk of Rose-dale had been a goodly folk before they
were enthralled, and peaceable with one another, but that now it was a
sport of the Dusky Men to set a match between their thralls to fight it
out with sword and buckler or otherwise; and the vanquished man, if he
were not sore hurt, they would scourge, or shear some member from him, or
even slay him outright, if the match between the owners were so made.
And many other sad and grievous tales he told to Face-of-god, more than
need be told again; so that the War-leader went along sorry and angry,
with his teeth set, and his hand on the sword-hilt.

Thus they went till night fell on them, and they could scarce see the
signs they had made on their outward journey.  Then they made stay in a
little valley, having set a watch duly; and since they were by this time
far from Rose-dale, and were a great company as regarded scattered bands
of the foe, they lighted their fires and cooked their venison, and made
good cheer to the Runaways, and so went to sleep in the wild-wood.

When morning was come they gat them at once to the road; and if the
Burgdalers were eager to be out of the wood, their eagerness was as
nought to the eagerness of the Runaways, most of whom could not be easy
now, and deemed every minute lost unless they were wending on to the
Dale; so that this day they were willing to get over the more ground,
whereas they had not set out on their road till afternoon yesterday.

Howsoever, they rested at noontide, and Face-of-god bade Dallach bring
him to speech with others of the Runaways, and first that he might talk
with those three men of the kindreds who had fled from Silver-dale in
early days.  So Dallach brought them to him; but he found that though
they spake the tongue, they were so few-spoken from wildness and
loneliness, at least at first, that nought could come from them that was
not dragged from them.

These men said that they had been in the wood more than nine years, so
that they knew but little of the conditions of the Dale in that present
day.  However, as to what Dallach had said concerning the Dusky Men, they
strengthened his words; and they said that the Dusky Men took no delight
save in beholding torments and misery, and that they doubted if they were
men or trolls.  They said that since they had dwelt in the wood they had
slain not a few of the foemen, waylaying them as occasion served, but
that in this warfare they had lost two of their fellows.  When
Face-of-god asked them of their deeming of the numbers of the Dusky Men,
they said that before those bands had broken into Rose-dale, they counted
them, as far as they could call to mind, at about three thousand men, all
warriors; and that somewhat less than one thousand had gone up into
Rose-dale, and some had died, and many had been cast away in the
wild-wood, their fellows knew not how.  Yet had not their numbers in
Silver-dale diminished; because two years after they (the speakers) had
fled, came three more Dusky Companies or Tribes into Silver-dale, and
each of these tribes was of three long hundreds; and with their coming
had the cruelty and misery much increased in the Dale, so that the
thralls began to die fast; and that drave the Dusky Men beyond the
borders of Silver-dale, so that they fell upon Rose-dale.  When asked how
many of the kindreds might yet be abiding in Silver-dale, their faces
clouded, and they seemed exceeding wroth, and answered, that they would
willingly hope that most of those that had not been slain at the time of
the overthrow were now dead, yet indeed they feared there were yet some
alive, and mayhappen not a few women.

By then must they get on foot again, and so the talk fell between them;
but when they made stay for the night, after they had done their meat,
Face-of-god prayed Dallach bring to him some of the latest-come folk from
Silver-dale, and he brought to him the man and the woman who had been in
the Dale within that moon.  As to the man, if those of the Earl-folk had
been few-spoken from fierceness and wildness, he was no less so from mere
dulness and weariness of misery; but the woman’s tongue went glibly
enough, and it seemed to pleasure her to talk about her past miseries.
As aforesaid, she was better clad than most of those of Rose-dale, and
indeed might be called gaily clad, and where her raiment was befouled or
rent, it was from the roughness of the wood and its weather, and not from
the thralldom.  She was a young and fair woman, black-haired and
grey-eyed.  She had washed herself that day in a woodland stream which
they had crossed on the road, and had arrayed her garments as trimly as
she might, and had plucked some fumitory, wherewith she had made a
garland for her head.  She sat down on the grass in front of Face-of-god,
while the man her mate stood leaning against a tree and looked on her
greedily.  The Burgdale carles drew near to her to hearken her story, and
looked kindly on the twain.  She smiled on them, but especially on
Face-of-god, and said:

‘Thou hast sent for me, lord, and I wot well thou wouldst hear my tale
shortly, for it would be long to tell if I were to tell it fully, and
bring into it all that I have endured, which has been bitter enough, for
all that ye see me smooth of skin and well-liking of body.  I have been
the bed-thrall of one of the chieftains of the Dusky Men, at whose house
many of their great men would assemble, so that ye may ask me whatso ye
will; as I have heard much talk and may call it to mind.  Now if ye ask
me whether I have fled because of the shame that I, a free woman come of
free folk, should be a mere thrall in the bed of the foes of my kin, and
with no price paid for me, I must needs say it is not so; since over long
have we of the Dale been thralls to be ashamed of such a matter.  And
again, if ye deem that I have fled because I have been burdened with
grievous toil and been driven thereto by the whip, ye may look on my
hands and my body and ye will see that I have toiled little therewith:
nor again did I flee because I could not endure a few stripes now and
again; for such usage do thralls look for, even when they are delicately
kept for the sake of the fairness of their bodies, and this they may well
endure; yea also, and the mere fear of death by torment now and again.
But before me lay death both assured and horrible; so I took mine own
counsel, and told none for fear of bewrayal, save him who guarded me; and
that was this man; who fled not from fear, but from love of me, and to
him I have given all that I might give.  So we got out of the house and
down the Dale by night and cloud, and hid for one whole day in the Dale
itself, where I trembled and feared, so that I deemed I should die of
fear; but this man was well pleased with my company, and with the lack of
toil and beating even for the day.  And in the night again we fled and
reached the wild-wood before dawn, and well-nigh fell into the hands of
those who were hunting us, and had outgone us the day before, as we lay
hid.  Well, what is to say?  They saw us not, else had we not been here,
but scattered piece-meal over the land.  This carle knew the passes of
the wood, because he had followed his master therein, who was a great
hunter in the wastes, contrary to the wont of these men, and he had lain
a night on the burg yonder; therefore he brought me thither, because he
knew that thereabout was plenty of prey easy to take, and he had a bow
with him; and there we fell in with others of our folk who had fled
before, and with Dallach; who e’en now told us what was hard to believe,
that there was a fair young man like one of the Gods leading a band of
goodly warriors, and seeking for us to bring us into a peaceful and happy
land; and this man would not have gone with him because he feared that he
might fall into thralldom of other folk, who would take me away from him;
but for me, I said I would go in any case, for I was weary of the wood
and its roughness and toil, and that if I had a new master he would
scarcely be worse than my old one was at his best, and him I could
endure.  So I went, and glad and glad I am, whatever ye will do with me.
And now will I answer whatso ye may ask of me.’

She laid her limbs together daintily and looked fondly on Face-of-god,
and the carle scowled at her somewhat at first, but presently, as he
watched her, his face smoothed itself out of its wrinkles.

But Face-of-god pondered a little while, and then asked the woman if she
had heard any words to remember of late days concerning the affairs of
the Dusky Men and their intent; and he said:

‘I pray thee, sister, be truthful in thine answer, for somewhat lieth on
it.’

She said: ‘How could I speak aught but the sooth to thee, O lovely lord?
The last word spoken hereof I mind me well: for my master had been
mishandling me, and I was sullen to him after the smart, and he mocked
and jeered me, and said: Ye women deem we cannot do without you, but ye
are fools, and know nothing; we are going to conquer a new land where the
women are plenty, and far fairer than ye be; and we shall leave you to
fare afield like the other thralls, or work in the digging of silver; and
belike ye wot what that meaneth.  Also he said that they would leave us
to the new tribe of their folk, far wilder than they, whom they looked
for in the Dale in about a moon’s wearing; so that they needs must seek
to other lands.  Also this same talk would we hear whenever it pleased
any of them to mock us their bed-thralls.  Now, my sweet lord, this is
nought but the very sooth.’

Again spake Face-of-god after a while:

‘Tell me, sister, hast thou heard of any of the Dusky Men being slain in
the wood?’

‘Yea,’ she said, and turned pale therewith and caught her breath as one
choking; but said in a little while:

‘This alone was it hard for me to tell thee amongst all the I griefs I
have borne, whereof I might have told thee many tales, and will do one
day if thou wilt suffer it; but fear makes this hard for me.  For in very
sooth this was the cause of my fleeing, that my master was brought in
slain by an arrow in the wood; and he was to be borne to bale and burned
in three days’ wearing; and we three bed-thralls of his, and three of the
best of the men-thralls, were to be burned quick on his bale-fire after
sore torments; therefore I fled, and hid a knife in my bosom, that I
might not be taken alive; but sweet was life to me, and belike I should
not have smitten myself.’

And she wept sore for pity of herself before them all.  But Face-of-god
said:

‘Knowest thou, sister, by whom the man was slain?’

‘Nay,’ she said, still sobbing; ‘but I heard nought thereof, nor had I
noted it in my terror.  The death of others, who were slain before him,
and the loss of many, we knew not how, made them more bitterly cruel with
us.’

And again was she weeping; but Face-of-god said kindly to her: ‘Weep no
more, sister, for now shall all thy troubles be over; I feel in my heart
that we shall overcome these felons, and make an end of them, and there
then is Burgdale for thee in its length and breadth, or thine own Dale to
dwell in freely.’

‘Nay,’ she said, ‘never will I go back thither!’ and she turned round to
him and kissed his feet, and then arose and turned a little toward her
mate; and the carle caught her by the hand and led her away, and seemed
glad so to do.

So once again they fell asleep in the woods, and again the next morning
fared on their way early that they might come into Burgdale before
nightfall.  When they stayed a while at noontide and ate, Face-of-god
again had talk with the Runaways, and this time with those of Rose-dale,
and he heard much the same story from them that he had heard before, told
in divers ways, till his heart was sick with the hearing of it.

On this last day Face-of-god led his men well athwart the wood, so that
he hit Wildlake’s Way without coming to Carl-stead; and he came down into
the Dale some four hours after noon on a bright day of latter March.  At
the ingate to the Dale he found watches set, the men whereof told him
that the tidings were not right great.  Hall-face’s company had fallen in
with a band of the Felons three score in number in the oak-wood nigh to
Boars-bait, and had slain some and chased the rest, since they found it
hard to follow them home as they ran for the tangled thicket: of the
Burgdalers had two been slain and five hurt in this battle.

As for Red-coat’s company, they had fallen in with no foemen.




CHAPTER XXIX.  THEY BRING THE RUNAWAYS TO BURGSTEAD.


SO now being out of the wood, they went peaceably and safely along the
Portway, the Runaways mingling with the Dalesmen.  Strange showed amidst
the health and wealth of the Dale the rags and misery and nakedness of
the thralls, like a dream amidst the trim gaiety of spring; and
whomsoever they met, or came up with on the road, whatso his business
might be, could not refrain himself from following them, but mingled with
the men-at-arms, and asked them of the tidings; and when they heard who
these poor people were, even delivered thralls of the Foemen, they were
glad at heart and cried out for joy; and many of the women, nay, of the
men also, when they first came across that misery from out the heart of
their own pleasant life, wept for pity and love of the poor folk, now at
last set free, and blessed the swords that should do the like by the
whole people.

They went slowly as men began to gather about them; yea, some of the good
folk that lived hard by must needs fare home to their houses to fetch
cakes and wine for the guests; and they made them sit down and rest on
the green grass by the side of the Portway, and eat and drink to cheer
their hearts; others, women and young swains, while they rested went down
into the meadows and plucked of the spring flowers, and twined them
hastily with deft and well-wont fingers into chaplets and garlands for
their heads and bodies.  Thus indeed they covered their nakedness, till
the lowering faces and weather-beaten skins of those hardly-entreated
thralls looked grimly out from amidst the knots of cowslip and oxlip, and
the branches of the milk-white blackthorn bloom, and the long trumpets of
the daffodils, of the hue that wrappeth round the quill which the webster
takes in hand when she would pleasure her soul with the sight of the
yellow growing upon the dark green web.

So they went on again as the evening was waning, and when they were
gotten within a furlong of the Gate, lo! there was come the minstrelsy,
the pipe and the tabor, the fiddle and the harp, and the folk that had
learned to sing the sweetest, both men and women, and Redesman at the
head of them all.

Then fell the throng into an ordered company; first went the music, and
then a score of Face-of-god’s warriors with drawn swords and uplifted
spears; and then the flower-bedecked misery of the Runaways, men and
women going together, gaunt, befouled, and hollow-eyed, with here and
there a flushed cheek or gleaming eye, or tear-bedewed face, as the joy
and triumph of the eve pierced through their wonted weariness of grief;
then the rest of the warriors, and lastly the mingled crowd of Dalesfolk,
tall men and fair women gaily arrayed, clean-faced, clear-skinned, and
sleek-haired, with glancing eyes and ruddy lips.

And now Redesman turned about to the music and drew his bow across his
fiddle, and the other bows ran out in concert, and the harps followed the
story of them, and he lifted up his voice and sang the words of an old
song, and all the singers joined him and blended their voices with his.
And these are some of the words which they sang:

   Lo! here is Spring, and all we are living,
      We that were wan with Winter’s fear;
   Reach out your hands to her hands that are giving,
      Lest ye lose her love and the light of the year.

   Many a morn did we wake to sorrow,
      When low on the land the cloud-wrath lay;
   Many an eve we feared to-morrow,
      The unbegun unfinished day.

   Ah we—we hoped not, and thou wert tardy;
      Nought wert thou helping; nought we prayed.
   Where was the eager heart, the hardy?
      Where was the sweet-voiced unafraid?

   But now thou lovest, now thou leadest,
      Where is gone the grief of our minds?
   What was the word of the tale, that thou heedest
      E’en as the breath of the bygone winds?

   Green and green is thy garment growing
      Over thy blossoming limbs beneath;
   Up o’er our feet rise the blades of thy sowing,
      Pierced are our hearts with thine odorous breath.

   But where art thou wending, thou new-comer?
      Hurrying on to the Courts of the Sun?
   Where art thou now in the House of the Summer?
      Told are thy days and thy deed is done.

   Spring has been here for us that are living
      After the days of Winter’s fear;
   Here in our hands is the wealth of her giving,
      The Love of the Earth, and the Light of the Year.

Thus came they to the Gate, and lo! the Bride thereby, leaning against a
buttress, gazing with no dull eyes at the coming throng.  She was now
clad in her woman’s attire again, to wit a light flame-coloured gown over
a green kirtle; but she yet bore a gilded helm on her head and a sword
girt to her side in token of her oath to the God.  She had been in
Hall-face’s company in that last battle, and had done a man’s service
there, fighting very valiantly, but had not been hurt, and had come back
to Burgstead when the shift of men was.

Now she drew herself up and stood a little way before the Gate and looked
forth on the throng, and when her eyes beheld the Runaways amidst of the
weaponed carles of Burgdale, her face flushed, and her eyes filled with
tears as she stood, partly wondering, partly deeming what they were.  She
waited till Stone-face came by her, and then she took the old man by the
sleeve, and drew him apart a little and said to him: ‘What meaneth this
show, my friend?  Who hath clad these folk thus strangely; and who be
these three naked tall ones, so fierce-looking, but somewhat noble of
aspect?’

For indeed those three men of the kindreds, when they had gotten into the
Dale, and had rested them, and drunk a cup of wine, and when they had
seen the chaplets and wreaths of the spring-flowers wherewith they were
bedecked, and had smelt the sweet savour of them, fell to walking
proudly, heeding not their nakedness; for no rag had they upon them save
breech-clouts of deer-skin: they had changed weapons with the Burgdale
carles; and one had gotten a great axe, which he bore over his shoulder,
and the shaft thereof was all done about with copper; and another had
shouldered a long heavy thrusting-spear, and the third, an exceeding tall
man, bore a long broad-bladed war-sword.  Thus they went, brown of skin
beneath their flower-garlands, their long hair bleached by the sun
falling about their shoulders; high they strode amongst the shuffling
carles and tripping women of the later-come thralls.  But when they heard
the music, and saw that they were coming to the Gate in triumph, strange
thoughts of old memories swelled up in their hearts, and they refrained
them not from weeping, for they felt that the joy of life had come back
to them.

Nor must it be deemed that these were the only ones amongst the Runaways
whose hearts were cheered and softened: already were many of them coming
back to life, as they felt their worn bodies caressed by the clear soft
air of Burgdale, and the sweetness of the flowers that hung about them,
and saw all round about the kind and happy faces of their well-willers.

So Stone-face looked on the Bride as she stood with face yet
tear-bedewed, awaiting his answer, and said:

‘Daughter, thou sayest who clad these folk thus?  It was misery that hath
so dight them; and they are the images of what we shall be if we love
foul life better than fair death, and so fall into the hands of the
Felons, who were the masters of these men.  As for the tall naked men,
they are of our own blood, and kinsmen to Face-of-god’s new friends; and
they are of the best of the vanquished: it was in early days that they
fled from thralldom; as we may have to do.  Now, daughter, I bid thee be
as joyous as thou art valiant, and then shall all be well.’

Therewith she smiled on him, and he departed, and she stood a little
while, as the throng moved on and was swallowed by the Gate, and looked
after them; and for all her pity for the other folk, she thought chiefly
of those fearless tall men who were of the blood of those with whom it
was lawful to wed.

There she stood as the wind dried the tears upon her cheeks, thinking of
the sorrow which these folk had endured, and their stripes and mocking,
their squalor and famine; and she wondered and looked on her own fair and
shapely hands with the precious finger-rings thereon, and on the dainty
cloth and trim broidery of her sleeve; and she touched her smooth cheek
with the back of her hand, and smiled, and felt the spring sweet in her
mouth, and its savour goodly in her nostrils; and therewith she called to
mind the aspect of her lovely body, as whiles she had seen it imaged, all
its full measure, in the clear pool at midsummer, or piece-meal, in the
shining steel of the Westland mirror.  She thought also with what joy she
drew the breath of life, yea, even amidst of grief, and of how sweet and
pure and well-nurtured she was, and how well beloved of many friends and
the whole folk, and she set all this beside those woeful bodies and
lowering faces, and felt shame of her sorrow of heart, and the pain it
had brought to her; and ever amidst shame and pity of all that misery
rose up before her the images of those tall fierce men, and it seemed to
her as if she had seen something like to them in some dream or
imagination of her mind.

So came the Burgdalers and their guests into the street of Burgstead
amidst music and singing; and the throng was great there.  Then
Face-of-god bade make a ring about the strangers, and they did so, and he
and the Runaways alone were in the midst of it; and he spake in a loud
voice and said:

‘Men of the Dale and the Burg, these folk whom here ye see in such a
sorry plight are they whom our deadly foes have rejoiced to torment; let
us therefore rejoice to cherish them.  Now let those men come forth who
deem that they have enough and more, so that they may each take into
their houses some two or three of these friends such as would be fain to
be together.  And since I am War-leader, and have the right hereto, I
will first choose them whom I will lead into the House of the Face.  And
lo you! will I have this man (and he laid his hand on Dallach),who is he
whom I first came across, and who found us all these others, and next I
will have yonder tall carles, the three of them, because I perceive them
to be men meet to be with a War-leader, and to follow him in battle.’

Therewith he drew the three Men of the Wolf towards him, but Dallach
already was standing beside him.  And folk rejoiced in Face-of-god.

But the Bride came forward next, and spake to him meekly and simply:

‘War-leader, let me have of the women those who need me most, that I may
bring them to the House of the Steer, and try if there be not some good
days yet to be found for them, wherein they shall but remember the past
grief as an ugly dream.’

Then Face-of-god looked on her, and him-seemed he had never seen her so
fair; and all the shame wherewith he had beheld her of late was gone from
him, and his heart ran over with friendly love towards her as she looked
into his face with kindly eyes; and he said:

‘Kinswoman, take thy choice as thy kindness biddeth, and happy shall they
be whom thou choosest.’

She bowed her head soberly, and chose from among the guests four women of
the saddest and most grievous, and no man of their kindred spake for
going along with them; then she went her ways home, leading one of them
by the hand, and strange was it to see those twain going through sun and
shade together, that poor wretch along with the goodliest of women.

Then came forward one after other of the worthy goodmen of the Dale, and
especially such as were old, and they led away one one man, and another
two, and another three, and often would a man crave to go with a woman or
a woman with a man, and it was not gainsaid them.  So were all the guests
apportioned, and ill-content were those goodmen that had to depart
without a guest; and one man would say to another: ‘Such-an-one, be not
downcast; this guest shall be between us, if he will, and shall dwell
with thee and me month about; but this first month with me, since I was
first comer.’  And so forth was it said.

Now to prevent the time to come, it may be said about the Runaways, that
when they had been a little while amongst the Burgdalers, well fed and
well clad and kindly cherished, it was marvellous how they were bettered
in aspect of body, and it began to be seen of them that they were
well-favoured people, and divers of the women exceeding goodly,
black-haired and grey-eyed, and very clear-skinned and white-skinned;
most of them were young, and the oldest had not seen above forty winters.
They of Rose-dale, and especially such as had first fled away to the
wood, were very soon seen to be merry and kindly folk; but they who had
been longest in captivity, and notably those from Silver-dale who were
not of the kindreds, were for a long time sullen and heavy, and it
availed little to trust to them for the doing of work; albeit they would
follow about their friends of Burgdale with the love of a dog; also they
were, divers of them, somewhat thievish, and if they lacked anything
would liefer take it by stealth than ask for it; which forsooth the
Burgdale men took not amiss, but deemed of it as a jest rather.

Very few of the Runaways had any will to fare back to their old homes, or
indeed could be got to go into the wood, or, after a day or two, to say
any word of Rose-dale or Silver-dale.  In this and other matters the
Burgdalers dealt with them as with children who must have their way; for
they deemed that their guests had much time to make up; also they were
well content when they saw how goodly they were, for these Dalesmen loved
to see men goodly of body and of a cheerful countenance.

As for Dallach and the three Silver-dale men of the kindred, they went
gladly whereas the Burgdale men would have them; and half a score others
took weapons in their hands when the war was foughten: concerning which
more hereafter.

But on the even whereof the tale now tells, Face-of-god and Stone-face
and their company met after nightfall in the Hall of the Face clad in
glorious raiment, and therewith were Dallach and the men of Silver-dale,
washen and docked of their long hair, after the fashion of warriors who
bear the helm; and they were clad in gay attire, with battle-swords girt
to their sides and gold rings on their arms.  Somewhat stern and sad-eyed
were those Silver-dalers yet, though they looked on those about them
kindly and courteously when they met their eyes; and Face-of-god yearned
towards them when he called to mind the beauty and wisdom and
loving-kindness of the Sun-beam.  They were, as aforesaid, strong men and
tall, and one of them taller than any amidst that house of tall men.
Their names were Wolf-stone, the tallest, and God-swain, and Spear-fist;
and God-swain the youngest was of thirty winters, and Wolf-stone of
forty.  They came into the Hall in such wise, that when they were washed
and attired, and all men were assembled in the Hall, and the Alderman and
the chieftains sitting on the daïs, Face-of-god brought them in from the
out-bower, holding Dallach by the right hand and Wolf-stone by the left;
and he looked but a stripling beside that huge man.

And when the men in the Hall beheld such goodly warriors, and remembered
their grief late past, they all stood up and shouted for joy of them.
But Face-of-god passed up the Hall with them, and stood before the daïs
and said:

‘O Alderman of the Dale and Chief of the House of the Face, here I bring
to you the foes of our foemen, whom I have met in the Wild-wood, and
bidden to our House; and meseemeth they will be our friends, and stand
beside us in the day of battle.  Therefore I say, take these guests and
me together, or put us all to the door together; and if thou wilt take
them, then show them to such places as thou deemest meet.’

Then stood up the Alderman and said:

‘Men of Silver-dale and Rose-dale, I bid you welcome!  Be ye our friends,
and abide here with us as long as seemeth good to you, and share in all
that is ours.  Son Face-of-god, show these warriors to seats on the daïs
beside thee, and cherish them as well as thou knowest how.’

Then Face-of-god brought them up on to the daïs and sat down on the right
hand of his father, with Dallach on his right hand, and then Wolf-stone
out from him; then sat Stone-face, that there might be a man of the Dale
to talk with them and serve them; and on his right hand first Spear-fist
and then God-swain.  And when they were all sat down, and the meat was on
the board, Iron-face turned to his son Face-of-god and took his hand, and
said in a loud voice, so that many might hear him:

‘Son Face-of-god, son Gold-mane, thou bearest with thee both ill luck and
good.  Erewhile, when thou wanderedst out into the Wild-wood, seeking
thou knewest not what from out of the Land of Dreams, thou didst but
bring aback to us grief and shame; but now that thou hast gone forth with
the neighbours seeking thy foemen, thou hast come aback to us with thine
hands full of honour and joy for us, and we thank thee for thy gifts, and
I call thee a lucky man.  Herewith, kinsman, I drink to thee and the
lasting of thy luck.’

Therewith he stood up and drank the health of the War-leader and the
Guests: and all men were exceeding joyous thereat, when they called to
mind his wrath at the Gate-thing, and they shouted for gladness as they
drank that health, and the feast became exceeding merry in the House of
the Face; and as to the war to come, it seemed to them as if it were over
and done in all triumph.




CHAPTER XXX.  HALL-FACE GOETH TOWARD ROSE-DALE.


ON the morrow Face-of-god took counsel with Hall-face and Stone-face as
to what were best to be done, and they sat on the daïs in the Hall to
talk it over.

Short was the time that had worn since that day in Shadowy Vale, for it
was but eight days since then; yet so many things had befallen in that
time, and, to speak shortly, the outlook for the Burgdalers had changed
so much, that the time seemed long to all the three, and especially to
Face-of-god.

It was yet twenty days till the Great Folk-mote should beholden, and to
Hall-face the time seemed long enough to do somewhat, and he deemed it
were good to gather force and fall on the Dusky Men in Rose-dale, since
now they had gotten men who could lead them the nighest way and by the
safest passes, and who knew all the ways of the foemen.  But to
Stone-face this rede seemed not so good; for they would have to go and
come back, and fight and conquer, in less time than twenty days, or be
belated of the Folk-mote, and meanwhile much might happen.

‘For,’ said Stone-face, ‘we may deem the fighting-men of Rose-dale to be
little less than one thousand, and however we fall on them, even if it be
unawares at first, they shall fight stubbornly; so that we may not send
against them many less than they be, and that shall strip Burgdale of its
fighting-men, so that whatever befalls, we that be left shall have to
bide at home.’

Now was Face-of-god of the same mind as Stone-face; and he said moreover:
‘When we go to Rose-dale we must abide there a while unless we be
overthrown.  For if ye conquer it and come away at once, presently shall
the tidings come to the ears of the Dusky Men in Silver-dale, and they
shall join themselves to those of Rose-dale who have fled before you, and
between them they shall destroy the unhappy people therein; for ye cannot
take them all away with you: and that shall they do all the more now,
when they look to have new thralls in Burgdale, both men and women.  And
this we may not suffer, but must abide till we have met all our foemen
and have overcome them, so that the poor folk there shall be safe from
them till they have learned how to defend their dale.  Now my rede is,
that we send out the War-arrow at once up and down the Dale, and to the
Shepherds and Woodlanders, and appoint a day for the Muster and
Weapon-show of all our Folk, and that day to be the day before the Spring
Market, that is to say, four days before the Great Folk-mote, and
meantime that we keep sure watch about the border of the wood, and now
and again scour the wood, so as to clear the Dale of their wandering
bands.’

‘Yea,’ said Hall-face; ‘and I pray thee, brother, let me have an hundred
of men and thy Dallach, and let us go somewhat deep into the wood towards
Rose-dale, and see what we may come across; peradventure it might be
something better than hart or wild-swine.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘I see no harm therein, if Dallach goeth with thee
freely; for I will have no force put on him or any other of the Runaways.
Yet meseemeth it were not ill for thee to find the road to Rose-dale; for
I have it in my mind to send a company thither to give those Rose-dale
man-quellers somewhat to do at home when we fall upon Silver-dale.
Therefore go find Dallach, and get thy men together at once; for the
sooner thou art gone on thy way the better.  But this I bid thee, go no
further than three days out, that ye may be back home betimes.’

At this word Hall-face’s eyes gleamed with joy, and he went out from the
Hall straightway and sought Dallach, and found him at the Gate.
Iron-face had given him a new sword, a good one, and had bidden him call
it Thicket-clearer, and he would not leave it any moment of the day or
night, but would lay it under his pillow at night as a child does with a
new toy; and now he was leaning against a buttress and drawing the said
sword half out of the scabbard and poring over its blade, which was
indeed fair enough, being wrought with dark grey waving lines like the
eddies of the Weltering Water.

So Hall-face greeted him, and smiled and said:

‘Guest, if thou wilt, thou may’st take that new blade of my father’s work
which thou lovest so, a journey which shall rejoice it.’

‘Yea,’ said Dallach, ‘I suppose that thou wouldest fare on thy brother’s
footsteps, and deemest that I am the man to lead thee on the road, and
even farther than he went; and though it might be thought by some that I
have seen enough of Rose-dale and the parts thereabout for one while, yet
will I go with thee; for now am I a man again, body and soul.’

And therewith he drew Thicket-clearer right out of his sheath and waved
him in the air.  And Hall-face was glad of him and said he was well apaid
of his help.  So they went away together to gather men, and on the morrow
Hall-face departed and went into the Wild-wood with Dallach and an
hundred and two score men.

But as for Face-of-god, he fared up and down the Dale following the
War-arrow, and went into all houses, and talked with the folk, both young
and old, men and women, and told them closely all that had betid and all
that was like to betide; and he was well pleased with that which he saw
and heard; for all took his words well, and were nought afeard or
dismayed by the tidings; and he saw that they would not hang aback.
Meantime the days wore, and Hall-face came not back till the seventh day,
and he brought with him twelve more Runaways, of whom five were women.
But he had lost four men, and had with him Dallach and five others of the
Dalesmen borne upon litters sore hurt; and this was his story:

They got to the Burg of the Runaways on the forenoon of the third day,
and thereby came on five carles of the Runaways—men who had missed
meeting Dallach that other day, but knew what had been done; for one of
them had been sick and could not come with him, and he had told the
others: so now they were hanging about the Burg of the Runaways hoping
somewhat that he might come again; and they met the Burgdalers full of
joy, and brought them trouts that they had caught in the river.

As for the other runaways, namely, five women and two more carles—they
had gotten them close to the entrance into Silver-dale, where by night
and cloud they came on a campment of the Dusky Men, who were leading home
these seven poor wretches, runaways whom they had caught, that they might
slay them most evilly in Rose-stead.  So Hall-face fell on the Dusky Men,
and delivered their captives, but slew not all the foe, and they that
fled brought pursuers on them who came up with them the next day, so near
was Rose-dale, though they made all diligence homeward.  The Burgdalers
must needs turn and fight with those pursuers, and at last they drave
them aback so that they might go on their ways home.  They let not the
grass grow beneath their feet thereafter, till they were assured by
meeting a band of the Woodlanders, who had gone forth to help them, and
with whom they rested a little.  But neither so were they quite done with
the foemen, who came upon them next day a very many: these however they
and the Woodlanders, who were all fresh and unwounded and very valiant,
speedily put to the worse; and so they came on to Burgstead, leaving
those of them who were sorest hurt to be tended by the Woodlanders at
Carlstead, who, as might be looked for, deal with them very lovingly.

It was in the first fight that they suffered that loss of slain and
wounded; and therein the newly delivered thralls fought valiantly against
their masters: as for Dallach, it was no marvel, said Hall-face, that he
was hurt; but rather a marvel that he was not slain, so little he recked
of point and edge, if he might but slay the foemen.

Such was Hall-face’s-tale; and Face-of-god deemed that he had done
unwisely to let him go that journey; for the slaying of a few Dusky Men
was but a light gain to set against the loss of so many Burgdalers; yet
was he glad of the deliverance of those Runaways, and deemed it a gain
indeed.  But henceforth would he hold all still till he should have
tidings of Folk-might; so nought was done thereafter save the warding of
the Dale, from the country of the Shepherds to the Waste above the
Eastern passes.

But Face-of-god himself went up amongst the Shepherds, and abode with a
goodman hight Hound-under-Greenbury, who gathered to him the folk from
the country-side, and they went up on to Greenbury, and sat on the green
grass while he spoke with them and told them, as he had told the others,
what had been done and what should be done.  And they heard him gladly,
and he deemed that there would be no blenching in them, for they were all
in one tale to live and die with their friends of Burgdale, and they said
that they would have no other word save that to bear to the Great
Folk-mote.

So he went away well-pleased, and he fared on thence to the Woodlanders,
and guested at the house of a valiant man hight Wargrove, who on the
morrow morn called the folk together to a green lawn of the Wild-wood, so
that there was scarce a soul of them that was not there.  Then he laid
the whole matter before them; and if the Dalesmen had been merry and
ready, and the Shepherds stout-hearted and friendly, yet were the
Wood-landers more eager still, so that every hour seemed long to them
till they stood in their war-gear; and they told him that now at last was
the hour drawing nigh which they had dreamed of, but had scarce dared to
hope for, when the lost way should be found, and the crooked made
straight, and that which had been broken should be mended; that their
meat and drink, and sleeping and waking, and all that they did were now
become to them but the means of living till the day was come whereon the
two remnants of the children of the Wolf should meet and become one Folk
to live or die together.

Then went Face-of-god back to Burgstead again, and as he stood anigh the
Thing-stead once more, and looked down on the Dale as he had beheld it
last autumn, he bethought him that with all that had been done and all
that had been promised, the earth was clearing of her trouble, and that
now there was nought betwixt him and the happy days of life which the
Dale should give to the dwellers therein, save the gathering hosts of the
battle-field and the day when the last word should be spoken and the
first stroke smitten.  So he went down on to the Portway well content.

Thereafter till the day of the Weapon-show there is nought to tell of,
save that Dallach and the other wounded men began to grow whole again;
and all men sat at home, or went on the woodland ward, expecting great
tidings after the holding of the Folk-mote.




CHAPTER XXXI.  OF THE WEAPON-SHOW OF THE MEN OF BURGDALE AND THEIR
NEIGHBOURS.


NOW on the day appointed for the Weapon-show came the Folk flock-meal to
the great and wide meadow that was cleft by Wildlake as it ran to join
the Weltering Water.  Early in the morning, even before sunrise, had the
wains full of women and children begun to come thither.  Also there came
little horses and asses from the Shepherd country with one or two or
three damsels or children sitting on each, and by wain-side or by beast
strode the men of the house, merry and fair in their war-gear.  The
Woodlanders, moreover, man and woman, elder and swain and young damsel,
streamed out of the wood from Carlstead, eager to make the day begin
before the sunrise, and end before his setting.

Then all men fell to pitching of tents and tilting over of wains; for the
April sun was hot in the Dale, and when he arose the meads were gay with
more than the spring flowers; for the tents and the tilts were stained
and broidered with many colours, and there was none who had not furbished
up his war-gear so that all shone and glittered.  And many wore gay
surcoats over their armour, and the women were clad in all their bravery,
and the Houses mostly of a suit; for one bore blue and another
corn-colour, and another green, and another brazil, and so forth, and all
gleaming and glowing with broidery of gold and bright hues.  But the
women of the Shepherds were all clad in white, embroidered with green
boughs and red blossoms, and the Woodland women wore dark red kirtles.
Moreover, the women had set garlands of flowers on their heads and the
helms of the men, and for the most part they were slim of body and tall
and light-limbed, and as dainty to look upon as the willow-boughs that
waved on the brook-side.

Thither had the goodmen who were guesting the Runaways brought their
guests, even now much bettered by their new soft days; and much the poor
folk marvelled at all this joyance, and they scarce knew where they were;
but to some it brought back to their minds days of joyance before the
thralldom and all that they had lost, so that their hearts were heavy a
while, till they saw the warriors of the kindreds streaming into the mead
and bethought them why they carried steel.

Now by then the sun was fully up there was a great throng on the Portway,
and this was the folk of the Burg on their way to the Weapon-mead.  The
men-at-arms were in the midst of the throng, and at the head of them was
the War-leader, with the banner of the Face before him, wherein was done
the image of the God with the ray-ringed head.  But at the rearward of
the warriors went the Alderman and the Burg-wardens, before whom was
borne the banner of the Burg pictured with the Gate and its Towers; but
in the midst betwixt those two was the banner of the Steer, a white beast
on a green field.

So when the Dale-wardens who were down in the meadow heard the music and
beheld who were coming, they bade the companies of the Dale and the
Shepherds and the Woodlanders who were down there to pitch their banners
in a half circle about the ingle of the meadow which was made by the
streams of Wildlake and the Weltering Water, and gather to them to be
ordered there under their leaders of scores and half-hundreds and
hundreds; and even so they did.  But the banners of the Dale without the
Burg were the Bridge, and the Bull, and the Vine, and the Sickle.  And
the Shepherds had three banners, to wit Greenbury, and the Fleece, and
the Thorn.

As for the Woodlanders, they said that they were abiding their great
banner, but it should come in good time; ‘and meantime,’ said they, ‘here
are the war-tokens that we shall fight under; for they are good enough
banners for us poor men, the remnant of the valiant of time past.’
Therewith they showed two great spears, and athwart the one was tied an
arrow, its point dipped in blood, its feathers singed with fire; and they
said, ‘This is the banner of the War-shaft.’

On the other spear there was nought; but the head thereof was great and
long, and they had so burnished the steel that the sun smote out a ray of
light from it, so that it might be seen from afar.  And they said: ‘This
is the Banner of the Spear!  Down yonder where the ravens are gathering
ye shall see a banner flying over us.  There shall fall many a mother’s
son.’

Smiled the Dale-wardens, and said that these were good banners to fight
under; and those that stood nearby shouted for the valiancy of the
Woodland Carles.

Now the Dale-wardens went to the entrance from the Portway to the meadow,
and there met the Men of the Burg, and two of them went one on either
side of the War-leader to show him to his seat, and the others abode till
the Alderman and Burg-wardens came up, and then joined themselves to
them, and the horns blew up both in the meadow and on the road, and the
new-comers went their ways to their appointed places amidst the shouts of
the Dalesmen; and the women and children and old men from the Burg
followed after, till all the mead was covered with bright raiment and
glittering gear, save within the ring of men at the further end.

So came the War-leader to his seat of green turf raised in the ingle
aforesaid; and he stood beside it till the Alderman and Wardens had taken
their places on a seat behind him raised higher than his; below him on
the step of his seat sat the Scrivener with his pen and ink-horn and
scroll of parchment, and men had brought him a smooth shield whereon to
write.

On the left side of Face-of-god stood the men of the Face all glittering
in their arms, and amongst them were Wolf-stone and his two fellows, but
Dallach was not yet whole of his hurts.  On his right were the folk of
the House of the Steer: the leader of that House was an old white-bearded
man, grandfather of the Bride, for her father was dead; and who but the
Bride herself stood beside him in her glorious war-gear, looking as if
she were new come from the City of the Gods, thought most men; but those
who beheld her closely deemed that she looked heavy-eyed and haggard, as
if she were aweary.  Nevertheless, wheresoever she passed, and whosoever
looked on her (and all men looked on her), there arose a murmur of praise
and love; and the women, and especially the young ones, said how fair her
deed was, and how meet she was for it; and some of them were for doing on
war-gear and faring to battle with the carles; and of these some were
sober and solemn, as was well seen afterwards, and some spake lightly:
some also fell to boasting of how they could run and climb and swim and
shoot in the bow, and fell to baring of their arms to show how strong
they were: and indeed they were no weaklings, though their arms were
fair.

There then stood the ring of men, each company under its banner; and
beyond them stood the women and children and men unmeet for battle; and
beyond them again the tilted wains and the tents.

Now Face-of-god sat him down on the turf-seat with his bright helm on his
head and his naked sword across his knees, while the horns blew up
loudly, and when they had done, the elder of the Dale-wardens cried out
for silence.  Then again arose Face-of-god and said:

‘Men of the Dale, and ye friends of the Shepherds, and ye, O valiant
Woodlanders; we are not assembled here to take counsel, for in three
days’ time shall the Great Folk-mote be holden, whereat shall be counsel
enough.  But since I have been appointed your Chief and War-leader, till
such time as the Folk-mote shall either yeasay or naysay my leadership, I
have sent for you that we may look each other in the face and number our
host and behold our weapons, and see if we be meet for battle and for the
dealing with a great host of foemen.  For now no longer can it be said
that we are going to war, but rather that war is on our borders, and we
are blended with it; as many have learned to their cost; for some have
been slain and some sorely hurt.  Therefore I bid you now, all ye that
are weaponed, wend past us that the tale of you may be taken.  But first
let every hundred-leader and half-hundred-leader and score-leader make
sure that he hath his tale aright, and give his word to the captain of
his banner that he in turn may give it out to the Scrivener with his name
and the House and Company that he leadeth.’

So he spake and sat him adown; and the horns blew again in token that the
companies should go past; and the first that came was Hall-ward of the
House of the Steer, and the first of those that went after him was the
Bride, going as if she were his son.

So he cried out his name, and the name of his House, and said, ‘An
hundred and a half,’ and passed forth, his men following him in most
goodly array.  Each man was girt with a good sword and bore a long heavy
spear over his shoulder, save a score who bare bows; and no man lacked a
helm, a shield, and a coat of fence.

Then came a goodly man of thirty winters, and stayed before the Scrivener
and cried out:

‘Write down the House of the Bridge of the Upper Dale at one hundred, and
War-well their leader.’

And he strode on, and his men followed clad and weaponed like those of
the Steer, save that some had axes hanging to their girdles instead of
swords; and most bore casting-spears instead of the long spears, and half
a score were bowmen.

Then came Fox of Upton leading the men of the Bull of Middale, an hundred
and a half lacking two; very great and tall were his men, and they also
bore long spears, and one score and two were bowmen.

Then Fork-beard of Lea, a man well on in years, led on the men of the
Vine, an hundred and a half and five men thereto; two score of them bare
bow in hand and were girt with sword; the rest bore their swords naked in
their right hands, and their shields (which were but small bucklers)
hanging at their backs, and in the left hand each bore two
casting-spears.  With these went two doughty women-at-arms among the
bowmen, tall and well-knit, already growing brown with the spring sun,
for their work lay among the stocks of the vines on the southward-looking
bents.

Next came a tall young man, yellow-haired, with a thin red beard, and
gave himself out for Red-beard of the Knolls; he bore his father’s name,
as the custom of their house was, but the old man, who had long been head
man of the House of the Sickle, was late dead in his bed, and the young
man had not seen twenty winters.  He bade the Scrivener write the tale of
the Men of the Sickle at an hundred and a half, and his folk fared past
the War-leader joyously, being one half of them bowmen; and fell shooters
they were; the other half were girt with swords, and bore withal long
ashen staves armed with great blades curved inwards, which weapon they
called heft-sax.

All these bands, as the name and the tale of them was declared were
greeted with loud shouts from their fellows and the bystanders; but now
arose a greater shout still, as Stone-face, clad in goodly glittering
array, came forth and said:

‘I am Stone-face of the House of the Face, and I bring with me two
hundreds of men with their best war-gear and weapons: write it down,
Scrivener!’

And he strode on like a young man after those who had gone past, and
after him came the tall Hall-face and his men, a gallant sight to see:
two score bowmen girt with swords, and the others with naked swords
waving aloft, and each bearing two casting-spears in his left hand.

Then came a man of middle age, broad-shouldered, yellow-haired,
blue-eyed, of wide and ruddy countenance, and after him a goodly company;
and again great was the shout that went up to the heavens; for he said:

‘Scrivener, write down that Hound-under-Greenbury, from amongst the
dwellers in the hills where the sheep feed, leadeth the men who go under
the banner of Greenbury, to the tale of an hundred and four score.’

Therewith he passed on, and his men followed, stout, stark, and
merry-faced, girt with swords, and bearing over their shoulders
long-staved axes, and spears not so long as those which the Dalesmen
bore; and they had but a half score of arrow-shot with them.

Next came a young man, blue-eyed also, with hair the colour of flax on
the distaff, broad-faced and short-nosed, low of stature, but very
strong-built, who cried out in a loud, cheerful voice:

‘I am Strongitharm of the Shepherds, and these valiant men are of the
Fleece and the Thorn blended together, for so they would have it; and
their tale is one hundred and two score and ten.’

Then the men of those kindreds went past merry and shouting, and they
were clad and weaponed like to them of Greenbury, but had with them a
score of bowmen.  And all these Shepherd-folk wore over their hauberks
white woollen surcoats broidered with green and red.

Now again uprose the cry, and there stood before the War-leader a very
tall man of fifty winters, dark-faced and grey-eyed, and he spake slowly
and somewhat softly, and said:

‘War-leader, this is Red-wolf of the Woodlanders leading the men who go
under the sign of the War-shaft, to the number of an hundred and two.’

Then he passed on, and his men after him, tall, lean, and silent amidst
the shouting.  All these men bare bows, for they were keen hunters; each
had at his girdle a little axe and a wood-knife, and some had long swords
withal.  They wore, everyone of the carles, short green surcoats over
their coats of fence; but amongst them were three women who bore like
weapons to the men, but were clad in red kirtles under their hauberks,
which were of good ring-mail gleaming over them from throat to knee.

Last came another tall man, but young, of twenty-five winters, and spake:

‘Scrivener, I am Bears-bane of the Woodlanders, and these that come after
me wend under the sign of the Spear, and they are of the tale of one
hundred and seven.’

And he passed by at once, and his men followed him, clad and weaponed no
otherwise than they of the War-shaft, and with them were two women.

Now went all those companies back to their banners, and stood there; and
there arose among the bystanders much talk concerning the Weapon-show,
and who were the best arrayed of the Houses.  And of the old men, some
spake of past weapon-shows which they had seen in their youth, and they
set them beside this one, and praised and blamed.  So it went on a little
while till the horns blew again, and once more there was silence.  Then
arose Face-of-god and said:

‘Men of Burgdale, and ye Shepherd-folk, and ye of the Woodland, now shall
ye wot how many weaponed men we may bring together for this war.
Scrivener, arise and give forth the tale of the companies, as they have
been told unto you.’

Then the Scrivener stood up on the turf-bench beside Face-of-god, and
spake in a loud voice, reading from his scroll:

‘Of the Men of Burgdale there have passed by me nine hundreds and six; of
the Shepherds three hundreds and eight and ten; and of the Woodlanders
two hundreds and nine; so that all told our men are fourteen hundreds and
thirty and three.’

Now in those days men reckoned by long hundreds, so that the whole tale
of the host was one thousand, five hundred, and four score and one,
telling the tale in short hundreds.

When the tale had been given forth and heard, men shouted again, and they
rejoiced that they were so many.  For it exceeded the reckoning which the
Alderman had given out at the Gate-thing.  But Face-of-god said:

‘Neighbours, we have held our Weapon-show; but now hold you ready, each
man, for the Hosting toward very battle; for belike within seven days
shall the leaders of hundreds and twenties summon you to be ready in arms
to take whatso fortune may befall.  Now is sundered the Weapon-show.  Be
ye as merry to-day as your hearts bid you to be.’

Therewith he came down from his seat with the Alderman and the Wardens,
and they mingled with the good folk of the Dale and the Shepherds and the
Woodlanders, and merry was their converse there.  It yet lacked an hour
of noon; so presently they fell to and feasted in the green meadow,
drinking from wain to wain and from tent to tent; and thereafter they
played and sported in the meads, shooting at the butts and wrestling, and
trying other masteries.  Then they fell to dancing one and all, and so at
last to supper on the green grass in great merriment.  Nor might you have
known from the demeanour of any that any threat of evil overhung the
Dale.  Nay, so glad were they, and so friendly, that you might rather
have deemed that this was the land whereof tales tell, wherein people die
not, but live for ever, without growing any older than when they first
come thither, unless they be born into the land itself, and then they
grow into fair manhood, and so abide.  In sooth, both the land and the
folk were fair enough to be that land and the folk thereof.

But a little after sunset they sundered, and some fared home; but many of
them abode in the tents and tilted wains, because the morrow was the
first day of the Spring Market: and already were some of the Westland
chapmen come; yea, two of them were with the bystanders in the meadow;
and more were looked for ere the night was far spent.




CHAPTER XXXII.  THE MEN OF SHADOWY VALE COME TO THE SPRING MARKET AT
BURGSTEAD.


ON the morrow betimes in the morning the Westland chapmen, who were now
all come, went out from the House of the Face, where they were ever wont
to be lodged, and set up their booths adown the street betwixt gate and
bridge.  Gay was the show; for the booths were tilted over with painted
cloths, and the merchants themselves were clad in long gowns of fine
cloth; scarlet, and blue, and white, and green, and black, with broidered
welts of gold and silver; and their knaves were gaily attired in short
coats of divers hues, with silver rings about their arms, and short
swords girt to their sides.  People began to gather about these chapmen
at once when they fell to opening their bales and their packs, and
unloading their wains.  There had they iron, both in pigs and forged
scrap and nails; steel they had, and silver, both in ingots and vessel;
pearls from over sea; cinnabar and other colours for staining, such as
were not in the mountains: madder from the marshes, and purple of the
sea, and scarlet grain from the holm-oaks by its edge, and woad from the
deep clayey fields of the plain; silken thread also from the outer ocean,
and rare webs of silk, and jars of olive oil, and fine pottery, and
scented woods, and sugar of the cane.  But gold they had none with them,
for that they took there; and for weapons, save a few silver-gilt toys,
they had no market.

So presently they fell to chaffer; for the carles brought them little
bags of the river-borne gold, so that the weights and scales were at
work; others had with them scrolls and tallies to tell the number of the
beasts which they had to sell, and the chapmen gave them wares therefor
without beholding the beasts; for they wotted that the Dalesmen lied not
in chaffer.  While the day was yet young withal came the Dalesmen from
the mid and nether Dale with their wares and set up their booths; and
they had with them flasks and kegs of the wine which they had to sell;
and bales of the good winter-woven cloth, some grey, some dyed, and
pieces of fine linen; and blades of swords, and knives, and axes of such
fashion as the Westland men used; and golden cups and chains, and fair
rings set with mountain-blue stones, and copper bowls, and vessels gilt
and parcel-gilt, and mountain-blue for staining.  There were men of the
Shepherds also with such fleeces as they could spare from the daily
chaffer with the neighbours.  And of the Woodlanders were four carles and
a woman with peltries and dressed deer-skins, and a few pieces of
well-carven wood-work for bedsteads and chairs and such like.

Soon was the Burg thronged with folk in all its open places, and all were
eager and merry, and it could not have been told from their demeanour and
countenance that the shadow of a grievous trouble hung over them.  True
it was that every man of the Dale and the neighbours was girt with his
sword, or bore spear or axe or other weapon in his hand, and that most
had their bucklers at their backs and their helms on their heads; but
this was ever their custom at all meetings of men, not because they
dreaded war or were fain of strife, but in token that they were free men,
from whom none should take the weapons without battle.

Such were the folk of the land: as for the chapmen, they were well-spoken
and courteous, and blithe with the folk, as they well might be, for they
had good pennyworths of them; yet they dealt with them without using
measureless lying, as behoved folk dealing with simple and proud people;
and many was the tale they told of the tidings of the Cities and the
Plain.

There amongst the throng was the Bride in her maiden’s attire, but girt
with the sword, going from booth to booth with her guests of the
Runaways, and doing those poor people what pleasure she might, and giving
them gifts from the goods there, such as they set their hearts on.  And
the more part of the Runaways were about among the people of the Fair;
but Dallach, being still weak, sat on a bench by the door of the House of
the Face looking on well-pleased at all the stir of folk.

Hall-face was gone on the woodland ward; while Face-of-god went among the
folk in his most glorious attire; but he soon betook him to the place of
meeting without the Gate, where Stone-face and some of the elders were
sitting along with the Alderman, beside whom sat the head man of the
merchants, clad in a gown of fine scarlet embroidered with the best work
of the Dale, with a golden chaplet on his head, and a good sword,
golden-hilted, by his side, all which the Alderman had given to it him
that morning.  These chiefs were talking together concerning the tidings
of the Plain, and many a tale the guest told to the Dalesmen, some true,
some false.  For there had been battles down there, and the fall of
kings, and destruction of people, as oft befalleth in the guileful
Cities.  He told them also, in answer to their story of the Dusky Men, of
how men even such-like, but riding on horses, or drawn in wains, an host
not to be numbered, had erewhile overthrown the hosts of the Cities of
the Plain, and had wrought evils scarce to be told of; and how they had
piled up the skulls of slaughtered folk into great hills beside the
city-gates, so that the sun might no longer shine into the streets; and
how because of the death and the rapine, grass had grown in the kings’
chambers, and the wolves had chased deer in the Temples of the Gods.

‘But,’ quoth he, ‘I know you, bold tillers of the soil, valiant scourers
of the Wild-wood, that the worst that can befall you will be to die under
shield, and that ye shall suffer no torment of the thrall.  May the
undying Gods bless the threshold of this Gate, and oft may I come hither
to taste of your kindness!  May your race, the uncorrupt, increase and
multiply, till your valiant men and clean maidens make the bitter sweet
and purify the earth!’

He spake smooth-tongued and smiling, handling the while the folds of his
fine scarlet gown, and belike he meant a full half of what he said; for
he was a man very eloquent of speech, and had spoken with kings, uncowed
and pleased with his speaking; and for that cause and his riches had he
been made chief of the chapmen.  As he spake the heart of Face-of-god
swelled within him, and his cheek flushed; but Iron-face sat up straight
and proud, and a light smile played about his face, as he said gravely:

‘Friend of the Westland, I thank thee for the blessing and the kind word.
Such as we are, we are; nor do I deem that the very Gods shall change us.
And if they will be our friends, it is well; for we desire nought of them
save their friendship; and if they will be our foes, that also shall we
bear; nor will we curse them for doing that which their lives bid them to
do.  What sayest thou, Face-of-god, my son?’

‘Yea, father,’ said Face-of-god, ‘I say that the very Gods, though they
slay me, cannot unmake my life that has been.  If they do deeds, yet
shall we also do.’

The Outlander smiled as they spake, and bowed his head to Iron-face and
Face-of-god, and wondered at their pride of heart, marvelling what they
would say to the great men of the Cities if they should meet them.

But as they sat a-talking, there came two men running to them from the
Portway, their weapons all clattering upon them, and they heard withal
the sound of a horn winded not far off very loud and clear; and the
Chapman’s cheek paled: for in sooth he doubted that war was at hand,
after all he had heard of the Dalesmen’s dealings with the Dusky Men.
And all battle was loathsome to him, nor for all the gain of his chaffer
had he come into the Dale, had he known that war was looked for.

But the chiefs of the Dalesmen stirred not, nor changed countenance; and
some of the goodmen who were in the street nigh the Gate came forth to
see what was toward; for they also had heard the voice of the horn.

Then one of those messengers came up breathless, and stood before the
chiefs, and said:

‘New tidings, Alderman; here be weaponed strangers come into the Dale.’

The Alderman smiled on him and said: ‘Yea, son, and are they a great host
of men?’

‘Nay,’ said the man, ‘not above a score as I deem, and there is a woman
with them.’

‘Then shall we abide them here,’ said the Alderman, ‘and thou mightest
have saved thy breath, and suffered them to bring tidings of themselves;
since they may scarce bring us war.  For no man desireth certain and
present death; and that is all that such a band may win at our hands in
battle to-day; and all who come in peace are welcome to us.  What like
are they to behold?’

Said the man: ‘They are tall men gloriously attired, so that they seem
like kinsmen of the Gods; and they bear flowering boughs in their hands.’

The Alderman laughed, and said: ‘If they be Gods they are welcome indeed;
and they shall grow the wiser for their coming; for they shall learn how
guest-fain the Burgdale men may be.  But if, as I deem, they be like unto
us, and but the children of the Gods, then are they as welcome, and it
may be more so, and our greeting to them shall be as their greeting to us
would be.’

Even as he spake the horn was winded nearer yet, and more loudly, and
folk came pouring out of the Gate to learn the tidings.  Presently the
strangers came from off the Portway into the space before the Gate; and
their leader was a tall and goodly man of some thirty winters, in
glorious array, helm on head and sword by side, his surcoat green and
flowery like the spring meads.  In his right hand he held a branch of the
blossomed black-thorn (for some was yet in blossom), and his left had
hold of the hand of an exceeding fair woman who went beside him: behind
him was a score of weaponed men in goodly attire, some bearing bows, some
long spears, but each bearing a flowering bough in hand.

The tall man stopped in the midst of the space, and the Alderman and they
with him stirred not; though, as for Face-of-god, it was to him as if
summer had come suddenly into the midst of winter, and for the very
sweetness of delight his face grew pale.

Then the new-comer drew nigh to the Alderman and said:

‘Hail to the Gate and the men of the Gate!  Hail to the kindred of the
children of the Gods!’

But the Alderman stood up and spake: ‘And hail to thee, tall man!  Fair
greeting to thee and thy company!  Wilt thou name thyself with thine own
name, or shall I call thee nought save Guest?  Welcome art thou, by
whatsoever name thou wilt be called.  Here may’st thou and thy folk abide
as long as ye will.’

Said the new-comer: ‘Thanks have thou for thy greeting and for thy
bidding!  And that bidding shall we take, whatsoever may come of it; for
we are minded to abide with thee for a while.  But know thou, O Alderman
of the Dalesmen, that I am not sackless toward thee and thine.  My name
is Folk-might of the Children of the Wolf, and this woman is the
Sun-beam, my sister, and these behind me are of my kindred, and are well
beloved and trusty.  We are no evil men or wrong-doers; yet have we been
driven into sore straits, wherein men must needs at whiles do deeds that
make their friends few and their foes many.  So it may be that I am thy
foeman.  Yet, if thou doubtest of me that I shall be a baneful guest,
thou shalt have our weapons of us, and then mayest thou do thy will upon
us without dread; and here first of all is my sword!’

Therewith he cast down the flowering branch he was bearing, and pulled
his sword from out his sheath, and took it by the point, and held out the
hilt to Iron-face.

But the Alderman smiled kindly on him and said:

‘The blade is a good one, and I say it who know the craft of
sword-forging; but I need it not, for thou seest I have a sword by my
side.  Keep your weapons, one and all; for ye have come amongst many and
those no weaklings: and if so be that thy guilt against us is so great
that we must needs fall on you, ye will need all your war-gear.  But
hereof is no need to speak till the time of the Folk-mote, which will be
holden in three days’ wearing; so let us forbear this matter till then;
for I deem we shall have enough to say of other matters.  Now,
Folk-might, sit down beside me, and thou also, Sun-beam, fairest of
women.’

Therewith he looked into her face and reddened, and said:

‘Yet belike thou hast a word of greeting for my son, Face-of-god, unless
it be so that ye have not seen him before?’

Then Face-of-god came forward, and took Folk-might by the hand and kissed
him; and he stood before the Sun-beam and took her hand, and the world
waxed a wonder to him as he kissed her cheeks; and in no wise did she
change countenance, save that her eyes softened, and she gazed at him
full kindly from the happiness of her soul.

Then Face-of-god said: ‘Welcome, Guests, who erewhile guested me so well:
now beginneth the day of your well-doing to the men of Burgdale;
therefore will we do to you as well as we may.’

Then Folk-might and the Sun-beam sat them down with the chieftains, one
on either side of the Alderman, but Face-of-god passed forth to the
others, and greeted them one by one: of them was Wood-father and his
three sons, and Bow-may; and they rejoiced exceedingly to see him, and
Bow-may said:

‘Now it gladdens my heart to look upon thee alive and thriving, and to
remember that day last winter when I met thee on the snow, and turned
thee back from the perilous path to thy pleasure, which the Dusky Men
were besetting, of whom thou knewest nought.  Yea, it was merry that
tide; but this is better.  Nay, friend,’ she said, ‘it availeth thee
nought to strive to look out of the back of thine head: let it be enough
to thee that she is there.  Thou art now become a great chieftain, and
she is no less; and this is a meeting of chieftains, and the folk are
looking on and expecting demeanour of them as of the Gods; and she is not
to be dealt with as if she were the daughter of some little goodman with
whom one hath made tryst in the meadows.  There! hearken to me for a
while; at least till I tell thee that thou seemest to me to hold thine
head higher than when last I saw thee; though that is no long time
either.  Hast thou been in battle again since that day?’

‘Nay,’ he said, ‘I have stricken no stroke since I slew two felons within
the same hour that we parted.  And thou, sister, what hast thou done?’

She said: ‘The grey goose hath been on the wing thrice since that,
bearing on it the bane of evil things.’

Then said Wood-wise: ‘Kinswoman, tell him of that battle, since thou art
deft with thy tongue.’

She said: ‘Weary on battles! it is nought save this: twelve days agone
needs must every fighting-man of the Wolf, carle or of queen, wend away
from Shadowy Vale, while those unmeet for battle we hid away in the caves
at the nether end of the Dale: but Sun-beam would not endure that night,
and fared with us, though she handled no weapon.  All this we had to do
because we had learned that a great company of the Dusky Men were
over-nigh to our Dale, and needs must we fall upon them, lest they should
learn too much, and spread the story.  Well, so wise was Folk-might that
we came on them unawares by night and cloud at the edge of the Pine-wood,
and but one of our men was slain, and of them not one escaped; and when
the fight was over we counted four score and ten of their arm-rings.’

He said: ‘Did that or aught else come of our meeting with them that
morning?’

‘Nay,’ she said, ‘nought came of it: those we slew were but a straying
band.  Nay, the four score and ten slain in the Pine-wood knew not of
Shadowy Vale belike, and had no intent for it: they were but scouring the
wood seeking their warriors that had gone out from Silver-dale and came
not aback.’

‘Thou art wise in war, Bow-may,’ said Face-of-god, and he smiled withal.

Bow-may reddened and said: ‘Friend Gold-mane, dost thou perchance deem
that there is aught ill in my warring?  And the Sun-beam, she naysayeth
the bearing of weapons; though I deem that she hath little fear of them
when they come her way.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Nay, I deem no ill of it, but much good.  For I
suppose that thou hast learned overmuch of the wont of the Dusky Men, and
hast seen their thralls?’

She knitted her brows, and all the merriment went out of her face at that
word, and she answered: ‘Yea, thou hast it; for I have both seen their
thralls and been in the Dale of thralldom; and how then can I do less
than I do?  But for thee, I perceive that thou hast been nigh unto our
foes and hast fallen in with their thralls; and that is well; for whatso
tales we had told thee thereof it is like thou wouldst not have trowed
in, as now thou must do, since thou thyself hast seen these poor folk.
But now I will tell thee, Gold-mane, that my soul is sick of these
comings and goings for the slaughter of a few wretches; and I long for
the Great Day of Battle, when it will be seen whether we shall live or
die; and though I laugh and jest, yet doth the wearing of the days wear
me.’

He looked kindly on her and said: ‘I am War-leader of this Folk, and
trust me that the waiting-tide shall not be long; wherefore now, sister,
be merry to-day, for that is but meet and right; and cast aside thy care,
for presently shalt thou behold many new friends.  But now meseemeth
overlong have ye been standing before our Gate, and it is time that ye
should see the inside of our Burg and the inside of our House.’

Indeed by this time so many men had come out of the street that the place
before the Gate was all thronged, and from where he stood Face-of-god
could scarce see his father, or Folk-might and the Sun-beam and the
chieftains.

So he took Wood-father by the hand, and close behind him came Wood-wise
and Bow-may, and he cried out for way that he might speak with the
Alderman, and men gave way to them, and he led those new-comers close up
to the gate-seats of the Elders, and as he clove the press smiling and
bright-eyed and happy, all gazed on him; but the Sun-beam, who was
sitting between Iron-face and the Westland Chapman, and who heretofore
had been agaze with eyes beholding little, past whose ears the words went
unheard, and whose mind wandered into thoughts of things unfashioned yet,
when she beheld him close to her again, then, taken unawares, her eyes
caressed him, and she turned as red as a rose, as she felt all the
sweetness of desire go forth from her to meet him.  So that, he
perceiving it, his voice was the clearer and sweeter for the inward joy
he felt, as he said:

‘Alderman, meseemeth it is now time that we bring our Guests into the
House of our Fathers; for since they are in warlike array, and we are no
longer living in peace, and I am now War-leader of the Dale, I deem it
but meet that I should have the guesting of them.  Moreover, when we are
come into our House, I will bid thee look into thy treasury, that thou
may’st find therein somewhat which it may pleasure us to give to our
Guests.’

Said Iron-face: ‘Thou sayest well, son, and since the day is now worn
past noon, and these folk are but just come from the Waste, therefore
such as we have of meat and drink abideth them.  And surely there is
within our house a coffer which belongeth to thee and me; and forsooth I
know not why we keep the treasures hoarded therein, save that it be for
this cause: that if we were to give to our friends that which we
ourselves use and love, which would be of all things pleasant to us, if
we gave them such goods, they would be worn and worsened by our use of
them.  For this reason, therefore, do we keep fair things which we use
not, so that we may give them to our friends.

‘Now, Guests, both of the Waste and the Westland, since here is no
Gate-thing or meeting of the Dale-wardens, and we sit here but for our
pleasure, let us go take our pleasure within doors for a while, if it
seem good to you.’

Therewith he arose, and the folk made way for him and his Guests; and
Folk-might went on the right hand of Iron-face, and beside him went the
Chapman, who looked on him with a half-smile, as though he knew somewhat
of him.  But on the other side of Iron-face went the Sun-beam, whose hand
he held, and after these came Face-of-god, leading in the rest of the
New-comers, who yet held the flowery branches in their hands.

Now so much had Face-of-god told the Dalesmen, that they deemed they all
knew these men for their battle-fellows of whom they had heard tell; and
this the more as the men were so goodly and manly of aspect, especially
Folk-might, so that they seemed as if they were nigh akin to the Gods.
As for the Sun-beam, they knew not how to praise her beauty enough, but
they said that they had never known before how fair the Gods might be.
So they raised a great shout of welcome as the men came through the Gate
into the Burg, and all men turned their backs on the booths, so eager
were they to behold closely these new friends.

But as the Guests went from the Gate to the House of the Face, going very
slowly because of the press, there in the front of the throng stood the
Bride with the women of the Runaways, whom she had caused to be clad very
fairly; and she was fain to do them a pleasure by bringing them to sight
of these new-comers, of whom she had not heard who they were, though she
had heard the cry that strangers were at hand.  So there she stood
smiling a little with the pleasure of showing a fair sight to the poor
people, as folk do with children.  But when she saw those twain going on
each side of the Alderman she knew them at once; and when the Sun-beam,
who was on his left side, passed so close to her that she could see the
very smoothness and dainty fashion of her skin, then was she astonied,
and the world seemed strange to her, and till they were gone by, and for
a while afterwards, she knew not where she was nor what she did, though
it seemed to her as if she still saw the face of that fair woman as in a
picture.

But the Sun-beam had noted her at first, even amongst the fair women of
Burgstead, and she so steady and bright beside the wandering timorous
eyes and lowering faces of the thralls.  But suddenly, as eye met eye,
she saw her face change; she saw her cheek whiten, her eyes stare, and
her lips quiver, and she knew at once who it was; for she had not seen
her before as Folk-might had.  Then the Sun-beam cast her eyes adown,
lest her compassion might show in her face, and be a fresh grief to her
that had lost the wedding and the love; and so she passed on.

As for Folk-might, he had seen her at once amongst all that folk as he
came into the street, and in sooth he was looking for her; and when he
saw her face change, as the sight of the Sun-beam smote upon her heart,
his own face burned with shame and anger, and he looked back at her as he
went toward the House.  But she saw him not, nor noted him; and none
deemed it strange that he looked long on the Bride, the treasure of
Burgstead.  But for some while Folk-might was few-spoken and sharp-spoken
amongst the chieftains; for he was slow to master his longing and his
wrath.

So when all the Guests had entered the door of the House of the Face, the
Alderman turned back, and, standing on the threshold of his House, spake
unto the throng:

‘Men of the Dale, and ye Outlanders who may be here, know that this is a
happy day; for hither have come to us Guests, men of the kindred of the
Gods, and they are even those of whom Face-of-god my son hath told you.
And they are friends of our friends and foes of our foes.  These men are
now in my House, as is but right; but when they come forth I look to you
to cherish them in the best way ye know, and make much of them, as of
those who may help us and who may by us be holpen.’

Therewith he went in again and into the Hall, and bade show the
New-comers to the daïs; and wine of the best, and meat such as was to
hand, was set before them.  He bade men also get ready high feast as
great as might be against the evening; and they did his bidding
straightway.




CHAPTER XXXIII.  THE ALDERMAN GIVES GIFTS TO THEM OF SHADOWY VALE.


IN the Hall of the Face Folk-might sat on the daïs at the right hand of
the Alderman, and the Sun-beam on his left hand.  But Iron-face also had
beheld the Bride how her face changed, and he knew the cause, and was
grieved and angry and ashamed thereof: also he bethought him how this
stranger was sitting in the very place where the Bride used to sit, and
of all the love, as of a very daughter, that he had had for her; howbeit
he constrained himself to talk courteously and kindly both to Folk-might
and the Sun-beam, as behoved the Chief of the House and the Alderman of
the Dale.  Moreover, he was not a little moved by the goodliness and
wisdom of the Sun-beam and the manliness of Folk-might, who was the most
chieftain-like of men.

But while they sat there Face-of-god went from man to man of the Guests,
and made much of each, but especially of Wood-father and his sons and
Bow-may, and they loved him, and praised him, and deemed him the best of
hall-mates.  Nor might the Sun-beam altogether refrain her from looking
lovingly on him, and it could be seen of her that she deemed he was doing
well, and like a wise leader and chieftain.

So wore away awhile, and men were fulfilled of meat and drink; so then
the Alderman arose and spake, and said:

‘Is it not so, Guests, that ye would now gladly behold our market, and
the goodly wares which the chapmen have brought us from the Cities?’

Then most men cried out: ‘Yea, yea!’ and Iron-face said:

‘Then shall ye go, nor be holden by me from your pleasure.  And ye
kinsmen who are the most guest-fain and the wisest, go ye with our
friends, and make all things easy and happy for them.  But first of all,
Guests, I were well pleased if ye would take some small matters out of
our abundance; for it were well that ye see them ere ye stand before the
chapmen’s booths, lest ye chaffer with them for what ye have already.’

They all praised his bounty and thanked him for his goodwill: so he arose
to go to his treasury, and bade certain of his folk go along with him to
bear in the gifts.  But ere he had taken three steps down the hall,
Face-of-god prevented him and said:

‘Kinsman, if thou hast anywhere a hauberk somewhat better than folk are
wont to bear, such as thine own hand fashioneth, and a sword of the like
stuff, I would have thee give them, the sword to my brother-in-arms
Wood-wise here, and the war-coat to my sister Bow-may, who shooteth so
well in the bow that none may shoot closer, and very few as close; and
her shaft it was that delivered me when my skull was amongst the axes of
the Dusky Men: else had I not been here.’

Thereat Bow-may reddened and looked down, like a scholar who hath been
over-praised for his learning and diligence; but the Alderman smiled on
her and said:

‘I thank thee, son, that thou hast let me know what these our two friends
may be fain of: and as for this damsel-at-arms, it is a little thing that
thou askest for her, and we might have found her something more worthy of
her goodliness; yet forsooth, since we are all bound for the place where
shafts and staves shall be good cheap, a greater treasure might be of
less avail to her.’

Thereat men laughed, and the Alderman went down the Hall with those
bearers of gifts, and was away for a space while they drank and made
merry: but presently back they came from the treasury bearing loads of
goodly things which were laid on one of the endlong boards.  Then began
the gift-giving: and first he gave unto Folk-might six golden cups
marvellously fashioned, the work of four generations of wrights in the
Dale, and he himself had wrought the last two thereof.  To Sun-beam he
gave a girdle of gold, fashioned with great mastery, whereon were images
of the Gods and the Fathers, and warriors, and beasts of the field and
fowls of the air; and as he girt it about her loins, he said in a soft
voice so that few heard:

‘Sun-beam, thou fair woman, time has been when thou wert to us as the
edge of the poisonous sword or the midnight torch of the murderer; but
now I know not how it will be, or if the grief which thou hast given me
will ever wear out or not.  And now that I have beheld thee, I have
little to do to blame my son; for indeed when I look on thee I cannot
deem that there is any evil in thee.  Yea, however it may be, take thou
this gift as the reward of thine exceeding beauty.’

She looked on him with kind eyes, and said meekly:

‘Indeed, if I have hurt thee unwittingly, I grieve to have hurt so good a
man.  Hereafter belike we may talk more of this, but now I will but say,
that whereas at first I needed but to win thy son’s goodwill, so that our
Folk might come to life and thriving again, now it is come to this, that
he holdeth my heart in his hand and may do what he will with it;
therefore I pray thee withhold not thy love either from him or from me.’

He looked on her wondering, and said: ‘Thou art such an one as might make
the old man young, and the boy grow into manhood suddenly; and thy voice
is as sweet as the voice of the song-birds singing in the dawn of early
summer soundeth to him who hath been sick unto death, but who hath
escaped it and is mending.  And yet I fear thee.’

Therewith he kissed her hand and turned unto the others, and he gave unto
Bow-may a hauberk of ring-mail of his own fashioning, a sure defence and
a wonderful work, and the collar thereof was done with gold and gems.

But he said to her: ‘Fair damsel-at-arms, faithful is thy face, and the
fashion of thee is goodly: now art thou become one of the best of our
friends, and this is little enough to give thee; yet would we fain ward
thy body against the foeman; so grieve us not by gainsaying us.’

And Bow-may was exceeding glad, and scarce knew how to cease handling
that marvel of ring-mail.

Then to Wood-wise Iron-face gave a most goodly sword, the blade all
marked with dark lines like the stream of an eddying river, the hilts of
steel and gold marvellously wrought; and all the work of a smith who had
dwelt in the house of his father’s father, and was a great warrior.

Unto Wood-father he gave a very goodly helm parcel-gilded; and to his
sons and the other folk fair gifts of weapons and jewels and girdles and
cups and other good things; so that their hearts were full of joy, and
they all praised his open hand.

Then some of the best and merriest of the kinsmen of the Face, and
Face-of-god with them, brought the Guests out into the street and among
the booths.  There Face-of-god beheld the Bride again; and she was
standing by the booth of a chapman and dealing with him for a piece of
goodly silken cloth to be a gown for one of her guests, and she was
talking and smiling as she chaffered with him, as her wont was; for she
was ever very friendly of demeanour with all men.  But he noted that she
was yet exceeding pale, and he was right sorry thereof, for he loved her
friendly; yet now had he no shame for all that had befallen, when he
bethought him of the Sun-beam and the love she had for him.  And also he
had a deeming that the Bride would better of her grief.




CHAPTER XXXIV.  THE CHIEFTAINS TAKE COUNSEL IN THE HALL OF THE FACE.


THEN turned Face-of-god back into the Hall, and saw where Iron-face sat
at the daïs, and with him Folk-might and Stone-face and the Elder of the
Dale-wardens, and Sun-beam withal; so he went soberly up to the board,
and sat himself down thereat beside Stone-face, over against Folk-might
and his father, beside whom sat the Sun-beam; and Folk-might looked on
him gravely, as a man powerful and trustworthy, yet was his look somewhat
sour.

Then the Alderman said: ‘My son, I said not to thee come back presently,
because I wotted that thou wouldst surely do so, knowing that we have
much to speak of.  For, whatever these thy friends may have done, or
whatsoever thou hast done with them to grieve us, all that must be set
aside at this present time, since the matter in hand is to save the Dale
and its folk.  What sayest thou hereon?  Since, young as thou mayst be,
thou art our War-leader, and doubtless shalt so be after the Folk-mote
hath been holden.’

Face-of-god answered not hastily: indeed, as he sat thinking for a minute
or two, the fair spring day seemed to darken about them or to glare into
the light of flames amidst the night-tide; and the joyous clamour without
doors seemed to grow hoarse and fearful as the sound of wailing and
shrieking.  But he spake firmly and simply in a clear voice, and said:

‘There can be no two words concerning what we have to aim at; these Dusky
Men we must slay everyone, though we be fewer than they be.’

Folk-might smiled and nodded his head; but the others sat staring down
the hall or into the hangings.

Then spake Folk-might: ‘Thou wert a boy methought when I cast my spear at
thee last autumn, Face-of-god, but now hast thou grown into a man.  Now
tell me, what deemest thou we must do to slay them all?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Once again it is clear that we must fall upon them at
home in Rose-dale and Silver-dale.’

Again Folk-might nodded: but Iron-face said:

‘Needeth this?  May we not ward the Dale and send many bands into the
wood to fall upon them when we meet them?  Yea, and so doing these our
guests have already slain many, as this valiant man hath told me e’en
now.  Will ye not slay so many at last, that they shall learn to fear us,
and abide at home and leave us at peace?’

But Face-of-god said: ‘Meseemeth, father, that this is not thy rede, and
that thou sayest this but to try me: and perchance ye have been talking
about me when I was without in the street e’en now.  Even if it might be
that we should thus cow these felons into abiding at home and tormenting
their own thralls at their ease, yet how then are our friends of the Wolf
holpen to their own again?  And I shall tell thee that I have promised to
this man and this woman that I will give them no less than a man’s help
in this matter.  Moreover, I have spoken in every house of the Dale, and
to the Shepherds and the Woodlanders, and there is no man amongst them
but will follow me in the quarrel.  Furthermore, they have heard of the
thralldom that is done on men no great way from their own houses; yea,
they have seen it; and they remember the old saw, “Grief in thy
neighbour’s hall is grief in thy garth,” and sure it is, father, that
whether thou or I gainsay them, go they will to deliver the thralls of
the Dusky Men, and will leave us alone in the Dale.’

‘This is no less than sooth,’ said the Dale-warden, ‘never have men gone
forth more joyously to a merry-making than all men of us shall wend to
this war.’

‘But,’ said Face-of-god, ‘of one thing ye may be sure, that these men
will not abide our pleasure till we cut them all off in scattered bands,
nor will they sit deedless at home.  Nor indeed may they; for we have
heard from their thralls that they look to have fresh tribes of them come
to hand to eat their meat and waste their servants, and these and they
must find new abodes and new thralls; and they are now warned by the
overthrows and slayings that they have had at our hands that we are
astir, and they will not delay long, but will fall upon us with all their
host; it might even be to-day or to-morrow.’

Said Folk-might: ‘In all this thou sayest sooth, brother of the Dale; and
to cut this matter short, I will tell you all, that yesterday we had with
us a runaway from Silver-dale (it is overlong to tell how we fell in with
her; for it was a woman).  But she told us that this very moon is a new
tribe come into the Dale, six long hundreds in number, and twice as many
more are looked for in two eights of days, and that ere this moon hath
waned, that is, in twenty-four days, they will wend their ways straight
for Burgdale, for they know the ways thereto.  So I say that Face-of-god
is right in all wise.  But tell me, brother, hast thou thought of how we
shall come upon these men?’

‘How many men wilt thou lead into battle?’ said Face-of-god.

Folk-might reddened, and said: ‘A few, a few; maybe two-hundreds all
told.’

‘Yea,’ said Face-of-god, ‘but some special gain wilt thou be to us.’

‘So I deem at least,’ said Folk-might.

Said Face-of-god: ‘Good is that.  Now have we held our Weapon-show in the
Dale, and we find that we together with you be sixteen long hundreds of
men; and the tale of the foemen that be now in Silver-dale, new-comers
and all, shall be three thousands or thereabout, and in Rose-dale hard on
a thousand.’

‘Scarce so many,’ said Folk-might; ‘some of the felons have died; we told
over our silver arm-rings yesterday, and the tale was three hundred and
eighty and six.  Besides, they were never so many as thou deemest.’

‘Well,’ said Face-of-god, ‘yet at least they shall outnumber us sorely.
We may scarce leave the Dale unguarded when our host is gone; therefore I
deem that we shall have but one thousand of men for our onslaught on
Silver-dale.’

‘How come ye to that?’ said Stone-face.

Said Face-of-god: ‘Abide a while, fosterer!  Though the odds between us
be great, it is not to be hidden that I wot how ye of the Wolf know of
privy passes into Silver-dale; yea, into the heart thereof; and this is
the special gain ye have to give us.  Therefore we, the thousand men,
falling on the foe unawares, shall make a great slaughter of them; and if
the murder be but grim enough, those thralls of theirs shall fear us and
not them, as already they hate them and not us, so that we may look to
them for rooting out these sorry weeds after the overthrow.  And what
with one thing, what with another, we may cherish a good hope of clearing
Silver-dale at one stroke with the said thousand men.

‘There remaineth Rose-dale, which will be easier to deal with, because
the Dusky Men therein are fewer and the thralls as many: that also would
I fall on at the same time as we fall on Silver-dale with the men that
are left over from the Silver-dale onslaught.  Wherefore my rede is, that
we gather all those unmeet for battle in the field into this Burg, with
ten tens of men to strengthen them; which shall be enough for them, along
with the old men, and lads, and sturdy women, to defend themselves till
help comes, if aught of evil befall, or to flee into the mountains, or at
the worst to die valiantly.  Then let the other five hundreds fare up to
Rose-dale, and fall on the Dusky Men therein about the same time, but not
before our onslaught on Silver-dale: thus shall hand help foot, so that
stumbling be not falling; and we may well hope that our rede shall
thrive.’

Then was he silent, and the Sun-beam looked upon him with gleaming eyes
and parted lips, waiting eagerly to hear what Folk-might would say.  He
held his peace a while, drumming on the board with his fingers, and none
else spake a word.  At last he said:

‘War-leader of Burgdale, all that thou hast spoken likes me well, and
even so must it be done, saving that parting of our host and sending one
part to fall upon Rose-dale.  I say, nay; let us put all our might into
that one stroke on Silver-dale, and then we are undone indeed if we fail;
but so shall we be if we fail anywise; but if we win Silver-dale, then
shall Rose-dale lie open before us.’

‘My brother,’ said Face-of-god, ‘thou art a tried warrior, and I but a
lad: but dost thou not see this, that whatever we do, we shall not at one
onslaught slay all the Dusky Men of Silver-dale, and those that flee
before us shall betake them to Rose-dale, and tell all the tale, and what
shall hinder them then from falling on Burgdale (since they are no great
way from it) after they have murdered what they will of the unhappy
people under their hands?’

Said Folk-might: ‘I say not but that there is a risk thereof, but in war
we must needs run such risks, and all should be risked rather than that
our blow on Silver-dale be light.  For we be the fewer; and if the foemen
have time to call that to mind, then are we all lost.’

Said Stone-face: ‘Meseemeth, War-leader, that there is nought much to
dread in leaving Rose-dale to itself for a while; for not only may we
follow hard on the fleers if they flee to Rose-dale, and be there no long
time after them, before they have time to stir their host; but also after
the overthrow we shall be free to send men back to Burgdale by way of
Shadowy Vale.  I deem that herein Folk-might hath the right of it.’

‘Even so say I,’ said the Alderman; ‘besides, we might theft leave more
folk behind us for the warding of the Dale.  So, son, the risk whereof
thou speakest groweth the lesser the longer it is looked on.’

Then spake the Dale-warden: ‘Yet saving your wisdom, Alderman, the risk
is there yet.  For if these felons come into the Dale at all, even if the
folk left behind hold the Burg and keep themselves unmurdered, yet may
they not hinder the foe from spoiling our homesteads; so that our folk
coming back in triumph shall find ruin at home, and spend weary days in
hunting their foemen, who shall, many of them, escape into the
Wild-wood.’

‘Yea,’ said the Sun-beam, ‘sooth is that; and Face-of-god is wise to
think of it and of other matters.  Yet one thing we must bear in mind,
that all may not go smoothly in our day’s work in Silver-dale; so we must
have force there to fall back on, in case we miss our stroke at first.
Therefore, I say, send we no man to Rose-dale, and leave we no able
man-at-arms behind in the Burg, so that we have with us every blade that
may be gathered.’

Iron-face smiled and said: ‘Thou art wise, damsel; and I marvel that so
fair-fashioned a thing as thou can think so hardly of the meeting of the
fallow blades.  But hearken! will not the Dusky Men hear that we have
stripped the Dale of fighting-men, and may they not then give our host
the go-by and send folk to ruin us?’

There was silence while Face-of-god looked down on the board; but
presently he lifted up his face and said:

‘Folk-might was right when he said that all must be risked.  Let us leave
Rose-dale till we have overcome them of Silver-dale.  Moreover, my
father, thou must not deem of these felons as if they were of like wits
to us, to forecast the deeds to come, and weigh the chances nicely, and
unravel tangled clews.  Rather they move like to the stares in autumn, or
the winter wild-geese, and will all be thrust forward by some sting that
entereth into their imaginations.  Therefore, if they have appointed one
moon to wear before they fall upon us, they will not stir till then, and
we have time enough to do what must be done.  Wherefore am I now of one
mind with the rest of you.  Now meseemeth it were well that these things
which we have spoken here, and shall speak, should not be noised abroad
openly; nay, at the Folk-mote it would be well that nought be said about
the day or the way of our onslaught on Silver-dale, lest the foe take
warning and be on their guard.  Though, sooth to say, did I deem that if
they had word of our intent they of Rose-dale would join themselves to
them of Silver-dale, and that we should thus have all our foes in one
net, then were I fain if the word would reach them.  For my soul loathes
the hunting that shall befall up and down the wood for the slaying of a
man here, and two or three there, and the wearing of the days in
wandering up and down with weapons in the hand, and the spinning out of
hatred and delaying of peace.’

Then Iron-face reached his hand across the board and took his son’s hand,
and said:

‘Hail to thee, son, for thy word!  Herein thou speakest as if from my
very soul, and fain am I of such a War-leader.’

And desire drew the eyes of the Sun-beam to Face-of-god, and she beheld
him proudly.  But he said:

‘All hath been spoken that the others of us may speak; and now it falleth
to the part of Folk-might to order our goings for the tryst for the
onslaught, and the trysting-place shall be in Shadowy Vale.  How sayest
thou, Chief of the Wolf?’

Said Folk-might: ‘I have little to say; and it is for the War-leader to
see to this closely and piecemeal.  I deem, as we all deem, that there
should be no delay; yet were it best to wend not all together to Shadowy
Vale, but in divers bands, as soon as ye may after the Folk-mote, by the
sure and nigh ways that we shall show you.  And when we are gathered
there, short is the rede, for all is ready there to wend by the passes
which we know throughly, and whereby it is but two days’ journey to the
head of Silver-dale, nigh to the caves of the silver, where the felons
dwell the thickest.’

He set his teeth, and his colour came and went: for as constantly as the
onslaught had been in his mind, yet whenever he spake of the great day of
battle, hope and joy and anger wrought a tumult in his soul; and now that
it was so nigh withal, he could not refrain his joy.

But he spake again: ‘Now therefore, War-leader, it is for thee to order
the goings of thy folk.  But I will tell thee that they shall not need to
take aught with them save their weapons and victual for the way, that is,
for thirty hours; because all is ready for them in Shadowy Vale, though
it be but a poor place as to victual.  Canst thou tell us, therefore,
what thou wilt do?’

Face-of-god had knit his brows and become gloomy of countenance; but now
his face cleared, and he set his hand to his pouch, and drew forth a
written parchment, and said:

‘This is the order whereof I have bethought me.  Before the Folk-mote I
and the Wardens shall speak to the leaders of hundreds, who be mostly
here at the Fair, and give them the day and the hour whereon they shall,
each hundred, take their weapons and wend to Shadowy Vale, and also the
place where they shall meet the men of yours who shall lead them across
the Waste.  These hundred-leaders shall then go straightway and give the
word to the captains of scores, and the captains of scores to the
captains of tens; and if, as is scarce doubtful, the Folk-mote yea-says
the onslaught and the fellowship with you of the Wolf, then shall those
leaders of tens bring their men to the trysting-place, and so go their
ways to Shadowy Vale.  Now here I have the roll of our Weapon-show, and I
will look to it that none shall be passed over; and if ye ask me in what
order they had best get on the way, my rede is that a two hundred should
depart on the very evening of the day of the Folk-mote, and these to be
of our folk of the Upper Dale; and on the morning of the morrow of the
Folk-mote another two hundreds from the Dale; and in the evening of the
same day the folk of the Shepherds, three hundreds or more, and that will
be easy to them; again on the next day two more bands of the Lower Dale,
one in the morning, one in the evening.  Lastly, in the earliest dawn of
the third day from the Folk-mote shall the Woodlanders wend their ways.
But one hundred of men let us leave behind for the warding of the Burg,
even as we agreed before.  As for the place of tryst for the faring over
the Waste, let it be the end of the knolls just by the jaws of the pass
yonder, where the Weltering Water comes into the Dale from the East.  How
say ye?’

They all said, and Folk-might especially, that it was right well devised,
and that thus it should be done.

Then turned Face-of-god to the Dale-warden, and said:

‘It were good, brother, that we saw the other wardens as soon as may be,
to do them to wit of this order, and what they have to do.’

Therewith he arose and took the Elder of the Dale-wardens away with him,
and the twain set about their business straight-way.  Neither did the
others abide long in the Hall, but went out into the Burg to see the
chapmen and their wares.  There the Alderman bought what he needed of
iron and steel and other matters; and Folk-might cheapened him a dagger
curiously wrought, and a web of gold and silk for the Sun-beam, for which
wares he paid in silver arm-rings, new-wrought and of strange fashion.

But amidst of the chaffer was now a great ring of men; and in the midst
of the ring stood Redesman, fiddle and bow in hand, and with him were
four damsels wondrously arrayed; for the first was clad in a smock so
craftily wrought with threads of green and many colours, that it seemed
like a piece of the green field beset with primroses and cowslips and
harebells and windflowers, rather than a garment woven and sewn; and in
her hand she bore a naked sword, with golden hilts and gleaming blade.
But the second bore on her roses done in like manner, both blossoms and
green leaves, wherewith her body was covered decently, which else had
been naked.  The third was clad as though she were wading the wheat-field
to the waist, and above was wrapped in the leaves and bunches of the
wine-tree.  And the fourth was clad in a scarlet gown flecked with white
wool to set forth the winter’s snow, and broidered over with the burning
brands of the Holy Hearth; and she bore on her head a garland of
mistletoe.  And these four damsels were clearly seen to image the four
seasons of the year—Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter.  But amidst them
stood a fountain or conduit of gilded work cunningly wrought, and full of
the best wine of the Dale, and gilded cups and beakers hung about it.

So now Redesman fell to caressing his fiddle with the bow till it began
to make sweet music, and therewith the hearts of all danced with it; and
presently words come into his mouth, and he fell to singing; and the
damsels answered him:

   Earth-wielders, that fashion the Dale-dwellers’ treasure,
      Soft are ye by seeming, yet hardy of heart!
   No warrior amongst us withstandeth your pleasure;
      No man from his meadow may thrust you apart.

   Fresh and fair are your bodies, but far beyond telling
      Are the years of your lives, and the craft ye have stored.
   Come give us a word, then, concerning our dwelling,
      And the days to befall us, the fruit of the sword.

                             _Winter saith_:

   When last in the feast-hall the Yule-fire flickered,
      The foot of no foeman fared over the snow,
   And nought but the wind with the ash-branches bickered:
      Next Yule ye may deem it a long time ago.

                             _Autumn saith_:

   Loud laughed ye last year in the wheat-field a-smiting;
      And ye laughed as your backs drave the beam of the press.
   When the edge of the war-sword the acres are lighting
      Look up to the Banner and laugh ye no less.

                             _Summer saith_:

   Ye called and I came, and how good was the greeting,
      When ye wrapped me in roses both bosom and side!
   Here yet shall I long, and be fain of our meeting,
      As hidden from battle your coming I bide.

                             _Spring saith_:

   I am here for your comfort, and lo! what I carry;
      The blade with the bright edges bared to the sun.
   To the field, to the work then, that e’en I may tarry
      For the end of the tale in my first days begun!

Therewith the throng opened, and a young man stepped lightly into the
ring, clad in very fair armour, with a gilded helm on his head; and he
took the sword from the hand of the Maiden of Spring, and waved it in the
air till the westering sun flashed back from it.  Then each of the four
damsels went up to the swain and kissed his mouth; and Redesman drew the
bow across the strings, and the four damsels sang together, standing
round about the young warrior:

   It was but a while since for earth’s sake we trembled,
      Lest the increase our life-days had won for the Dale,
   All the wealth that the moons and the years had assembled,
      Should be but a mock for the days of your bale.

   But now we behold the sun smite on the token
      In the hand of the Champion, the heart of a man;
   We look down the long years and see them unbroken;
      Forth fareth the Folk by the ways it began.

   So bid ye these chapmen in autumn returning,
      To bring iron for ploughshares and steel for the scythe,
   And the over-sea oil that hath felt the sun’s burning,
      And fair webs for your women soft-spoken and blithe;

   And pledge ye your word in the market to meet them,
      As many a man and as many a maid,
   As eager as ever, as guest-fain to greet them,
      And bide till the booth from the waggon is made.

   Come, guests of our lovers! for we, the year-wielders,
      Bid each man and all to come hither and take
   A cup from our hands midst the peace of our shielders,
      And drink to the days of the Dale that we make.

Then went the damsels to that wine-fountain, and drew thence cups of the
best and brightest wine of the Dale, and went round about the ring, and
gave drink to whomsoever would, both of the chapmen and the others; while
the weaponed youth stood in the midst bearing aloft his sword and shield
like an image in a holy place, and Redesman’s bow still went up and down
the strings, and drew forth a sweet and merry tune.

Great game it was now to see the stark Burgdale carles dragging the Men
of the Plain, little loth, up to the front of the ring, that they might
stretch out their hands for a cup, and how many a one, as he took it,
took as much as he might of the damsel’s hand withal.  As for the
damsels, they played the Holy Play very daintily, neither reddening nor
laughing, but faring so solemnly, and withal so sweetly and bright-faced,
that it might well have been deemed that they were in very sooth Maidens
of the God of Earth sent from the ever-enduring Hall to cheer the hearts
of men.

So simply and blithely did the Men of Burgdale disport them after the
manner of their fathers, trusting in their valour and beholding the good
days to be.

So wore the evening, and when night was come, men feasted throughout the
Burg from house to house, and every hall was full.  But the Guests from
Shadowy Vale feasted in the Hall of the Face in all glee and goodwill;
and with them were the chief of the chapmen and two others; but the rest
of them had been laid hold of by goodmen of the Burg, and dragged into
their feast-halls, for they were fain of those guests and their tales.
One of the chapmen in the House of the Face knew Folk-might, and hailed
him by the name he had borne in the Cities, Regulus to wit; indeed, the
chief chapman knew him, and even somewhat over-well, for he had been held
to ransom by Folk-might in those past days, and even yet feared him,
because he, the chapman, had played somewhat of a dastard’s part to him.
But the other was an open-hearted and merry fellow, and no weakling; and
Folk-might was fain of his talk concerning times bygone, and the fields
they had foughten in, and other adventures that had befallen them, both
good and evil.

As for Face-of-god, he went about the Hall soberly, and spake no more
than behoved him, so as not to seem a mar-feast; for the image of the
slaughter to be yet abode with him, and his heart foreboded the
after-grief of the battle.  He had no speech with the Sun-beam till men
were sundering after the feast, and then he came close to her amidst of
the turmoil, and said:

‘Time presses on me these days; but if thou wouldest speak with me
to-morrow as I would with thee, then mightest thou go on the Bridge of
the Burg about sunrise, and I will be there, and we two only.’

Her face, which had been somewhat sad that evening (for she had been
watching his), brightened at that word, and she took his hand as folk
came thronging round about them, and said:

‘Yea, friend, I shall be there, and fain of thee.’  And therewithal they
sundered for that night.

And all men went to sleep throughout the Burg: howbeit they set a watch
at the Burg-Gate; and Hall-face, when he was coming back from the
woodland ward about sunset, fell in with Redcoat of Waterless and four
score men on the Portway coming to meet him and take his place.  All
which was clean contrary to the wont of the Burgdalers, who at most
whiles held no watch and ward, not even in Fair-time.




CHAPTER XXXV.  FACE-OF-GOD TALKETH WITH THE SUN-BEAM.


FACE-OF-GOD was at the Bridge on the morrow before sun-rising, and as he
turned about at the Bridge-foot he saw the Sun-beam coming down the
street; and his heart rose to his mouth at the sight of her, and he went
to meet her and took her by the hand; and there were no words between
them till they had kissed and caressed each other, for there was no one
stirring about them.  So they went over the Bridge into the meadows, and
eastward of the beaten path thereover.

The grass was growing thick and strong, and it was full of flowers, as
the cowslip and the oxlip, and the chequered daffodil, and the wild
tulip: the black-thorn was well-nigh done blooming, but the hawthorn was
in bud, and in some places growing white.  It was a fair morning, warm
and cloudless, but the night had been misty, and the haze still hung
about the meadows of the Dale where they were wettest, and the grass and
its flowers were heavy with dew, so that the Sun-beam went barefoot in
the meadow.  She had a dark cloak cast over her kirtle, and had left her
glittering gown behind her in the House.

They went along hand in hand exceeding fain of each other, and the sun
rose as they went, and the long beams of gold shone through the tops of
the tall trees across the grass they trod, and a light wind rose up in
the north, as Face-of-god stayed a moment and turned toward the Face of
the Sun and prayed to Him, while the Sun-beam’s hand left the
War-leader’s hand and stole up to his golden locks and lay amongst them.

Presently they went on, and the feet of Face-of-god led him unwitting
toward the chestnut grove by the old dyke where he had met the Bride such
a little while ago, till he bethought whither he was going and stopped
short and reddened; and the Sun-beam noted it, but spake not; but he
said: ‘Hereby is a fair place for us to sit and talk till the day’s work
beginneth.’

So then he turned aside, and soon they came to a hawthorn brake out of
which arose a great tall-stemmed oak, showing no green as yet save a
little on its lower twigs; and anigh it, yet with room for its boughs to
grow freely, was a great bird-cherry tree, all covered now with
sweet-smelling white blossoms.  There they sat down on the trunk of a
tree felled last year, and she cast off her cloak, and took his face
between her two hands and kissed him long and fondly, and for a while
their joy had no word.  But when speech came to them, it was she that
spake first and said:

‘Gold-mane, my dear, sorely I wonder at thee and at me, how we are
changed since that day last autumn when I first saw thee.  Whiles I
think, didst thou not laugh when thou wert by thyself that day, and mock
at me privily, that I must needs take such wisdom on myself, and lesson
thee standing like a stripling before me.  Dost thou not call it all to
mind and make merry over it, now that thou art become a great chieftain
and a wise warrior, and I am yet what I always was, a young maiden of the
kindred; save that now I abide no longer for my love?’

Her face was exceeding bright and rippled with joyous smiles, and he
looked at her and deemed that her heart was overflowing with happiness,
and he wondered at her indeed that she was so glad of him, and he said:

‘Yea, indeed, oft do I see that morning in the woodland hall and thee and
me therein, as one looketh on a picture; yea verily, and I laugh, yet is
it for very bliss; neither do I mock at all.  Did I not deem thee a God
then? and am I not most happy now when I can call it thus to mind?  And
as to thee, thou wert wise then, and yet art thou wise now.  Yea, I
thought thee a God; and if we are changed, is it not rather that thou
hast lifted me up to thee, and not come down to me?’

Yet therewithal he knit his brows somewhat and said:

‘Yet thou hast not to tell me that all thy love for thy Folk, and thy
yearning hope for its recoverance, was but a painted show.  Else why
shouldst thou love me the better now that I am become a chieftain, and
therefore am more meet to understand thy hope and thy sorrow?  Did I not
behold thee as we stood before the Wolf of the Hall of Shadowy Vale, how
the tears stood in thine eyes as thou beheldest him, and thine hand in
mine quivered and clung to me, and thou wert all changed in a moment of
time?  Was all this then but a seeming and a beguilement?’

‘O young man,’ she said, ‘hast thou not said it, that we stood there
close together, and my hand in thine and desire growing up in me?  Dost
thou not know how this also quickeneth the story of our Folk, and our
goodwill towards the living, and remembrance of the dead?  Shall they
have lived and desired, and we deny desire and life?  Or tell me: what
was it made thee so chieftain-like in the Hall yesterday, so that thou
wert the master of all our wills, for as self-willed as some of us were?
Was it not that I, whom thou deemest lovely, was thereby watching thee
and rejoicing in thee?  Did not the sweetness of thy love quicken thee?
Yet because of that was thy warrior’s wisdom and thy foresight an empty
show?  Heedest thou nought the Folk of the Dale?  Wouldest thou sunder
from the children of the Fathers, and dwell amongst strangers?’

He kissed her and smiled on her and said: ‘Did I not say of thee that
thou wert wiser than the daughters of men?  See how wise thou hast made
me!’

She spake again: ‘Nay, nay, there was no feigning in my love for my
people.  How couldest thou think it, when the Fathers and the kindred
have made this body that thou lovest, and the voice of their songs is in
the speech thou deemest sweet?’

He said: ‘Sweet friend, I deemed not that there was feigning in thee: I
was but wondering what I am and how I was fashioned, that I should make
thee so glad that thou couldst for a while forget thy hope of the days
before we met.’

She said: ‘O how glad, how glad!  Yet was I nought hapless.  In despite
of all trouble I had no down-weighing grief, and I had the hope of my
people before me.  Good were my days; but I knew not till now how glad a
child of man may be.’

Their words were hushed for a while amidst their caresses.  Then she
said:

‘Gold-mane, my friend, I mocked not my past self because I deem that I
was a fool then, but because I see now that all that my wisdom could do,
would have come about without my wisdom; and that thou, deeming thyself
something less than wise, didst accomplish the thing I craved, and that
which thou didst crave also; and withal wisdom embraced thee, along with
love.’

Therewith she cast her arms about him and said:

‘O friend, I mock myself of this: that erst thou deemedst me a God and
fearedst me, but now thou seemest to me to be a God, and I fear thee.
Yea, though I have longed so sore to be with thee since the day of
Shadowy Vale, and though I have wearied of the slow wearing of the days,
and it hath tormented me; yet now that I am with thee, I bless the
torment of my longing; for it is but my longing that compelleth me to
cast away my fear of thee and caress thee, because I have learned how
sweet it is to love thee thus.’

He wound his arms about her, and sweeter was their longing than mere joy;
and though their love was beyond measure, yet was therein no shame to
aught, not even to the lovely Dale and that fair season of spring, so
goodly they were among the children of men.

In a while they arose and turned homeward, and went over the open meadow,
and it was yet early, and the dew was as heavy on the grass as before,
though the wide sunlight was now upon it, glittering on the wet blades,
and shining through the bells of the chequered daffodils till they looked
like gouts of blood.

‘Look,’ said Sun-beam, as they went along by the same way whereas they
came, ‘deemest thou not that other speech-friends besides us have been
abroad to talk together apart on this morning of the eve of battle.  It
is nought unwonted, that we do, even though we forget the trouble of the
people to think of our own joy for a while.’

The smile died out of her face as she spoke, and she said:

‘O friend, this much may I say for myself in all sooth, that indeed I
would die for the kindred and its good days, nor falter therein; but if I
am to die, might I but die in thine arms!’

He looked very lovingly on her, and put his arm about her and kissed her
and said: ‘What ails us to stand in the doom-ring and bear witness
against ourselves before the kindred?  Now I will say, that whatsoever
the kindred may or can call upon me to do, that will I do, nor grudge the
deed: I am sackless before them.  But that is true which I spake to thee
when we came together up out of Shadowy Vale, to wit, that I am no
strifeful man, but a peaceful; and I look to it to win through this war,
and find on the other side either death, or life amongst a happy folk;
and I deem that this is mostly the mind of our people.’

She said: ‘Thou shalt not die, thou shalt not die!’

‘Mayhappen not,’ he said; ‘yet yesterday I could not but look into the
slaughter to come, and it seemed to me a grim thing, and darkened the day
for me; and I grew acold as a man walking with the dead.  But tell me:
thou sayest I shall not die; dost thou say this only because I am become
dear to thee, or dost thou speak it out of thy foresight of things to
come?’

She stopped and looked silently a while over the meadows towards the
houses of the Thorp: they were standing now on the border of a shallow
brook that ran down toward the Weltering Water; it had a little strand of
fine sand like the sea-shore, driven close together, and all moist,
because that brook was used to flood the meadow for the feeding of the
grass; and the last evening the hatches which held up the water had been
drawn, so that much had ebbed away and left the strand aforesaid.

After a while the Sun-beam turned to Face-of-god, and she was become
somewhat pale; she said:

‘Nay, I have striven to see, and can see nought save the picture of hope
and fear that I make for myself.  So it oft befalleth foreseeing women,
that the love of a man cloudeth their vision.  Be content, dear friend;
it is for life or death; but whichso it be, the same for me and thee
together?’

‘Yea,’ he said, ‘and well content I am; so now let each of us trust in
the other to be both good and dear, even as I trusted in thee the first
hour that I looked on thee.’

‘It is well,’ she said; ‘it is well.  How fair thou art; and how fair is
the morn, and this our Dale in the goodly season; and all this abideth us
when the battle is over.’

Once more her voice became sweet and wheedling, and the smile lit up her
face again, and she pointed down to the sand with her finger, and said:

‘See thou!  Here indeed have other lovers passed by across the brook.
Shall we wish them good luck?’

He laughed and looked down on the sand, and said:

‘Thou art in haste to make a story up.  Indeed I see that these first
footprints are of a woman, for no carle of the Dale has a foot as small;
for we be tall fellows; and these others withal are a man’s footprints;
and if they showed that they had been walking side by side, simple had
been thy tale; but so it is not.  I cannot say that these two pairs of
feet went over the brook within five minutes of each other; but sure it
is that they could not have been faring side by side.  Well, belike they
were lovers bickering, and we may wish them luck out of that.  Truly it
is well seen that Bow-may hath done thine hunting for thee, dear friend;
or else wouldest thou have lacked venison; for thou hast no hunter’s
eye.’

‘Well,’ she said, ‘but wish them luck, and give me thine hand upon it.’

He took her hand, and fondled it, and said: ‘By this hand of my
speech-friend, I wish these twain all luck, in love and in leisure, in
faring and fighting, in sowing and samming, in getting and giving.  Is it
well enough wished?  If so it be, then come thy ways, dear friend; for
the day’s work is at hand.’

‘It is well wished,’ she said.  ‘Now hearken: by the valiant hand of the
War-leader, by the hand that shall unloose my girdle, I wish these twain
to be as happy as we be.’

He made as if to draw her away, but she hung aback to set the print of
her foot beside the woman’s foot, and then they went on together, and
soon crossed the Bridge, and came home to the House of the Face.

When they had broken their fast, Face-of-god would straight get to his
business of ordering matters for the warfare, and was wishful to speak
with Folk-might; but found him not, either in the House or the street.
But a man said:

‘I saw the tall Guest come abroad from the House and go toward the Bridge
very early in the morning.’

The Sun-beam, who was anigh when that was spoken, heard it and smiled,
and said: ‘Gold-mane, deemest thou that it was my brother whom we
blessed?’

‘I wot not,’ he said; ‘but I would he were here, for this gear must
speedily be looked to.’

Nevertheless it was nigh an hour before Folk-might came home to the
House.  He strode in lightly and gaily, and shaking the crest of his
war-helm as he went.  He looked friendly on Face-of-god, and said to him:

‘Thou hast been seeking me, War-leader; but grudge it not that I have
caused thee to tarry.  For as things have gone, I am twice the man for
thine helping that I was yester-eve; and thou art so ready and deft, that
all will be done in due time.’

He looked as if he would have had Face-of-god ask of him what made him so
fain, but Face-of-god said only:

‘I am glad of thy gladness; but now let us dally no longer, for I have
many folk to see to-day and much to set a-going.’

So therewith they spake together a while, and then went their ways
together toward Carlstead and the Woodlanders.




CHAPTER XXXVI.  FOLK-MIGHT SPEAKETH WITH THE BRIDE.


IT must be told that those footprints which Face-of-god and the Sun-beam
had blessed betwixt jest and earnest had more to do with them than they
wotted of.  For Folk-might, who had had many thoughts and longings since
he had seen the Bride again, rose up early about sunrise, and went
out-a-doors, and wandered about the Burg, letting his eyes stray over the
goodly stone houses and their trim gardens, yet noting them little, since
the Bride was not there.

At last he came to where there was an open place, straight-sided, longer
than it was wide, with a wall on each side of it, over which showed the
blossomed boughs of pear and cherry and plum-trees: on either hand before
the wall was a row of great lindens, now showing their first tender
green, especially on their lower twigs, where they were sheltered by the
wall.  At the nether end of this place Folk-might saw a grey stone house,
and he went towards it betwixt the lindens, for it seemed right great,
and presently was but a score of paces from its door, and as yet there
was no man, carle or queen, stirring about it.

It was a long low house with a very steep roof; but belike the hall was
built over some undercroft, for many steps went up to the door on either
hand; and the doorway was low, with a straight lintel under its arch.
This house, like the House of the Face, seemed ancient and somewhat
strange, and Folk-might could not choose but take note of it.  The front
was all of good ashlar work, but it was carven all over, without heed
being paid to the joints of the stones, into one picture of a flowery
meadow, with tall trees and bushes in it, and fowl perched in the trees
and running through the grass, and sheep and kine and oxen and horses
feeding down the meadow; and over the door at the top of the stair was
wrought a great steer bigger than all the other neat, whose head was
turned toward the sun-rising and uplifted with open mouth, as though he
were lowing aloud.  Exceeding fair seemed that house to Folk-might, and
as though it were the dwelling of some great kindred.

But he had scarce gone over it with his eyes, and was just about to draw
nigher yet to it, when the door at the top of those steps opened, and a
woman came out of the house clad in a green kirtle and a gown of brazil,
with a golden-hilted sword girt to her side.  Folk-might saw at once that
it was the Bride, and drew aback behind one of the trees so that she
might not see him, if she had not already seen him, as it seemed not that
she had, for she stayed but for a moment on the top of the stair, looking
out down the tree-rows, and then came down the stair and went soberly
along the road, passing so close to Folk-might that he could see the
fashion of her beauty closely, as one looks into the work of some deftest
artificer.  Then it came suddenly into his head that he would follow her
and see whither she was wending.  ‘At least,’ said he to himself, ‘if I
come not to speech with her, I shall be nigh unto her, and shall see
somewhat of her beauty.’

So he came out quietly from behind the tree, and followed her softly; and
he was clad in no garment save his kirtle, and bare no weapons to clash
and jingle, though he had his helm on his head for lack of a softer hat.
He kept her well in sight, and she went straight onward and looked not
back.  She went by the way whereas he had come, till they were in the
main street, wherein as yet was no one afoot; she made her way to the
Bridge, and passed over it into the meadows; but when she had gone but a
few steps, she stayed a little and looked on the ground, and as she did
so turned a little toward Folk-might, who had drawn back into the last of
the refuges over the up-stream buttresses.  He saw that there was a
half-smile on her face, but he could not tell whether she were glad or
sorry.  A light wind was beginning to blow, that stirred her raiment and
raised a lock of hair that had strayed from the golden fillet round about
her head, and she looked most marvellous fair.

Now she looked along the grass that glittered under the beams of the
newly-risen sun, and noted belike how heavy the dew lay on it; and the
grass was high already, for the spring had been hot, and haysel would be
early in the Dale.  So she put off her shoes, that were of deerskin and
broidered with golden threads, and turned somewhat from the way, and hung
them up amidst the new green leaves of a hawthorn bush that stood nearby,
and so went thwart the meadow somewhat eastward straight from that bush,
and her feet shone out like pearls amidst the deep green grass.

Folk-might followed presently, and she stayed not again, nor turned, nor
beheld him; he recked not if she had, for then would he have come up with
her and hailed her, and he knew that she was no foolish maiden to start
at the sight of a man who was the friend of her Folk.

So they went their ways till she came to the strand of the water-meadow
brook aforesaid, and she went through the little ripples of the shallow
without staying, and on through the tall deep grass of the meadow beyond,
to where they met the brook again; for it swept round the meadow in a
wide curve, and turned back toward itself; so it was some half furlong
over from water to water.

She stood a while on the brink of the brook here, which was brim-full and
nigh running into the grass, because there was a dam just below the
place; and Folk-might drew nigher to her under cover of the thorn-bushes,
and looked at the place about her and beyond her.  The meadow beyond
stream was very fair and flowery, but not right great; for it was bounded
by a grove of ancient chestnut trees, that went on and on toward the
southern cliffs of the Dale: in front of the chestnut wood stood a broken
row of black-thorn bushes, now growing green and losing their blossom,
and he could see betwixt them that there was a grassy bank running along,
as if there had once been a turf-wall and ditch round about the chestnut
trees.  For indeed this was the old place of tryst between Gold-mane and
the Bride, whereof the tale hath told before.

The Bride stayed scarce longer than gave him time to note all this; but
he deemed that she was weeping, though he could not rightly see her face;
for her shoulders heaved, and she hung her face adown and put up her
hands to it.  But now she went a little higher up the stream, where the
water was shallower, and waded the stream and went up over the meadow,
still weeping, as he deemed, and went between the black-thorn bushes, and
sat her down on the grassy bank with her back to the chestnut trees.

Folk-might was ashamed to have seen her weeping, and was half-minded to
turn him back again at once; but love constrained him, and he said to
himself, ‘Where shall I see her again privily if I pass by this time and
place?’  So he waited a little till he deemed she might have mastered the
passion of tears, and then came forth from his bush, and went down to the
water and crossed it, and went quietly over the meadow straight towards
her.  But he was not half-way across, when she lifted up her face from
between her hands and beheld the man coming.  She neither started nor
rose up; but straightened herself as she sat, and looked right into
Folk-might’s eyes as he drew near, though the tears were not dry on her
cheeks.

Now he stood before her, and said: ‘Hail to the Daughter of a mighty
House!  Mayst thou live happy!’

She answered: ‘Hail to thee also, Guest of our Folk!  Hast thou been
wandering about our meadows, and happened on me perchance?’

‘Nay,’ he said; ‘I saw thee come forth from the House of the Steer, and I
followed thee hither.’

She reddened a little, and knit her brow, and said:

‘Thou wilt have something to say to me?’

‘I have much to say to thee,’ he said; ‘yet it was sweet to me to behold
thee, even if I might not speak with thee.’

She looked on him with her deep simple eyes, and neither reddened again,
nor seemed wroth; then she said:

‘Speak what thou hast in thine heart, and I will hearken without anger
whatsoever it may be; even if thou hast but to tell me of the passing
folly of a mighty man, which in a month or two he will not remember for
sorrow or for joy.  Sit here beside me, and tell me thy thought.’

So he sat him adown and said: ‘Yea, I have much to say to thee, but it is
hard to me to say it.  But this I will say: to-day and yesterday make the
third time I have seen thee.  The first time thou wert happy and calm,
and no shadow of trouble was on thee; the second time thine happy days
were waning, though thou scarce knewest it; but to-day and yesterday thou
art constrained by the bonds of grief, and wouldest loosen them if thou
mightest.’

She said: ‘What meanest thou?  How knowest thou this?  How may a stranger
partake in my joy and my sorrow?’

He said: ‘As for yesterday, all the people might see thy grief and know
it.  But when I beheld thee the first time, I saw thee that thou wert
more fair and lovely than all other women; and when I was away from thee,
the thought of thee and thine image were with me, and I might not put
them away; and oft at such and such a time I wondered and said to myself,
what is she doing now? though god wot I was dealing with tangles and
troubles and rough deeds enough.  But the second time I beheld thee, when
I had looked to have great joy in the sight of thee, my heart was smitten
with a pang of grief; for I saw thee hanging on the words and the looks
of another man, who was light-minded toward thee, and that thou wert
troubled with the anguish of doubt and fear.  And he knew it not, nor saw
it, though I saw it.’

Her face grew troubled, and the tearful passion stirred within her.  But
she held it aback, and said, as anyone might have said it:

‘How wert thou in the Dale, mighty man?  We saw thee not.’

He said: ‘I came hither hidden in other semblance than mine own.  But
meddle not therewith; it availeth nought.  Let me say this, and do thou
hearken to it.  I saw thee yesterday in the street, and thou wert as the
ghost of thine old gladness; although belike thou hast striven with
sorrow; for I see thee with a sword by thy side, and we have been told
that thou, O fairest of women, hast given thyself to the Warrior to be
his damsel.’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘that is sooth.’

He went on: ‘But the face which thou bearedst yesterday against thy will,
amidst all the people, that was because thou hadst seen my sister the
Sun-beam for the first time, and Face-of-god with her, hand clinging to
hand, lip longing for lip, desire unsatisfied, but glad with all hope.’

She laid hand upon hand in the lap of her gown, and looked down, and her
voice trembled as she said:

‘Doth it avail to talk of this?’

He said: ‘I know not: it may avail; for I am grieved, and shall be whilst
thou art grieved; and it is my wont to strive with my griefs till I amend
them.’

She turned to him with kind eyes and said:

‘O mighty man, canst thou clear away the tangle which besetteth the soul
of her whose hope hath bewrayed her?  Canst thou make hope grow up in her
heart?  Friend, I will tell thee that when I wed, I shall wed for the
sake of the kindred, hoping for no joy therein.  Yea, or if by some
chance the desire of man came again into my heart, I should strive with
it to rid myself of it, for I should know of it that it was but a wasting
folly, that should but beguile me, and wound me, and depart, leaving me
empty of joy and heedless of life.’

He shook his head and said: ‘Even so thou deemest now; but one day it
shall be otherwise.  Or dost thou love thy sorrow?  I tell thee, as it
wears thee and wears thee, thou shalt hate it, and strive to shake it
off.’

‘Nay, nay,’ she said; ‘I love it not; for not only it grieveth me, but
also it beateth me down and belittleth me.’

‘Good is that,’ said he.  ‘I know how strong thine heart is.  Now, wilt
thou take mine hand, which is verily the hand of thy friend, and remember
what I have told thee of my grief which cannot be sundered from thine?
Shall we not talk more concerning this?  For surely I shall soon see thee
again, and often; since the Warrior, who loveth me belike, leadeth thee
into fellowship with me.  Yea, I tell thee, O friend, that in that
fellowship shalt thou find both the seed of hope, and the sun of desire
that shall quicken it.’

Therewith he arose and stood before her, and held out to her his hand all
hardened with the sword-hilt, and she took it, and stood up facing him,
and said:

‘This much will I tell thee, O friend; that what I have said to thee this
hour, I thought not to have said to any man; or to talk with a man of the
grief that weareth me, or to suffer him to see my tears; and marvellous I
deem it of thee, for all thy might, that thou hast drawn this speech from
out of me, and left me neither angry nor ashamed, in spite of these
tears; and thou whom I have known not, though thou knewest me!

‘But now it were best that thou depart, and get thee home to the House of
the Face, where I was once so frequent; for I wot that thou hast much to
do; and as thou sayest, it will be in warfare that I shall see thee.  Now
I thank thee for thy words and the thought thou hast had of me, and the
pain which thou hast taken to heal my hurt: I thank thee, I thank thee,
for as grievous as it is to show one’s hurts even to a friend.’

He said: ‘O Bride, I thank thee for hearkening to my tale; and one day
shall I thank thee much more.  Mayest thou fare well in the Field and
amidst the Folk!’

Therewith he kissed her hand, and turned away, and went across the meadow
and the stream, glad at heart and blithe with everyone; for kindness grew
in him as gladness grew.




CHAPTER XXXVII.  OF THE FOLK-MOTE OF THE DALESMEN, THE SHEPHERD-FOLK, AND
THE WOODLAND CARLES: THE BANNER OF THE WOLF DISPLAYED.


NOW came the day of the Great Folk-mote, and there was much thronging
from everywhere to the Mote-stead, but most from Burgstead itself,
whereas few of the Dale-dwellers who had been at the Fair had gone back
home.  Albeit some of the Shepherds and of the Dalesmen of the
westernmost Dale had brought light tents, and tilted themselves in in the
night before the Mote down in the meadows below the Mote-stead.  From
early morning there had been a stream of folk on the Portway setting
westward; and many came thus early that they might hold converse with
friends and well-wishers; and some that they might disport them in the
woods.  Men went in no ordered bands, as the Burgstead men at least had
done on the day of the Weapon-show, save that a few of them who were
arrayed the bravest gathered about the banners, and went with them to the
Mote-stead; for all the banners must needs be there.

The Folk-mote was to be hallowed-in three hours before noon, as all men
knew; therefore an hour before that time were all men of the Dale and the
Shepherds assembled that might be looked for, save the Alderman and the
chieftains with the banner of the Burg, and these were not like to come
many minutes before the Hallowing.  Folk were gathered on the Field in
such wise, that the men-at-arms made a great ring round about the
Doom-ring, (albeit there were many old men there, girt with swords that
they should never heave up again in battle), so that without that ring
there was nought save women and children.  But when all the other Houses
were assembled, men looked around, and beheld the place of the
Woodlanders that it was empty; and they marvelled that they were thus
belated.  For now all was ready, and a watcher had gone up to the Tower
on the height, and had with him the great Horn of Warning, which could be
heard past the Mote-stead and a great way down the Dale: and if he saw
foes coming from the East he should blow one blast; if from the South,
two; if from the West, three; if from the North, four.

So half an hour from the appointed time of Hallowing rose the rumour that
the Alderman was on the road, and presently they of the women who were on
the outside of the throng, by drawing nigh to the edge of the sheer rock,
could behold the Banner of the Burg on the Portway, and soon after could
see the wain, done about with green boughs, wherein sat the chieftains in
their glittering war-gear.  Speedily they spread the tidings, and a
confused shout went up into the air; and in a little while the wain
stayed on Wildlake’s Way at the bottom of the steep slope that went up to
the Mote-stead, and the banner of the Burg came on proudly up the hill.
Soon all men beheld it, and saw that the tall Hall-face bore it in front
of his brother Face-of-god, who came on gleaming in war-gear better than
most men had seen; which was indeed of his father’s fashioning, and his
father’s gift to him that morning.

After Face-of-god came the Alderman, and with him Folk-might leading the
Sun-beam by the hand, and then Stone-face and the Elder of the
Dale-wardens; and then the six Burg-wardens: as to the other
Dale-wardens, they were in their places on the Field.

So now those who had been standing up turned their faces toward the Altar
of the Gods, and those who had been sitting down sprang to their feet,
and the confused rumour of the throng rose into a clear shout as the
chieftains went to their places, and sat them down on the turf-seats
amidst the Doom-ring facing the Speech-hill and the Altar of the Gods.
Amidmost sat the Alderman, on his right hand Face-of-god, and out from
him Hall-face, and then Stone-face and three of the Wardens; but on his
left hand sat first the two Guests, then the Elder of the Dale-wardens,
and then the other three Burg-wardens; as for the Banner of the Burg, its
staff was stuck into the earth behind them, and the Banner raised itself
in the morning wind and flapped and rippled over their heads.

There then they sat, and folk abided, and it still lacked some minutes of
the due time, as the Alderman wotted by the shadow of the great
standing-stone betwixt him and the Altar.  Therewithal came the sound of
a great horn from out of the wood on the north side, and men knew it for
the horn of the Woodland Carles, and were glad; for they could not think
why they should be belated; and now men stood up a-tiptoe and on other’s
shoulders to look over the heads of the women and children to behold
their coming; but their empty place was at the southwest corner of the
ring of men.

So presently men beheld them marching toward their place, cleaving the
throng of the women and children, a great company; for besides that they
had with them two score more of men under weapons than on the day of the
Weapon-show, all their little ones and women and outworn elders were with
them, some on foot, some riding on oxen and asses.  In their forefront
went the two signs of the Battle-shaft and the War-spear.  But moreover,
in front of all was borne a great staff with the cloth of a banner
wrapped round about it, and tied up with a hempen yarn that it might not
be seen.

Stark and mighty men they looked; tall and lean, broad-shouldered,
dark-faced.  As they came amongst the throng the voice of their horn died
out, and for a few moments they fared on with no sound save the tramp of
their feet; then all at once the man who bare the hidden banner lifted up
one hand, and straightway they fell to singing, and with that song they
came to their place.  And this is some of what they sang:

   O white, white Sun, what things of wonder
      Hast thou beheld from thy wall of the sky!
   All the Roofs of the Rich and the grief thereunder,
      As the fear of the Earl-folk flitteth by!

   Thou hast seen the Flame steal forth from the Forest
      To slay the slumber of the lands,
   As the Dusky Lord whom thou abhorrest
      Clomb up to thy Burg unbuilt with hands.

   Thou lookest down from thy door the golden,
      Nor batest thy wide-shining mirth,
   As the ramparts fall, and the roof-trees olden
      Lie smouldering low on the burning earth.

   When flitteth the half-dark night of summer
      From the face of the murder great and grim,
   ’Tis thou thyself and no new-comer
      Shines golden-bright on the deed undim.

   Art thou our friend, O Day-dawn’s Lover?
      Full oft thine hand hath sent aslant
   Bright beams athwart the Wood-bear’s cover,
      Where the feeble folk and the nameless haunt.

   Thou hast seen us quail, thou hast seen us cower,
      Thou hast seen us crouch in the Green Abode,
   While for us wert thou slaying slow hour by hour,
      And smoothing down the war-rough road.

   Yea, the rocks of the Waste were thy Dawns upheaving,
      To let the days of the years go through;
   And thy Noons the tangled brake were cleaving
      The slow-foot seasons’ deed to do.

   Then gaze adown on this gift of our giving,
      For the WOLF comes wending frith and ford,
   And the Folk fares forth from the dead to the living,
      For the love of the Lief by the light of the Sword.

Then ceased the song, and the whole band of the Woodlanders came pouring
tumultuously into the space allotted them, like the waters pouring over a
river-dam, their white swords waving aloft in the morning sunlight; and
wild and strange cries rose up from amidst them, with sobbing and weeping
of joy.  But soon their troubled front sank back into ordered ranks,
their bright blades stood upright in their hands before them, and folk
looked on their company, and deemed it the very Terror of battle and
Render of the ranks of war.  Right well were they armed; for though many
of their weapons were ancient and somewhat worn, yet were they the work
of good smiths of old days; and moreover, if any of them lacked good
war-gear of his own, that had the Alderman and his sons made good to
them.

But before the hedge of steel stood the two tall men who held in their
hands the war-tokens of the Battle-shaft and the War-spear, and betwixt
them stood one who was indeed the tallest man of the whole assembly, who
held the great staff of the hidden banner.  And now he reached up his
hand, and plucked at the yarn that bound it, which of set purpose was but
feeble, and tore it off, and then shook the staff aloft with both hands,
and shouted, and lo! the Banner of the Wolf with the Sun-burst behind
him, glittering-bright, new-woven by the women of the kindred, ran out in
the fresh wind, and flapped and rippled before His warriors there
assembled.

Then from all over the Mote-stead arose an exceeding great shout, and all
men waved aloft their weapons; but the men of Shadowy Vale who were
standing amidst the men of the Face knew not how to demean themselves,
and some of them ran forth into the Field and leapt for joy, tossing
their swords into the air, and catching them by the hilts as they fell:
and amidst it all the Woodlanders now stood silent, unmoving, as men
abiding the word of onset.

As for that brother and sister: the Sun-beam flushed red all over her
face, and pressed her hands to her bosom, and then the passion of tears
over-mastered her, and her breast heaved, and the tears gushed out of her
eyes, and her body was shaken with weeping.  But Folk-might sat still,
looking straight before him, his eyes glittering, his teeth set, his
right hand clutching hard at the hilts of his sword, which lay naked
across his knees.  And the Bride, who stood clad in her begemmed and
glittering war-array in the forefront of the Men of the Steer, nigh unto
the seats of the chieftains, beheld Folk-might, and her face flushed and
brightened, and still she looked upon him.  The Alderman’s face was as of
one pleased and proud; yet was its joy shadowed as it were by a cloud of
compassion.  Face-of-god sat like the very image of the War-god, and
stirred not, nor looked toward the Sun-beam; for still the thought of the
after-grief of battle, and the death of friends and folk that loved him,
lay heavy on his heart, for all that it beat wildly at the shouting of
the men.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.  OF THE GREAT FOLK-MOTE: ATONEMENTS GIVEN, AND MEN MADE
SACKLESS.


AMIDST the clamour uprose the Alderman; for it was clear to all men that
the Folk-mote should be holden at once, and the matters of the War, and
the Fellowship, and the choosing of the War-leader, speedily dealt with.
So the Alderman fell to hallowing in the Folk-mote: he went up to the
Altar of the Gods, and took the Gold-ring off it, and did it on his arm;
then he drew his sword and waved it toward the four aírts, and spake; and
the noise and shouting fell, and there was silence but for him:

‘Herewith I hallow in this Folk-mote of the Men of the Dale and the
Sheepcotes and the Woodland, in the name of the Warrior and the Earth-god
and the Fathers of the kindreds.  Now let not the peace of the Mote be
broken.  Let not man rise against man, or bear blade or hand, or stick or
stone against any.  If any man break the Peace of the Holy Mote, let him
be a man accursed, a wild-beast in the Holy Places; an outcast from home
and hearth, from bed and board, from mead and acre; not to be holpen with
bread, nor flesh, nor wine; nor flax, nor wool, nor any cloth; nor with
sword, nor shield, nor axe, nor plough-share; nor with horse, nor ox, nor
ass; with no saddle-beast nor draught-beast; nor with wain, nor boat, nor
way-leading; nor with fire nor water; nor with any world’s wealth.  Thus
let him who hath cast out man be cast out by man.  Now is hallowed-in the
Folk-mote of the Men of the Dale and the Sheepcotes and the Woodlands.’

Therewith he waved his sword again toward the four aírts, and went and
sat down in his place.  But presently he arose again, and said:

‘Now if man hath aught to say against man, and claimeth boot of any, or
would lay guilt on any man’s head, let him come forth and declare it; and
the judges shall be named, and the case shall be tried this afternoon or
to-morrow.  Yet first I shall tell you that I, the Alderman of the
Dalesmen, doomed one Iron-face of the House of the Face to pay a double
fine, for that he drew a sword at the Gate-thing of Burgstead with the
intent to break the peace thereof.  Thou, Green-sleeve, bring forth the
peace-breaker’s fine, that Iron-face may lay the same on the Altar.’

Then came forth a man from the men of the Face bearing a bag, and he
brought it to Iron-face, who went up to the Altar and poured forth
weighed gold from the bag thereon, and said:

‘Warden of the Dale, come thou and weigh it!’

‘Nay,’ quoth the Warden, ‘it needeth not, no man here doubteth thee,
Alderman Iron-face.’

A murmur of yeasay went up, and none had a word to say against the
Alderman, but they praised him rather: also men were eager to hear of the
war, and the fellowship, and to be done with these petty matters.  Then
the Alderman rose again and said:

‘Hath any man a grief against any other of the Kindreds of the Dale, or
the Sheepcotes, or the Woodlands?’

None answered or stirred; so after he had waited a while, he said:

‘Is there any who hath any guilt to lay against a Stranger, an Outlander,
being such a man as he deems we can come at?’

Thereat was a stir amongst the Men of the Fleece of the Shepherds, and
their ranks opened, and there came forth an ill-favoured lean old man,
long-nebbed, blear-eyed, and bent, girt with a rusty old sword, but not
otherwise armed.  And all men knew Penny-thumb, who had been ransacked
last autumn.  As he came forth, it seemed as if his neighbours had been
trying to hold him back; but a stout, broad-shouldered man, black-haired
and red-bearded, made way for the old man, and led him out of the throng,
and stood by him; and this man was well armed at all points, and looked a
doughty carle.  He stood side by side with Penny-thumb, right in front of
the men of his house, and looked about him at first somewhat uneasily, as
though he were ashamed of his fellow; but though many smiled, none
laughed aloud; and they forbore, partly because they knew the man to be a
good man, partly because of the solemn tide of the Folk-mote, and partly
in sooth because they wished all this to be over, and were as men who had
no time for empty mirth.

Then said the Alderman: ‘What wouldest thou, Penny-thumb, and thou,
Bristler, son of Brightling?’

Then Penny-thumb began to speak in a high squeaky voice: ‘Alderman, and
Lord of the Folk!’  But therewithal Bristle, pulled him back, and said:

‘I am the man who hath taken this quarrel upon me, and have sworn upon
the Holy Boar to carry this feud through; and we deem, Alderman, that if
they who slew Rusty and ransacked Penny-thumb be not known now, yet they
soon may be.’

As he spake, came forth those three men of the Shepherds and the two
Dalesmen who had sworn with him on the Holy Boar.  Then up stood
Folk-might, and came forth into the field, and said:

‘Bristler, son of Brightling, and ye other good men and true, it is but
sooth that the ransackers and the slayer may soon be known; and here I
declare them unto you: I it was and none other who slew Rusty; and I was
the leader of those who ransacked Penny-thumb, and cowed Harts-bane of
Greentofts.  As for the slaying of Rusty, I slew him because he chased
me, and would not forbear, so that I must either slay or be slain, as
hath befallen me erewhile, and will befall again, methinks.  As for the
ransacking of Penny-thumb, I needed the goods that I took, and he needed
them not, since he neither used them, nor gave them away, and, they being
gone, he hath lived no worser than aforetime.  Now I say, that if ye will
take the outlawry off me, which, as I hear, ye laid upon me, not knowing
me, then will I handsel self-doom to thee, Bristler, if thou wilt bear
thy grief to purse, and I will pay thee what thou wilt out of hand; or if
perchance thou wilt call me to Holm, thither will I go, if thou and I
come unslain out of this war.  As to the ransacking and cowing of
Harts-bane, I say that I am sackless therein, because the man is but a
ruffler and a man of violence, and hath cowed many men of the Dale; and
if he gainsay me, then do I call him to the Holm after this war is over;
either him or any man who will take his place before my sword.’

Then he held his peace, and man spake to man, and a murmur arose, as they
said for the more part that it was a fair and manly offer.  But Bristler
called his fellows and Penny-thumb to him, and they spake together; and
sometimes Penny-thumb’s shrill squeak was heard above the deep-voiced
talk of the others; for he was a man that harboured malice.  But at last
Bristler spake out and said:

‘Tall man, we know that thou art a chieftain and of good will to the men
of the Dale and their friends, and that want drave thee to the
ransacking, and need to the manslaying, and neither the living nor the
dead to whom thou art guilty are to be called good men; therefore will I
bring the matter to purse, if thou wilt handsel me self-doom.’

‘Yea, even so let it be,’ quoth Folk-might; and stepped forward and took
Bristler by the hand, and handselled him self-doom.  Then said Bristler:

‘Though Rusty was no good man, and though he followed thee to slay thee,
yet was he in his right therein, since he was following up his goodman’s
gear; therefore shalt thou pay a full blood-wite for him, that is to say,
the worth of three hundreds in weed-stuff in whatso goods thou wilt.  As
for the ransacking of Penny-thumb, he shall deem himself well paid if
thou give him our hundreds in weed-stuff for that which thou didst borrow
of him.’

Then Penny-thumb set up his squeak again, but no man hearkened to him,
and each man said to his neighbour that it was well doomed of Bristler,
and neither too much nor too little.  But Folk-might bade Wood-wont to
bring thither to him that which he had borne to the Mote; and he brought
forth a big sack, and Folk-might emptied it on the earth, and lo! the
silver rings of the slain felons, and they lay in a heap on the green
field, and they were the best of silver.  Then the Elder of the
Dale-wardens weighed out from the heap the blood-wite for Rusty,
according to the due measure of the hundred in weed-stuff, and delivered
it unto Bristler.  And Folk-might said:

‘Draw nigh now, Penny-thumb, and take what thou wilt of this gear, which
I need not, and grudge not at me henceforward.’

But Penny-thumb was afraid, and abode where he was; and Bristler laughed,
and said: ‘Take it, goodman, take it; spare not other men’s goods as thou
dost thine own.’

And Folk-might stood by, smiling faintly: so Penny-thumb plucked up a
heart, and drew nigh trembling, and took what he durst from that heap;
and all that stood by said that he had gotten a full double of what had
been awarded to him.  But as for him, he went his ways straight from the
Mote-stead, and made no stay till he had gotten him home, and laid the
silver up in a strong coffer; and thereafter he bewailed him sorely that
he had not taken the double of that which he took, since none would have
said him nay.

When he was gone, the Alderman arose and said:

‘Now, since the fines have been paid duly and freely, according to the
dooming of Bristler, take we off the outlawry from Folk-might and his
fellows, and account them to be sackless before us.’

Then he called for other cases; but no man had aught more to bring
forward against any man, either of the kindreds or the Strangers.




CHAPTER XXXIX.  OF THE GREAT FOLK-MOTE: MEN TAKE REDE OF THE WAR-FARING,
THE FELLOWSHIP, AND THE WAR-LEADER.  FOLK-MIGHT TELLETH WHENCE HIS PEOPLE
CAME.  THE FOLK-MOTE SUNDERED.


NOW a great silence fell upon the throng, and they stood as men abiding
some new matter.  Unto them arose the Alderman, and said:

‘Men of the Dale, and ye Shepherds and Woodlanders; it is well known to
you that we have foemen in the wood and beyond it; and now have we gotten
sure tidings, that they will not abide at home or in the wood, but are
minded to fall upon us at home.  Now therefore I will not ask you whether
ye will have peace or war; for with these foemen ye may have peace no
otherwise save by war.  But if ye think with me, three things have ye to
determine: first, whether ye will abide your foes in your own houses, or
will go meet them at theirs; next, whether ye will take to you as fellows
in arms a valiant folk of the children of the Gods, who are foemen to our
foemen; and lastly, what man ye will have to be your War-leader.  Now, I
bid all those here assembled, to speak hereof, any man of them that will,
either what they may have conceived in their own minds, or what their
kindred may have put into their mouths to speak.’

Therewith he sat down, and in a little while came forth old Hall-ward of
the House of the Steer, and stood before the Alderman, and said: ‘O
Alderman, all we say: Since war is awake we will not tarry, but will go
meet our foes while it is yet time.  The valiant men of whom thou tellest
shall be our fellows, were there but three of them.  We know no better
War-leader than Face-of-god of the House of the Face.  Let him lead us.’

Therewith he went his ways; and next came forth War-well, and said: ‘The
House of the Bridge would have Face-of-god for War-leader, these tall men
for fellows, and the shortest way to meet the foe.’  And he went back to
his place.

Next came Fox of Upton, and said: ‘Time presses, or much might be spoken.
Thus saith the House of the Bull: Let us go meet the foe, and take these
valiant strangers for way-leaders, and Face-of-god for War-leader.’  And
he also went back again.

Then came forth two men together, an old man and a young, and the old man
spake as soon as he stood still: ‘The Men of the Vine bid me say their
will: They will not stay at home to have their houses burned over their
heads, themselves slain on their own hearths, and their wives haled off
to thralldom.  They will take any man for their fellow in arms who will
smite stark strokes on their side.  They know Face-of-god, and were
liefer of him for War-leader than any other, and they will follow him
wheresoever he leadeth.  Thus my kindred biddeth me say, and I hight
Fork-beard of Lea.  If I live through this war, I shall have lived
through five.’

Therewith he went back to his place; but the young man lifted up his
voice and said: ‘To all this I say yea, and so am I bidden by the kindred
of the Sickle.  I am Red-beard of the Knolls, the son of my father.’  And
he went to his place again.

Then came forth Stone-face, and said: ‘The House of the Face saith: Lead
us through the wood, O Face-of-god, thou War-leader, and ye warriors of
the Wolf.  I am Stone-face, as men know, and this word hath been given to
me by the kindred.’  And he took his place again.

Then came forth together the three chiefs of the Shepherds, to wit
Hound-under-Greenbury, Strongitharm, and the Hyllier; and Strongitharm
spake for all three, and said:

‘The Men of Greenbury, and they of the Fleece and the Thorn, are of one
accord, and bid us say that they are well pleased to have Face-of-god for
War-leader; and that they will follow him and the warriors of the Wolf to
live or die with them; and that they are ready to go meet the foe at
once, and will not skulk behind the walls of Greenbury.’

Therewith the three went back again to their places.

Then came forth that tall man that bare the Banner of the Wolf, when he
had given the staff into the hands of him who stood next.  He came and
stood over against the seat of the chieftains; and for a while he could
say no word, but stood struggling with the strong passion of his joy; but
at last he lifted his hands aloft, and cried out in a loud voice:

‘O war, war!  O death!  O wounding and grief!  O loss of friends and
kindred! let all this be rather than the drawing back of meeting hands
and the sundering of yearning hearts!’ and he went back hastily to his
place.  But from the ranks of the Woodlanders ran forth a young man, and
cried out:

‘As is the word of Red-wolf, so is my word, Bears-bane of Carlstead; and
this is the word which our little Folk hath put into our mouths; and O!
that our hands may show the meaning of our mouths; for nought else can.’

Then indeed went up a great shout, though many forebore to cry out; for
now were they too much moved for words or sounds.  And in special was
Face-of-god moved; and he scarce knew which way to look, lest he should
break out into sobs and weeping; for of late he had been much among the
Woodlanders, and loved them much.

Then all the noise and clamour fell, and it was to men as if they who had
come thither a folk, had now become an host of war.

But once again the Alderman rose up and spake:

‘Now have ye yeasaid three things: That we take Face-of-god of the House
of the Face for our War-leader; that we fare under weapons at once
against them who would murder us; and that we take the valiant Folk of
the Wolf for our fellows in arms.’

Therewith he stayed his speech, and this time the shout arose clear and
most mighty, with the tossing up of swords and the clashing of weapons on
shields.

Then he said: ‘Now, if any man will speak, here is the War-leader, and
here is the chief of our new friends, to answer to whatso any of the
kindred would have answered.’

Thereon came forth the Fiddle from amongst the Men of the Sickle, and
drew somewhat nigh to the Alderman, and said:

‘Alderman, we would ask of the War-leader if he hath devised the manner
of our assembling, and the way of our war-faring, and the day of our
hosting.  More than this I will not ask of him, because we wot that in so
great an assembly it may be that the foe may have some spy of whom we wot
not; and though this be not likely, yet some folk may babble; therefore
it is best for the wise to be wise everywhere and always.  Therefore my
rede it is, that no man ask any more concerning this, but let it lie with
the War-leader to bring us face to face with the foe as speedily as he
may.’

All men said that this was well counselled.  But Face-of-god arose and
said: ‘Ye Men of the Dale, ye Shepherds and Woodlanders, meseemeth the
Fiddle hath spoken wisely.  Now therefore I answer him and say, that I
have so ordered everything since the Gate-thing was holden at Burgstead,
that we may come face to face with the foemen by the shortest of roads.
Every man shall be duly summoned to the Hosting, and if any man fail, let
it be accounted a shame to him for ever.’

A great shout followed on his words, and he sat down again.  But Fox of
Upton came forth and said:

‘O Alderman, we have yeasaid the fellowship of the valiant men who have
come to us from out of the waste; but this we have done, not because we
have known them, otherwise than by what our kinsman Face-of-god hath told
us concerning them, but because we have seen clearly that they will be of
much avail to us in our warfare.  Now, therefore, if the tall chieftain
who sitteth beside thee were to do us to wit what he is, and whence he
and his are come, it were well, and fain were we thereof; but if he
listeth not to tell us, that also shall be well.’

Then arose Folk-might in his place; but or ever he could open his mouth
to speak, the tall Red-wolf strode forward bearing with him the Banner of
the Wolf and the Sun-burst, and came and stood beside him; and the wind
ran through the folds of the banner, and rippled it out above the heads
of those twain.  Then Folk-might spake and said:

   ‘O Men of the Dale and the Sheepcotes, I will do as ye bid me do;
   And fain were ye of the story if every deal ye knew.
   But long, long were its telling, were I to tell it all:
   Let it bide till the Cup of Deliverance ye drink from hall to hall.

   ‘Like you we be of the kindreds, of the Sons of the Gods we come,
   Midst the Mid-earth’s mighty Woodland of old we had our home;
   But of older time we abided ’neath the mountains of the Earth,
   O’er which the Sun ariseth to waken woe and mirth.

   Great were we then and many; but the long days wore us thin,
   And war, wherein the winner hath weary work to win.
   And the woodland wall behind us e’en like ourselves was worn,
   And the tramp of the hosts of the foemen adown its glades was borne
   On the wind that bent our wheat-fields.  So in the morn we rose,
   And left behind the stubble and the autumn-fruited close,
   And went our ways to the westward, nor turned aback to see
   The glare of our burning houses rise over brake and tree.
   But the foe was fierce and speedy, nor long they tarried there,
   And through the woods of battle our laden wains must fare;
   And the Sons of the Wolf were minished, and the maids of the Wolf
   waxed few,
   As amidst the victory-singing we fared the wild-wood through.

   ‘So saith the ancient story, that west and west we went,
   And many a day of battle we had in brake, on bent;
   Whilst here a while we tarried, and there we hastened on,
   And still the battle-harvest from many a folk we won.

   ‘Of the tale of the days who wotteth?  Of the years what man can tell,
   While the Sons of the Wolf were wandering, and knew not where to
   dwell?
   But at last we clomb the mountains, and mickle was our toil,
   As high the spear-wood clambered of the drivers of the spoil;
   And tangled were the passes and the beacons flared behind,
   And the horns of gathering onset came up upon the wind.
   So saith the ancient story, that we stood in a mountain-cleft,
   Where the ways and the valleys sundered to the right hand and the
   left.
   There in the place of sundering all woeful was the rede;
   We knew no land before us, and behind was heavy need.
   As the sword cleaves through the byrny, so there the mountain flank
   Cleft through the God-kin’s people; and ne’er again we drank
   The wine of war together, or feasted side by side
   In the Feast-hall of the Warrior on the fruit of the battle-tide.
   For there we turned and sundered; unto the North we went
   And up along the waters, and the clattering stony bent;
   And unto the South and the Sheepcotes down went our sister’s sons;
   And O for the years passed over since we saw those valiant ones!’

He ceased, and laid his right hand on the banner-staff a little below the
left hand of Red-wolf; and men were so keen to hear each word that he
spake, that there was no cry nor sound of voices when he had done, only
the sound of the rippling banner of the Wolf over the heads of those
twain.  The Sun-beam bowed her head now, and wept silently.  But the
Bride, she had drawn her sword, and held it upright in her hand before
her, and the sun smote fire from out of it.

Then it was but a little while before Red-wolf lifted up his voice, and
sang:

   ‘Hearken a wonder, O Folk of the Field,
   How they that did sunder stand shield beside shield!

   Lo! the old wont and manner by fearless folk made,
   On the Bole of the Banner the brothers’ hands laid.

   Lo! here the token of what hath betid!
   Grown whole is the broken, found that which was hid.

   Now one way we follow whate’er shall befall;
   As seeketh the swallow his yesteryear’s hall.

   Seldom folk fewer to fight-stead hath fared;
   Ne’er have men truer the battle-reed bared.

   Grey locks now I carry, and old am I grown,
   Nor looked I to tarry to meet with mine own.

   For we who remember the deeds of old days
   Were nought but the ember of battle ablaze.

   For what man might aid us? what deed and what day
   Should come where Weird laid us aloof from the way?

   What man save that other of Twain rent apart,
   Our war-friend, our Brother, the piece of our heart.

   Then hearken the wonder how shield beside shield
   The twain that did sunder wend down to the Field!’

Now when he had made an end, men could no longer forebear the shout; and
it went up into the heavens, and was borne by the west-wind down the Dale
to the ears of the stay-at-home women and men unmeet to go abroad, and it
quickened their blood and the spirits within them as they heard it, and
they smiled and were fain; for they knew that their kinsfolk were glad.

But when there was quiet on the Mote-field again, Folk-might spake again
and said;

   ‘It is sooth that my Brother sayeth, and that now again we wend,
   All the Sons of the Wolf together, till the trouble hath an end.
   But as for that tale of the Ancients, it saith that we who went
   To the northward, climbed and stumbled o’er many a stony bent,
   Till we happed on that isle of the waste-land, and the grass of
   Shadowy Vale,
   Where we dwelt till we throve a little, and felt our might avail.
   Then we fared abroad from the shadow and the little-lighted hold,
   And the increase fell to the valiant, and the spoil to the
   battle-bold,
   And never a man gainsaid us with the weapons in our hands;
   And in Silver-dale the happy we gat us life and lands.

   ‘So wore the years o’er-wealthy; and meseemeth that ye know
   How we sowed and reaped destruction, and the Day of the overthrow:
   How we leaned on the staff we had broken, and put our lives in the
   hand
   Of those whom we had vanquished and the feeble of the land;
   And these were the stone of stumbling, and the burden not to be borne,
   When the battle-blast fell on us and our day was over-worn.
   Thus then did our wealth bewray us, and left us wise and sad;
   And to you, bold men, it falleth once more to make us glad,
   If so your hearts are bidding, and ye deem the deed of worth.
   Such were we; what we shall be, ’tis yours to say henceforth.’

He said furthermore: ‘How great we have been I have told you already; and
ye shall see for yourselves how little we be now.  Is it enough, and will
ye have us for friends and brothers?  How say ye?’

They answered with shout upon shout, so that all the place and the
wild-wood round about was full of the voice of their crying; but when the
clamour fell, then spake the Alderman and said:

‘Friend, and chieftain of the Wolf, thou mayst hear by this shouting of
the people that we have no mind to naysay our yea-say.  And know that it
is not our use and manner to seek the strong for friends, and to thrust
aside the weak; but rather to choose for our friends them who are of like
mind to us, men in whom we put our trust.  From henceforth then there is
brotherhood between us; we are yours, and ye are ours; and let this
endure for ever!’

Then were all men full of joy; and now at last the battle seemed at hand,
and the peace beyond the battle.

Then men brought the hallowed beasts all garlanded with flowers into the
Doom-ring, and there were they slain and offered up unto the Gods, to wit
the Warrior, the Earth-god, and the Fathers; and thereafter was solemn
feast holden on the Field of the Folk-mote, and all men were fain and
merry.  Nevertheless, not all men abode there the feast through; for or
ever the afternoon was well worn, were many men wending along the Portway
eastward toward the Upper Dale, each man in his war-gear and with a scrip
hung about him; and these were they who were bound for the trysting-place
and the journey over the waste.

So the Folk-mote was sundered; and men went to their houses, and there
abode in peace the time of their summoning; since they wotted well that
the Hosting was afoot.

But as for the Woodlanders, who were at the Mote-stead with all their
folk, women, children, and old men, they went not back again to
Carlstead; but prayed the neighbours of the Middle Dale to suffer them to
abide there awhile, which they yeasaid with a good will.  So the
Woodlanders tilted themselves in, the more part of them, down in the
meadows below the Mote-stead, along either side of Wildlake’s Way; but
their ancient folk, and some of the women and children, the neighbours
would have into their houses, and the rest they furnished with victual
and all that they needed without price, looking upon them as their very
guests.  For indeed they deemed that they could see that these men would
never return to Carlstead, but would abide with the Men of the Wolf in
Silver-dale, once it were won.  And this they deemed but meet and right,
yet were they sorry thereof; for the Woodlanders were well beloved of all
the Dalesmen; and now that they had gotten to know that they were come of
so noble a kindred, they were better beloved yet, and more looked upon.




CHAPTER XL.  OF THE HOSTING IN SHADOWY VALE.


IT was on the evening of the fourth day after the Folk-mote that there
came through the Waste to the rocky edge of Shadowy Vale a band of some
fifteen score of men-at-arms, and with them a multitude of women and
children and old men, some afoot, some riding on asses and bullocks; and
with them were sumpter asses and neat laden with household goods, and a
few goats and kine.  And this was the whole folk of the Woodlanders come
to the Hosting in Shadowy Vale and the Home of the Children of the Wolf.
Their leaders of the way were Wood-father and Wood-wont and two other
carles of Shadowy Vale; and Red-wolf the tall, and Bears-bane and
War-grove were the captains and chieftains of their company.

Thus then they entered into the narrow pass aforesaid, which was the
ingate to the Vale from the Waste, and little by little its dimness
swallowed up their long line.  As they went by the place where the
lowering of the rock-wall gave a glimpse of the valley, they looked down
into it as Face-of-god had done, but much change was there in little
time.  There was the black wall of crags on the other side stretching
down to the ghyll of the great Force; there ran the deep green waters of
the Shivering Flood; but the grass which Face-of-god had seen naked of
everything but a few kine, thereon now the tents of men stood thick.
Their hearts swelled within them as they beheld it, but they forebore the
shout and the cry till they should be well within the Vale, and so went
down silently into the darkness.  But as their eyes caught that dim image
of the Wolf on the wall of the pass, man pointed it out to man, and not a
few turned and kissed it hurriedly; and to them it seemed that many a
kiss had been laid on that dear token since the days of old, and that the
hard stone had been worn away by the fervent lips of men, and that the
air of the mirk place yet quivered with the vows sworn over the
sword-blade.

But down through the dark they went, and so came on to the stony scree at
the end of the pass and into the Vale; and the whole Folk save the three
chieftains flowed over it and stood about it down on the level grass of
the Vale.  But those three stood yet on the top of the scree, bearing the
war-signs of the Shaft and the Spear, and betwixt them the banner of the
Wolf and the Sunburst newly displayed to the winds of Shadowy Vale.

Up and down the Vale they looked, and saw before the tents of men the old
familiar banners of Burgdale rising and falling in the evening wind.  But
amidst of the Doom-ring was pitched a great banner, whereon was done the
image of the Wolf with red gaping jaws on a field of green; and about him
stood other banners, to wit, The Silver Arm on a red field, the Red Hand
on a white field, and on green fields both, the Golden Bushel and the
Ragged Sword.

All about the plain shone glittering war-gear of men as they moved hither
and thither, and a stream of folk began at once to draw toward the scree
to look on those new-comers; and amidst the helmed Burgdalers and the
white-coated Shepherds went the tall men of the Wolf, bare-headed and
unarmed save for their swords, mingled with the fair strong women of the
kindred, treading barefoot the soft grass of their own Vale.

Presently there was a great throng gathered round about the Woodlanders,
and each man as he joined it waved hand or weapon toward them, and the
joy of their welcome sent a confused clamour through the air.  Then forth
from the throng stepped Folk-might, unarmed save his sword, and behind
him was Face-of-god, in his war-gear save his helm, hand in hand with the
Sun-beam, who was clad in her goodly flowered green kirtle, her feet
naked like her sisters of the kindred.

Then Folk-might cried aloud: ‘A full and free greeting to our brothers!
Well be ye, O Sons of our Ancient Fathers!  And to-day are ye the dearer
to us because we see that ye have brought us a gift, to wit, your wives
and children, and your grandsires unmeet for war.  By this token we see
how great is your trust in us, and that it is your meaning never to
sunder from us again.  O well be ye; well be ye!’

Then spake Red-wolf, and said: ‘Ye Sons of the Wolf, who parted from us
of old time in that cleft of the mountains, it is our very selves that we
give unto you; and these are a part of ourselves; how then should we
leave them behind us?  Bear witness, O men of Burgdale and the
Sheepcotes, that we have become one Folk with the men of Shadowy Vale,
never to be sundered again!’

Then all that multitude shouted with a loud voice; and when the shout had
died away, Folk-might spake again:

‘O Warriors of the Sundering, here shall your wives and children abide,
while we go a little journey to rejoice our hearts with the hard
handplay, and take to us that which we have missed: and to-morrow morn is
appointed for this same journey, unless ye be over foot-weary with the
ways of the Waste.’

Red-wolf smiled as he answered: ‘This ye say in jest, brother; for ye may
see that our day’s journey hath not been over-much for our old men; how
then should it weary those who may yet bear sword?  We are ready for the
road and eager for the handplay.’

‘This is well,’ said Folk-might, ‘and what was to be looked for.
Therefore, brother, do ye and your counsel-mates come straightway to the
Hall of the Wolf; wherein, after ye have eaten and drunken, shall we take
counsel with our brethren of Burgdale and the Sheepcotes, so that all may
be ordered for battle!’

Said Red-wolf: ‘Good is that, if we must needs abide till to-morrow; for
verily we came not hither to eat and drink and rest our bodies; but it
must be as ye will have it.’

Then the Sun-beam left the hand of Face-of-god and came forward, and held
out both her palms to the Woodland-folk, and spake in a voice that was
heard afar, though it were a woman’s, so clear and sweet it was; and she
said:

‘O Warriors of the Sundering, ye who be not needed in the Hall, and ye
our sisters with your little ones and your fathers, come now to us and
down to the tents which we have arrayed for you, and there think for a
little that we are all at our very home that we long for and have yet to
win, and be ye merry with us and make us merry.’

Therewith she stepped forward daintily and entered into their throng, and
took an old man of the Woodlanders by the hand, and kissed his cheek and
led him away, and the coming rest seemed sweet to him.  And then came
other women of the Vale, kind and fair and smiling, and led away, some an
old mother of the Wood-landers, some a young wife, some a pair of lads;
and not a few forsooth kissed and embraced the stark warriors, and went
away with them toward the tents, which stood along the side of the
Shivering Flood where it was at its quietest; for there was the grass the
softest and most abundant.  There on the green grass were tables arrayed,
and lamps were hung above them on spears, to be litten when the daylight
should fail.  And the best of the victual which the Vale could give was
spread on the boards, along with wine and dainties, bought in
Silver-dale, or on the edges of the Westland with sword-strokes and
arrow-flight.

There then they feasted and were merry; and the Sun-beam and Bow-may and
the other women of the Vale served them at table, and were very blithe
with them, caressing them with soft words, and with clipping and kissing,
as folk who were grown exceeding dear to them; so that that eve of battle
was softer and sweeter to them than any hour of their life.  With these
feasters were God-swain and Spear-fist of the delivered thralls of
Silver-dale as glad as glad might be; but Wolf-stone their eldest was
gone with Dallach to the Council in the Hall.

The men of Burgdale and the Shepherds feasted otherwhere in all content,
nor lacked folk of the Vale to serve them.  Amongst the men of the Face
were the ten delivered thralls who had heart to meet their masters in
arms: seven of them were of Rose-dale and three of Silver-dale.

The Bride was with her kindred of the Steer, with whom were many men of
Shadowy Vale, and she served her friends and fellows clad in her
war-gear, save helm and hauberk, bearing herself as one who is serving
dear guests.  And men equalled her for her beauty to the Gods of the High
Place and the Choosers of the Slain; and they who had not beheld her
before marvelled at her, and her loveliness held all men’s hearts in a
net of desire, so that they forebore their meat to gaze upon her; and if
perchance her hand touched some young man, or her cheek or sweet-breathed
mouth came nigh to his face, he became bewildered and wist not where he
was, nor what to do.  Yet was she as lowly and simple of speech and
demeanour as if she were a gooseherd of fourteen winters.

In the Hall was a goodly company, and all the leaders of the Folk were
therein, and Folk-might and the War-leader sitting in the midst of those
stone seats on the days.  There then they agreed on the whole ordering of
the battle and the wending of the host, as shall be told later on; and
this matter was long a-doing, and when it was done, men went to their
places to sleep, for the night was well worn.

But when men had departed and all was still, Folk-might, light-clad and
without a weapon, left the Hall and walked briskly toward the nether end
of the Vale.  He passed by all the tents, the last whereof were of the
House of the Steer, and came to a place where was a great rock rising
straight up from the plain like sheaves of black staves standing close
together; and it was called Staff-stone, and tales of the elves had been
told concerning it, so that Stone-face had beheld it gladly the day
before.

The moon was just shining into Shadowy Vale, and the grass was bright
wheresoever the shadows of the high cliffs were not, and the face of
Staff-stone shone bright grey as Folk-might came within sight of it, and
he beheld someone sitting at the base of the rock, and as he drew nigher
he saw that it was a woman, and knew her for the Bride; for he had prayed
her to abide him there that night, because it was nigh to the tents of
the House of the Steer; and his heart was glad as he drew nigh to her.

She sat quietly on a fragment of the black rock, clad as she had been all
day, in her glittering kirtle, but without hauberk or helm, a wreath of
wind-flowers about her head, her feet crossed over each other, her hands
laid palm uppermost in her lap.  She moved not as he drew nigh, but said
in a gentle voice when he was close to her:

‘Chief of the Wolf, great warrior, thou wouldest speak with me; and good
it is that friends should talk together on the eve of battle, when they
may never meet alive again.’

He said: ‘My talk shall not be long; for thou and I both must sleep
to-night, since there is work to hand to-morrow.  Now since, as thou
sayest, O fairest of women, we may never meet again alive, I ask thee now
at this hour, when we both live and are near to one another, to suffer me
to speak to thee of my love of thee and desire for thee.  Surely thou,
who art the sweetest of all things the Gods and the kindreds have made,
wilt not gainsay me this?’

She said very sweetly, yet smiling: ‘Brother of my father’s sons, how can
I gainsay thee thy speech?  Nay, hast thou not said it?  What more canst
thou add to it that will have fresh meaning to mine ears?’

He said: ‘Thou sayest sooth: might I then but kiss thine hand?’

She said, no longer smiling: ‘Yea surely, even so may all men do who can
be called my friends—and thou art much my friend.’

He took her hand and kissed it, and held it thereafter; nor did she draw
it away.  The moon shone brightly on them; but by its light he could not
see if she reddened, but he deemed that her face was troubled.  Then he
said: ‘It were better for me if I might kiss thy face, and take thee in
mine arms.’

Then said she: ‘This only shall a man do with me when I long to do the
like with him.  And since thou art so much my friend, I will tell thee
that as for this longing, I have it not.  Bethink thee what a little
while it is since the lack of another man’s love grieved me sorely.’

‘The time is short,’ said Folk-might, ‘if we tell up the hours thereof;
but in that short space have a many things betid.’

She said: ‘Dost thou know, canst thou guess, how sorely ashamed I went
amongst my people?  I durst look no man in the face for the aching of
mine heart, which methought all might see through my face.’

‘I knew it well,’ he said; ‘yet of me wert thou not ashamed but a little
while ago, when thou didst tell me of thy grief.’

She said: ‘True it is; and thou wert kind to me.  Thou didst become a
dear friend to me, methought.’

‘And wilt thou hurt a dear friend?’ said he.

‘O no,’ she said, ‘if I might do otherwise.  Yet how if I might not
choose?  Shall there be no forgiveness for me then?’

He answered nothing; and still he held her hand that strove not to be
gone from his, and she cast down her eyes.  Then he spake in a while:

‘My friend, I have been thinking of thee and of me; and now hearken: if
thou wilt declare that thou feelest no sweetness embracing thine heart
when I say that I desire thee sorely, as now I say it; or when I kiss
thine hand, as now I kiss it; or when I pray thee to suffer me to cast
mine arms about thee and kiss thy face, as now I pray it: if thou wilt
say this, then will I take thee by the hand straightway, and lead thee to
the tents of the House of the Steer, and say farewell to thee till the
battle is over.  Canst thou say this out of the truth of thine heart?’

She said: ‘What then if I cannot say this word?  What then?’

But he answered nothing; and she sat still a little while, and then arose
and stood before him, looking him in the eyes, and said:

‘I cannot say it.’

Then he caught her in his arms and strained her to him, and then kissed
her lips and her face again and again, and she strove not with him.  But
at last she said:

‘Yet after all this shalt thou lead me back to my folk straight-way; and
when the battle is done, if both we are living, then shall we speak more
thereof.’

So he took her hand and led her on toward the tents of the Steer, and for
a while he spake nought; for he doubted himself, what he should say; but
at last he spake:

‘Now is this better for me than if it had not been, whether I live or
whether I die.  Yet thou hast not said that thou lovest me and desirest
me.’

‘Wilt thou compel me?’ she said.  ‘To-night I may not say it.  Who shall
say what words my lips shall fashion when we stand together victorious in
Silver-dale; then indeed may the time seem long from now.’

He said: ‘Yea, true is that; yet once again I say that so measured long
and long is the time since first I saw thee in Burgdale before thou
knewest me.  Yet now I will not bicker with thee, for be sure that I am
glad at heart.  And lo you! our feet have brought us to the tents of thy
people.  All good go with thee!’

‘And with thee, sweet friend,’ she said.  Then she lingered a little,
turning her head toward the tents, and then turned her face toward him
and laid her hand on his neck, and drew his head adown to her and kissed
his cheek, and therewith swiftly and lightly departed from him.

Now the night wore and the morning came; and Face-of-god was abroad very
early in the morning, as his custom was; and he washed the night from off
him in the Carles’ Bath of the Shivering Flood, and then went round
through the encampment of the host, and saw none stirring save here and
there the last watchmen of the night.  He spake with one or two of these,
and then went up to the head of the Vale, where was the pass that led to
Silver-dale; and there he saw the watch, and spake with them, and they
told him that none had as yet come forth from the pass, and he bade them
to blow the horn of warning to rouse up the Host as soon as the
messengers came thence.  For forerunners had been sent up the pass, and
had been set to hold watch at divers places therein to pass on the word
from place to place.

Thence went Face-of-god back toward the Hall; but when he was yet some
way from it, he saw a slender glittering warrior come forth from the door
thereof, who stood for a moment looking round about, and then came
lightly and swiftly toward him; and lo! it was the Sun-beam, with a long
hauberk over her kirtle falling below her knees, a helm on her head and
plated shoes on her feet.  She came up to him, and laid her hand to his
cheek and the golden locks of his head (for he was bare-headed), and said
to him, smiling:

‘Gold-mane! thou badest me bear arms, and Folk-might also constrained me
thereto.  Lo thou!’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Folk-might is wise then, even as I am; and forsooth as
thou art.  For bethink thee if the bow drawn at a venture should speed
the eyeless shaft against thy breast, and send me forth a wanderer from
my Folk!  For how could I bear the sight of the fair Dale, and no hope to
see thee again therein?’

She said: ‘The heart is light within me to-day.  Deemest thou that this
is strange?  Or dost thou call to mind that which thou spakest the other
day, that it was of no avail to stand in the Doom-ring of the Folk and
bear witness against ourselves?  This will I not.  This is no
light-mindedness that thou beholdest in me, but the valiancy that the
Fathers have set in mine heart.  Deem not, O Gold-mane, fear not, that we
shall die before they dight the bride-bed for us.’

He would have kissed her mouth, but she put him away with her hand, and
doffed her helm and laid it on the grass, and said:

‘This is not the last time that thou shalt kiss me, Gold-mane, my dear;
and yet I long for it as if it were, so high as the Fathers have raised
me up this morn above fear and sadness.’

He said nought, but drew her to him, and wonder so moved him, that he
looked long and closely at her face before he kissed her; and forsooth he
could find no blemish in it: it was as if it were but new come from the
smithy of the Gods, and exceeding longing took hold of him.  But even as
their lips met, from the head of the Vale came the voice of the great
horn; and it was answered straightway by the watchers all down the tents;
and presently arose the shouts of men and the clash of weapons as folk
armed themselves, and laughter therewith, for most men were battle-merry,
and the cries of women shrilly-clear as they hastened about, busy over
the morning meal before the departure of the Host.  But Face-of-god said
softly, still caressing the Sun-beam, and she him:

‘Thus then we depart from this Valley of the Shadows, but as thou saidst
when first we met therein, there shall be no sundering of thee and me,
but thou shalt go down with me to the battle.’

And he led her by the hand into the Hall of the Wolf, and there they ate
a morsel, and thereafter Face-of-god tarried not, but busied himself
along with Folk-might and the other chieftains in arraying the Host for
departure.




CHAPTER XLI.  THE HOST DEPARTETH FROM SHADOWY VALE: THE FIRST DAY’S
JOURNEY.


IT was about three hours before noon that the Host began to enter into
the pass out of Shadowy Vale by the river-side; and the women and
children, and men unfightworthy, stood on the higher ground at the foot
of the cliffs to see the Host wend on the way.  Of these a many were of
the Woodlanders, who were now one folk with them of Shadowy Vale.  And
all these had chosen to abide tidings in the Vale, deeming that there was
little danger therein, since that last slaughter which Folk-might had
made of the Dusky Men; albeit Face-of-god had offered to send them all to
Burgstead with two score and ten men-at-arms to guard them by the way and
to eke out the warders of the Burg.

Now the fighting-men of Shadowy Vale were two long hundreds lacking five;
of whom two score and ten were women, and three score and ten lads under
twenty winters; but the women, though you might scarce see fairer of face
and body, were doughty in arms, all good shooters in the bow; and the
swains were eager and light-foot, cragsmen of the best, wont to scaling
the cliffs of the Vale in search of the nests of gerfalcons and such-like
fowl, and swimming the strong streams of the Shivering Flood; tough
bodies and wiry, stronger than most grown men, and as fearless as the
best.

The order of the Departure of the Host was this:

The Woodlanders went first into the pass, and with them were two score of
the ripe Warriors of the Wolf.  Then came of the kindreds of Burgdale,
the Men of the Steer, the Bridge, and the Bull; then the Men of the Vine
and the Sickle; then the Shepherd-folk; and lastly, the Men of the Face
led by Stone-face and Hall-face.  With these went another two score of
the dwellers in Shadowy Vale, and the rest were scattered up and down the
bands of the Host to guide them into the best paths and to make the way
easier to them.  Face-of-god was sundered from his kindred, and went
along with Folk-might in the forefront of the Host, while his father the
Alderman went as a simple man-at-arms with his House in the rearward.
The Sun-beam followed her brother and Face-of-god amidst the Warriors of
the Wolf, and with her were Bow-may clad in the Alderman’s gift, and
Wood-father and his children.  Bow-may had caused her to doff her hauberk
for that day, whereon they looked to fall in with no foeman.  As for the
Bride, she went with her kindred in all her war-gear; and the morning sun
shone in the gems of her apparel, and her jewelled feet fell like flowers
upon the deep grass of the upper Vale, and shone strange and bright
amongst the black stones of the pass.  She bore a quiver at her back and
a shining yew bow in her hand, and went amongst the bowmen, for she was a
very deft archer.

So fared they into the pass, leaving peace behind them, with all their
banners displayed, and the banner of the Red-mouthed Wolf went with the
Wolf and the Sun-burst in the forefront of their battle next after the
two captains.

As for their road, the grassy space between the rock-wall and the water
was wide and smooth at first, and the cliffs rose up like bundles of
spear-shafts high and clear from the green grass with no confused litter
of fallen stones; so that the men strode on briskly, their hearts
high-raised and full of hope.  And as they went, the sweetness of song
stirred in their souls, and at last Bow-may fell to singing in a loud
clear voice, and her cousin Wood-wise answered her, and all the warriors
of the Wolf who were in their band fell into the song at the ending, and
the sound of their melody went down the water and reached the ears of
those that were entering the pass, and of those who were abiding till the
way should be clear of them: and this is some of what they sang:

                            _Bow-may singeth_:

   Hear ye never a voice come crying
      Out from the waste where the winds fare wide?
   ‘Sons of the Wolf, the days are dying,
      And where in the clefts of the rocks do ye hide?

   ‘Into your hands hath the Sword been given,
      Hard are the palms with the kiss of the hilt;
   Through the trackless waste hath the road been riven
      For the blade to seek to the heart of the guilt.

   ‘And yet ye bide and yet ye tarry;
      Dear deem ye the sleep ’twixt hearth and board,
   And sweet the maiden mouths ye marry,
      And bright the blade of the bloodless sword.’

                           _Wood-wise singeth_:

   Yea, here we dwell in the arms of our Mother
      The Shadowy Queen, and the hope of the Waste;
   Here first we came, when never another
      Adown the rocky stair made haste.

   Far is the foe, and no sword beholdeth
      What deed we work and whither we wend;
   Dear are the days, and the Year enfoldeth
      The love of our life from end to end.

   Voice of our Fathers, why will ye move us,
      And call up the sun our swords to behold?
   Why will ye cry on the foeman to prove us?
      Why will ye stir up the heart of the bold?

                            _Bow-may singeth_:

   Purblind am I, the voice of the chiding;
      Then tell me what is the thing ye bear?
   What is the gift that your hands are hiding,
      The gold-adorned, the dread and dear?

                           _Wood-wise singeth_:

   Dark in the sheath lies the Anvil’s Brother,
      Hid is the hammered Death of Men.
   Would ye look on the gift of the green-clad Mother?
      How then shall ye ask for a gift again?

                           _The Warriors sing_:

   Show we the Sunlight the Gift of the Mother,
      As foot follows foot to the foeman’s den!
   Gleam Sun, breathe Wind, on the Anvil’s Brother,
      For bare is the hammered Death of Men.

Therewith they shook their naked swords in the air, and fared on eagerly,
and as swiftly as the pass would have them fare.  But so it was, that
when the rearward of the Host was entering the first of the pass, and was
going on the wide smooth sward, the vanward was gotten to where there was
but a narrow space clear betwixt water and cliff; for otherwhere was a
litter of great rocks and small, hard to be threaded even by those who
knew the passes well; so that men had to tread along the very verge of
the Shivering Flood, and wary must they be, for the water ran swift and
deep betwixt banks of sheer rock half a fathom below their very
foot-soles, which had but bare space to go on the narrow a way.  So it
held on for a while, and then got safer, and there was more space for
going betwixt cliff and flood; albeit it was toilsome enough, since for
some way yet there was a drift of stones to cumber their feet, some big
and some little, and some very big.  After a while the way grew better,
though here and there, where the cliffs lowered, were wide screes of
loose stones that they must needs climb up and down.  Thereafter for a
space was there an end of the stony cumber, but the way betwixt the river
and the cliffs narrowed again, and the black crags grew higher, and at
last so exceeding high, and the way so narrow, that the sky overhead was
to them as though they were at the bottom of a well, and men deemed that
thence they could see the stars at noontide.  For some time withal had
the way been mounting up and up, though the cliffs grew higher over it;
till at last they were but going on a narrow shelf, the Shivering Flood
swirling and rattling far below them betwixt sheer rock-walls grown
exceeding high; and above them the cliffs going up towards the heavens as
black as a moonless starless night of winter.  And as the flood thundered
below, so above them roared the ceaseless thunder of the wind of the
pass, that blew exceeding fierce down that strait place; so that the
skirts of their garments were wrapped about their knees by it, and their
feet were well-nigh stayed at whiles as they breasted the push thereof.

But as they mounted higher and higher yet, the noise of the waters
swelled into a huge roar that drowned the bellowing of the prisoned wind,
and down the pass came drifting a fine rain that fell not from the sky,
for between the clouds of that drift could folk see the heavens bright
and blue above them.  This rain was but the spray of the great force up
to whose steps they were climbing.

Now the way got rougher as they mounted; but this toil was caused by
their gain; for the rock-wall, which thrust out a buttress there as if it
would have gone to the very edge of the gap where-through the flood ran,
and so have cut the way off utterly, was here somewhat broken down, and
its stones scattered down the steep bent, so that there was a passage,
though a toilsome one.

Thus then through the wind-borne drift of the great force, through which
men could see the white waters tossing down below, amidst the clattering
thunder of the Shivering Flood and the rumble of the wind of the gap,
that tore through their garments and hair as if it would rend all to rags
and bear it away, the banners of the Wolf won their way to the crest of
the midmost height of the pass, and the long line of the Host came
clambering after them; and each band of warriors as it reached the top
cast an unheard shout from amidst the tangled fury of wind and waters.

A little further on and all that turmoil was behind them; the sun, now
grown low, smote the wavering column of spray from the force at their
backs, till the rainbows lay bright across it; and the sunshine lay wide
over a little valley that sloped somewhat steeply to the west right up
from the edge of the river; and beyond these western slopes could men see
a low peak spreading down on all sides to the plain, till it was like to
a bossed shield, and the name of it was Shield-broad.  Dark grey was the
valley everywhere, save that by the side of the water was a space of
bright green-sward hedged about toward the mountain by a wall of rocks
tossed up into wild shapes of spires and jagged points.  The river itself
was spread out wide and shallow, and went rattling about great grey rocks
scattered here and there amidst it, till it gathered itself together to
tumble headlong over three slant steps into the mighty gap below.

From the height in the pass those grey slopes seemed easy to traverse;
but the warriors of the Wolf knew that it was far otherwise, for they
were but the molten rock-sea that in time long past had flowed forth from
Shield-broad and filled up the whole valley endlong and overthwart,
cooling as it flowed, and the tumbled hedge of rock round about the green
plain by the river was where the said rock-sea had been stayed by meeting
with soft ground, and had heaped itself up round about the green-sward.
And that great rock-flood as it cooled split in divers fashions; and the
rain and weather had been busy on it for ages, so that it was worn into a
maze of narrow paths, most of which, after a little, brought the wayfarer
to a dead stop, or else led him back again to the place whence he had
started; so that only those who knew the passes throughly could thread
that maze without immeasurable labour.

Now when the men of the Host looked from the high place whereon they
stood toward the green plain by the river, they saw on the top of that
rock-wall a red pennon waving on a spear, and beside it three or four
weaponed men gleaming bright in the evening sun; and they waved their
swords to the Host, and made lightning of the sunbeams, and the men of
the Host waved swords to them in turn.  For these were the outguards of
the Host; and the place whereon they were was at whiles dwelt in by those
who would drive the spoil in Silver-dale, and midmost of the green-sward
was a booth builded of rough stones and turf, a refuge for a score of men
in rough weather.

So the men of the vanward gat them down the hill, and made the best of
their way toward the grassy plain through that rocky maze which had once
been as a lake of molten glass; and as short as the way looked from
above, it was two hours or ever they came out of it on to the smooth
turf, and it was moonlight and night ere the House of the Face had gotten
on to the green-sward.

There then the Host abode for that night, and after they had eaten lay
down on the green grass and slept as they might.  Bow-may would have
brought the Sun-beam into the booth with some others of the women, but
she would not enter it, because she deemed that otherwise the Bride would
abide without; and the Bride, when she came up, along with the House of
the Steer, beheld the Sun-beam, that Wood-father’s children had made a
lair for her without like a hare’s form; and forsooth many a time had she
lain under the naked heaven in Shadowy Vale and the waste about it, even
as the Bride had in the meadows of Burgdale.  So when the Bride was
bidden thereto, she went meekly into the booth, and lay there with others
of the damsels-at-arms.




CHAPTER XLII.  THE HOST COMETH TO THE EDGES OF SILVER-DALE.


SO wore the night, and when the dawn was come were the two captains
afoot, and they went from band to band to see that all was ready, and all
men were astir betimes, and by the time that the sun smote the eastern
side of Shield-broad ruddy, they had broken their fast and were dight for
departure.  Then the horns blew up beside the banners, and rejoiced the
hearts of men.  But by the command of the captains this was the last time
that they should sound till they blew for onset in Silver-dale, because
now would they be drawing nigher and nigher to the foemen, and they
wotted not but that wandering bands of them might be hard on the lips of
the pass, and might hear the horns’ voice, and turn to see what was
toward.

Forth then went the banners of the Wolf, and the men of the vanward fell
to threading the rock-maze toward the north, and in two hours’ time were
clear of the Dale under Shield-broad.  All went in the same order as
yesterday; but on this day the Sun-beam would bear her hauberk, and had a
sword girt to her side, and her heart was high and her speech merry.

When they left the Dale under Shield-broad the way was easy and wide for
a good way, the river flowing betwixt low banks, and the pass being more
like a string of little valleys than a mere gap, as it had been on the
other side of the Dale.  But when one third of the day was past, the way
began to narrow on them again, and to rise up little by little; and at
last the rock-walls drew close to the river, and when men looked toward
the north they saw no way, and nought but a wall.  For the gap of the
Shivering Flood turned now to the east, and the Flood came down from the
east in many falls, as it were over a fearful stair, through a gap where
there was no path between the cliffs and the water, nought but the
boiling flood and its turmoil; so that they who knew not the road
wondered what they should do.

But Folk-might led the banners to where a great buttress of the cliffs
thrust itself into the way, coming well-nigh down to the water, just at
the corner where the river turned eastward, and they got them about it as
they might, and on the other side thereof lo! another gap exceeding
strait, scarce twenty foot over, wall-sided, rugged beyond measure, going
up steeply from the great valley: a little water ran through it, mostly
filling up the floor of it from side to side; but it was but shallow.
This was now the battle-road of the Host, and the vanward entered it at
once, turning their backs upon the Shivering Flood.

Full toilsome and dreary was that strait way; often great stones hung
above their heads, bridging the gap and hiding the sky from them; nor was
there any path for them save the stream itself; so that whiles were they
wading its waters to the knee or higher, and whiles were they striding
from stone to stone amidst the rattle of the waters, and whiles were they
stepping warily along the ledges of rock above the deeper pools, and in
all wise labouring in overcoming the rugged road amidst the twilight of
the gap.

Thus they toiled till the afternoon was well worn, and so at last they
came to where the rock-wall was somewhat broken down on the north side,
and great rocks had fallen across the gap, and dammed up the waters,
which fell scantily over the dam from stone to stone into a pool at the
bottom of it.  Up this breach, then, below the force they scrambled and
struggled, for rough indeed was the road for them; and so came they up
out of the gap on to the open hill-side, a great shoulder of the heath
sloping down from the north, and littered over with big stones, borne
thither belike by some ice-river of the earlier days; and one great rock
was in special as great as the hall of a wealthy goodman, and shapen like
to a hall with hipped gables, which same the men of the Wolf called
House-stone.

There then the noise and clatter of the vanward rose up on the face of
the heath, and men were exceeding joyous that they had come so far
without mishap.  Therewith came weaponed men out from under House-stone,
and they came toward the men of the vanward, and they were a half-score
of the forerunners of the Wolf; therefore Folk-might and Face-of-god fell
at once into speech with them, and had their tidings; and when they had
heard them, they saw nought to hinder the host from going on their road
to Silver-dale forthright; and there were still three hours of daylight
before them.  So the vanward of the host tarried not, and the captains
left word with the men from under House-stone that the rest of the Host
should fare on after them speedily, and that they should give this word
to each company, as men came up from out the gap.  Then they fared
speedily up the hillside, and in an hour’s wearing had come to the crest
thereof, and to where the ground fell steadily toward the north, and
hereabout the scattered stones ceased, and on the other side of the crest
the heath began to be soft and boggy, and at last so soft, that if they
had not been wisely led, they had been bemired oftentimes.  At last they
came to where the flows that trickled through the mires drew together
into a stream, so that men could see it running; and thereon some of the
Woodlanders cried out joyously that the waters were running north; and
then all knew that they were drawing nigh to Silver-dale.

No man they met on the road, nor did they of Shadowy Vale look to meet
any; because the Dusky Men were not great hunters for the more part,
except it were of men, and especially of women; and, moreover, these
hill-slopes of the mountain-necks led no-whither and were utterly waste
and dreary, and there was nought to be seen there but snipes and bitterns
and whimbrel and plover, and here and there a hill-fox, or the great erne
hanging over the heath on his way to the mountain.

When sunset came, they were getting clear of the miry ground, and the
stream which they had come across amidst of the mires had got clearer and
greater, and rattled down between wide stony sides over the heath; and
here and there it deepened as it cleft its way through little knolls that
rose out of the face of the mountain-neck.  As the Host climbed one of
these and was come to its topmost (it was low enough not to turn the
stream), Face-of-god looked and beheld dark-blue mountains rising up far
off before him, and higher than these, but away to the east, the snowy
peaks of the World-mountains.  Then he called to mind what he had seen
from the Burg of the Runaways, and he took Folk-might by the arm, and
pointed toward those far-off mountains.

‘Yea,’ said Folk-might, ‘so it is, War-leader.  Silver-dale lieth between
us and yonder blue ridges, and it is far nigher to us than to them.’

But the Sun-beam came close to those twain, and took Face-of-god by the
hand and said: ‘O Gold-mane, dost thou see?’ and he turned about and
beheld her, and saw how her cheeks flamed and her eyes glittered, and he
said in a low voice: ‘To-morrow for mirth or silence, for life or death.’

But the whole vanward as they came up stayed to behold the sight of the
mountains on the other side of Silver-dale, and the banners of the Folk
hung over their heads, moving but little in the soft air of the evening:
so went they on their ways.

The sun sank, and dusk came on them as they followed down the stream, and
night came, and was clear and starlit, though the moon was not yet risen.
Now was the ground firm and the grass sweet and flowery, and wind-worn
bushes were scattered round about them, as they began to go down into the
ghyll that cleft the wall of Silver-dale, and the night-wind blew in
their faces from the very Dale and place of the Battle to be.  The path
down was steep at first, but the ghyll was wide, and the sides of it no
longer straight walls, as in the gaps of their earlier journey, but
broken, sloping back, and (as they might see on the morrow) partly of big
stones and shaly grit, partly grown over with bushes and rough grass,
with here and there a little stream trickling down their sides.  As they
went, the ghyll widened out, till at last they were in a valley going
down to the plain, in places steep, in places flat and smooth, the stream
ever rattling down the midst of it, and they on the west side thereof.
The vale was well grassed, and oak-trees and ash and holly and hazel grew
here and there about it; and at last the Host had before it a wood which
filled the vale from side to side, not much tangled with undergrowth, and
quite clear of it nigh to the stream-side.  Thereinto the vanward
entered, but went no long way ere the leaders called a halt and bade
pitch the banners, for that there should they abide the daylight.  Thus
it had been determined at the Council of the Hall of the Wolf; for
Folk-might had said: ‘With an Host as great as ours, and mostly of men
come into a land of which they know nought at all, an onslaught by night
is perilous: yea, and our foes should be over-much scattered, and we
should have to wander about seeking them.  Let us rather abide in the
wood of Wood-dale till the morning, and then display our banners on the
hill-side above Silver-dale, so that they may gather together to fall
upon us: in no case shall they keep us out of the Dale.’

There then they stayed, and as each company came up to the wood, they
were marshalled into their due places, so that they might set the battle
in array on the edge of Silver-dale.




CHAPTER XLIII.  FACE-OF-GOD LOOKETH ON SILVER-DALE: THE BOWMEN’S BATTLE.


THERE then they rested, as folk wearied with the toilsome journey, when
they had set sure watches round about their campment; and they ate
quietly what meat they had with them, and so gat them to sleep in the
wood on the eve of battle.

But not all slept; for the two captains went about amongst the companies,
Folk-might to the east, Face-of-god to the west, to look to the watches,
and to see that all was ordered duly.  Also the Sun-beam slept not, but
she lay beside Bow-may at the foot of an oak-tree; she watched
Face-of-god as he went away amidst the men of the Host, and watched and
waked abiding his returning footsteps.

The night was well worn by then he came back to his place in the vanward,
and on his way back he passed through the folk of the Steer laid along on
the grass, all save those of the watch, and the light of the moon high
aloft was mingled with the light of the earliest dawn; and as it happed
he looked down, and lo! close to his feet the face of the Bride as she
lay beside her grand-sire, her head pillowed on a bundle of bracken.  She
was sleeping soundly like a child who has been playing all day, and whose
sleep has come to him unsought and happily.  Her hands were laid together
by her side; her cheek was as fair and clear as it was wont to be at her
best; her face looked calm and happy, and a lock of her dark-red hair
strayed from her uncovered head over her breast and lay across her
wrists, so peacefully she slept.

Face-of-god turned his eyes from her at once, and went by swiftly, and
came to his own company.  The Sun-beam saw him coming, and rose
straightway to her feet from beside Bow-may, who lay fast asleep, and she
held out her hands to him; and he took them and kissed them, and he cast
his arms about her and kissed her mouth and her face, and she his in
likewise; and she said:

‘O Gold-mane, if this were but the morrow of to-morrow!  Yet shall all be
well; shall it not?’

Her voice was low, but it waked Bow-may, who sat up at once broad awake,
after the manner of a hunter of the waste ever ready for the next thing
to betide, and moreover the Sun-beam had been in her thoughts these two
days, and she feared for her, lest she should be slain or maimed.  Now
she smiled on the Sun-beam and said:

‘What is it?  Does thy mind forebode evil?  That needeth not.  I tell
thee it is not so ill for us of the sword to be in Silver-dale.  Thrice
have I been there since the Overthrow, and never more than a half-score
in company, and yet am I whole to-day.’

‘Yea, sister,’ said Face-of-god, ‘but in past times ye did your deed and
then fled away; but now we come to abide here, and this night is the last
of lurking.’

‘Ah,’ she said, ‘a little way from this I saw such things that we had
good will to abide here longer, few as we were, but that we feared to be
taken alive.’

‘What things were these?’ said Face-of-god.

‘Nay,’ she said, ‘I will not tell thee now; but mayhap in the lighted
winter feast-hall, when the kindred are so nigh us and about us that they
seem to us as if they were all the world, I may tell it thee; or mayhap I
never shall.’

Said the Sun-beam, smiling: ‘Thou wilt ever be talking, Bow-may.  Now let
the War-leader depart, for he will have much to do.’

And she was well at ease that she had seen Face-of-god again; but he
said:

‘Nay, not so much; all is well-nigh done; in an hour it will be broad
day, and two hours thereafter shall the Banner be displayed on the edge
of Silver-dale.’

The cheek of the Sun-beam flushed, and paled again, as she said: ‘Yea, we
shall stand even as our Fathers stood on the day when, coming from off
the waste, they beheld it, and knew it would be theirs.  Ah me! how have
I longed for this morn.  But now—Tell me, Gold-mane, dost thou deem that
I am afraid?  And I whom thou hast deemed to be a God.’

Quoth Bow-may: ‘Thou shalt deem her twice a God ere noon-tide, brother
Gold-mane.  But come now! the hour of deadly battle is at hand, and we
may not laugh that away; and therefore I bid thee remember, Gold-mane,
how thou didst promise to kiss me once more on the verge of deadly
battle.’

Therewith she stood up before him, and he tarried not, but kind and
smiling took her face between his two hands and kissed her lips, and she
cast her arms about him and kissed him, and then sank down on the grass
again, and turned from him, and laid her face amongst the grass and the
bracken, and they could see that she was weeping, and her body was shaken
with sobs.  But the Sun-beam knelt down to her, and caressed her with her
hand, and spake kind words to her softly, while Face-of-god went his ways
to meet Folk-might.

Now was the dawn fading into full daylight; and between dawn and sunrise
were all men stirring; for the watch had waked the hundred-leaders, and
they the leaders of scores and half-scores, and they the whole folk; and
they sat quietly in the wood and made no noise.

In the night the watch of the Sickle had fallen in with a thrall who had
stolen up from the Dale to set gins for hares, and now in the early
morning they brought him to the War-leader.  He was even such a man as
those with whom Face-of-god had fallen in before, neither better nor
worse than most of them: he was sore afraid at first, but by then he was
come to the captains he understood that he had happened upon friends; but
he was dull of comprehension and slow of speech.  Albeit Folk-might
gathered from him that the Dusky Men had some inkling of the onslaught;
for he said that they had been gathering together in the marketplace of
Silver-stead, and would do so again soon.  Moreover, the captains deemed
from his speech that those new tribes had come to hand sooner than was
looked for, and were even now in the Dale.  Folk-might smiled as one who
is not best pleased when he heard these tidings; but Face-of-god was glad
to hear thereof; for what he loathed most was that the war should drag
out in hunting of scattered bands of the foe.  Herewith came Dallach to
them as they talked (for Face-of-god had sent for him), and he fell to
questioning the man further; by whose answers it seemed that many men
also had come into the Dale from Rose-dale, so that they of the kindreds
were like to have their hands full.  Lastly Dallach drew from the thrall
that it was on that very morning that the great Folk-mote of the Dusky
Men should be holden in the market-place of the Stead, which was right
great, and about it were the biggest of the houses wherein the men of the
kindred had once dwelt.

So when they had made an end of questioning the thrall, and had given him
meat and drink, they asked him if he would take weapons in his hand and
lead them on the ways into the Dale, bidding him look about the wood and
note how great and mighty an host they were.  And the carle yeasaid this,
after staring about him a while, and they gave him spear and shield, and
he went with the vanward as a way-leader.

Again presently came a watch of the Shepherds, and they had found a man
and a woman dead and stark naked hanging to the boughs of a great
oak-tree deep in the wood.  This men knew for some vengeance of the Dusky
Men, for it was clear to see that these poor people had been sorely
tormented before they were slain.  Also the same watch had stumbled on
the dead body of an old woman, clad in rags, lying amongst the rank grass
about a little flow; she was exceeding lean and hunger-starved, and in
her hand was a frog which she had half eaten.  And Dallach, when he heard
of this, said that it was the wont of the Dusky Men to slay their thralls
when they were past work, or to drive them into the wilderness to die.

Lastly came a watch from the men of the Face, having with them two more
thralls, lusty young men; these they had come upon in company of their
master, who had brought them up into the wood to shoot him a buck, and
therefore they bare bows and arrows.  The watch had slain the master
straightway while the thralls stood looking on.  They were much afraid of
the weaponed men, but answered to the questioning much readier than the
first man; for they were household thralls, and better fed and clad than
he, who was but a toiler in the fields.  They yeasaid all his tale, and
said moreover that the Folk-mote of the Dusky Men should be holden in the
market-place that forenoon, and that most of the warriors should be
there, both the new-comers and the Rose-dale lords, and that without
doubt they should be under arms.

To these men also they gave a good sword and a helm each, and bade them
be brisk with their bows, and they said yea to marching with the Host;
and indeed they feared nothing so much as being left behind; for if they
fell into the hands of the Dusky Men, and their master missing, they
should first be questioned with torments, and then slain in the evillest
manner.

Now whereas things had thus betid, and that they knew thus much of their
foemen, Face-of-god called all the chieftains together, and they sat on
the green grass and held counsel amongst them, and to one and all it
seemed good that they should suffer the Dusky Men to gather together
before they meddled with them, and then fall upon them in such order and
such time as should seem good to the captains watching how things went;
and this would be easy, whereas they were all lying in the wood in the
same order as they would stand in battle-array if they were all drawn up
together on the brow of the hill.  Albeit Face-of-god deemed it good,
after he had heard all that they who had been in the Stead could tell him
thereof, that the Shepherd-Folk, who were more than three long hundreds,
and they of the Steer, the Bridge, and the Bull, four hundreds in all,
should take their places eastward of the Woodlanders who had led the
vanward.

Straightway the word was borne to these men, and the shift was made: so
that presently the Woodlanders were amidmost of the Host, and had with
them on their right hands the Men of the Steer, the Bridge, and the Bull,
and beyond them the Shepherd-Folk.  But on their left hand lay the Men of
the Vine, then they of the Sickle, and lastly the Men of the Face, and
these three kindreds were over five hundreds of warriors: as for the Men
of the Wolf, they abode at first with those companies which they had led
through the wastes, though this was changed afterwards.

All this being done, Face-of-god gave out that all men should break their
fast in peace and leisure; and while men were at their meat, Folk-might
spake to Face-of-god and said: ‘Come, brother, for I would show thee a
goodly thing; and thou, Dallach, come with us.’

Then he brought them by paths in the wood till Face-of-god saw the sky
shine white between the tree-boles, and in a little while they were come
well-nigh out of the thicket, and then they went warily; for before them
was nought but the slopes of Wood-dale, going down steeply into
Silver-dale, with nought to hinder the sight of it, save here and there
bushes or scattered trees; and so fair and lovely it was that Face-of-god
could scarce forbear to cry out.  He saw that it was only at the upper or
eastern end, where the mountains of the Waste went round about it, that
the Dale was narrow; it soon widened out toward the west, and for the
most part was encompassed by no such straight-sided a wall as was
Burgdale, but by sloping hills and bents, mostly indeed somewhat higher
and steeper than the pass wherein they were, but such as men could well
climb if they had a mind to, and there were any end to their journey.
The Dale went due west a good way, and then winded about to the
southwest, and so was hidden from them thereaway by the bents that lay on
their left hand.  As it was wider, so it was not so plain a ground as was
Burgdale, but rose in knolls and little hills here and there.  A river
greater than the Weltering Water wound about amongst the said mounds; and
along the side of it out in the open dale were many goodly houses and
homesteads of stone.  The knolls were mostly covered over with vines, and
there were goodly and great trees in groves and clumps, chiefly oak and
sweet chestnut and linden; many were the orchards, now in blossom, about
the homesteads; the pastures of the neat and horses spread out bright
green up from the water-side, and deeper green showed the acres of the
wheat on the lower slopes of the knolls, and in wide fields away from the
river.

Just below the pitch of the hill whereon they were, lay Silver-stead, the
town of the Dale.  Hitherto it had been an unfenced place; but Folk-might
pointed to where on the western side a new white wall was rising, and on
which, young as the day yet was, men were busy laying the stones and
spreading the mortar.  Fair seemed that town to Face-of-god: the houses
were all builded of stone, and some of the biggest were roofed with lead,
which also as well as silver was dug out of the mountains at the eastern
end of the Dale.  The market-place was clear to see from where they
stood, though there were houses on all sides of it, so wide it was.  From
their standing-place it was but three furlongs to this heart of
Silver-dale; and Face-of-god could see brightly-clad men moving about in
it already.  High above their heads he beheld two great clots of scarlet
and yellow raised on poles and pitched in front of a great stone-built
hall roofed with lead, which stood amidmost of the west end of the Place,
and betwixt those poles he saw on a mound with long slopes at its sides
somewhat of white stone, and amidmost of the whole Place a great stack of
faggot-wood built up four-square.  Those red and yellow things on the
poles he deemed would be the banners of the murder-carles; and Folk-might
told him that even so it was, and that they were but big bunches of
strips of woollen cloth, much like to great ragmops, save that the rags
were larger and longer: no other token of war, said Folk-might, did those
folk carry, save a crookbladed sword, smeared with man’s blood, and
bigger than any man might wield in battle.

‘Art thou far-seeing, War-leader?’ quoth he.  ‘What canst thou see in the
market-place?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Far-seeing am I above most men, and I see in the Place
a man in scarlet standing by the banner, which is pitched in front of the
great stone hall, near to the mound with the white stone on it; and
meseemeth he beareth a great horn in his hand.’

Said Folk-might: ‘Yea, and that stone hall was our Mote-house when we
were lords of the Dale, and thence it was that they who are now thralls
of the Dusky Men sent to them their message and token of yielding.  And
as for that white stone, it is the altar of their god; for they have but
one, and he is that same crook-bladed sword.  And now that I look, I see
a great stack of wood amidmost the market-place, and well I know what
that betokeneth.’

‘Lo you!’ said Face-of-god, ‘the man with the horn is gone up on to the
altar-mound, and meseemeth he is setting the little end of the horn to
his mouth.’

‘Hearken then!’ said Folk-might.  And in a moment came the hoarse
tuneless sound of the horn down the wind towards them; and Folk-might
said:

‘I deem I should know what that blast meaneth; and now is it time that
the Host drew nigher to set them in array behind these very trees.  But
if ye will, War-leader, we will abide here and watch the ways of the
foemen, and send Dallach with the word to the Host; also I would have
thee suffer me to bid hither at once two score and ten of the best of the
bowmen of our folk and the Woodlanders, and Wood-wise to lead them, for
he knoweth well the land hereabout, and what is good to do.’

‘It is good,’ said Face-of-god.  ‘Be speedy, Dallach!’

So Dallach departed, running lightly, and the two chiefs abode there; and
the horn in Silver-stead blew at whiles for a little, and then stayed;
and Folk-might said:

‘Lo you! they come flockmeal to the Mote-stead; the Place will be filled
ere long.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Will they make offerings to their god at the hallowing
in of their Folk-mote?  Where then are the slaughter-beasts?’

‘They shall not long be lacking,’ said Folk-might.  ‘See you it is
getting thronged about the altar and the Mote-house.’

Now there were four ways into the Market-place of Silver-stead turned
toward the four aírts, and the midmost of the kindreds’ battle looked
right down the southern one, which went up to the wood, but stopped there
in a mere woodland path, and the more part of the town lay north and west
of this way, albeit there was a way from the east also.  But the
hill-side just below the two captains lay two furlongs west of this
southern way; and it went down softly till it was gotten quite near to
the backs of the houses on the south side of the Market-place, and was
sprinkled scantly with bushes and trees as aforesaid; but at last were
there more bushes, which well-nigh made a hedge across it, reaching from
the side of the southern way; and a foot or two beyond these bushes the
ground fell by a steep and broken bent down to the level of the
Market-place, and betwixt that fringe of bushes and the backs of the
houses on the south side of the Place was less it maybe than a full
furlong: but the southern road aforesaid went down softly into the
Market-place, since it had been fashioned so by men.

Now the two chiefs heard a loud blast of horns come up from the town, and
lo! a great crowd of men wending their ways down the road from the north,
and they came into the market-place with spears and other weapons tossing
in the air, and amidst of these men, who seemed to be all of the
warriors, they saw as they drew nigher some two score and ten of men clad
in long raiment of yellow and scarlet, with tall spiring hats of strange
fashion on their heads, and in their hands long staves with great blades
like scythes done on to them; and again, in the midst of these yellow and
red glaive-bearers, in the very heart of the throng were some score of
naked folk, they deemed both men and women, but were not sure, so close
was the throng; nor could they see if they were utterly naked.

‘Lo you, brother!’ quoth Folk-might, ‘said I not that the beasts for the
hewing should not tarry?  Yonder naked folk are even they: and ye may
well deem that they are the thralls of the Dusky Men; and meseemeth by
the whiteness of their skins they be of the best of them.  For these
felons, it is like, look to winning great plenty of thralls in Burgdale,
and so set the less store on them they have, and may expend them freely.’

As he spake they heard the sound of men marching in the wood behind them,
and they turned about and saw that there was come Wood-wise, and with him
upwards of two score and ten of the bowmen of the Woodlanders and the
Wolf—huntsmen, cragsmen, and scourers of the Waste; men who could shoot
the chaffinch on the twig a hundred yards aloof; who could make a
hiding-place of the bennets of the wayside grass, or the stem of the
slender birch-tree.  With these must needs be Bow-may, who was the
closest shooter of all the kindreds.

So then Wood-wise told the War-leader that Dallach had given the word to
the Host, and that all men were astir and would be there presently in
their ordered companies; and Face-of-god spake to Folk-might, and said:
‘Chief of the Wolf, wilt thou not give command to these bowmen, and set
them to the work; for thou wottest thereof.’

‘Yea, that will I,’ said Folk-might, and turned to Wood-wise, and said:
‘Wood-wise, get ye down the slope, and loose on these felons, who have a
murder on hand, if so be ye have a chance to do it wisely.  But in any
case come ye all back; for all shall be needed yet to-day.  So flee if
they pursue, for ye shall have us to flee to.  Now be ye wary, nor let
the curse of the Wolf and the Face lie on your slothfulness.’

Wood-wise did but nod his head and lift his hand to his fellows, who set
off after him down the slope without more tarrying.  They went very
warily, as if they were hunting a quarry which would flee from them; and
they crept amongst the grass and stones from bush to bush like serpents,
and so, unseen by the Dusky Men, who indeed were busied over their own
matters, they came to the fringe of bushes above the broken ground
aforesaid, and there they took their stand, and before them below those
steep banks was but the space at the back of the houses.  As to the
houses, as aforesaid, they were not so high as elsewhere about the
Market-place; and at the end of a long low hall there was a gap between
its gable and the next house, whereby they had a clear sight of the Place
about the god’s altar and the banners, and the great hall of Silver-dale,
with the double stair that went up to the door thereof.

There then they made them ready, and Wood-wise set men to watch that none
should come sidelong on them unawares; their bows were bent and their
quivers open, and they were eager for the fray.

Thus they beheld the Market-place from their cover, and saw that those
folk who were to be hewn to the god were now standing facing the altar in
a half-ring, and behind them in another half-ring the glaive-bearers who
had brought them thither stood glaive in hand ready to hew them down when
the token should be given; and these were indeed the priests of the god.

There was clear space round about these poor slaughter-thralls, so that
the bowmen could see them well, and they told up a score of them, half
men, half women, and they were all stark naked save for wreaths of
flowers about their middles and their necks; and they had shackles of
lead about their wrists; which same lead should be taken out of the fire
wherein they should be burned, and from the shape it should take after it
had passed through the fire would the priests foretell the luck of the
deed to be done.

It was clear to be seen from thence that Folk-might was right when he
said that these slaughter-thralls were of the best of the house-thralls
and bed-mates of the Dusky Men, and that these felons were open-handed to
their god, and would not cheat him, or withhold from him the best and
most delicate of all they had.

Now spake Wood-wise to those about him: ‘It is sure that Folk-might would
have us give these poor thralls a chance, and that we must loose upon the
felons who would hew them down; and if we are to come back again, we can
go no nigher.  What sayest thou, Bow-may?  Is it nigh enough?  Can aught
be done?’

‘Yea, yea,’ she said, ‘nigh enough it is; but let Gold-ring be with me
and half a score of the very best, whether they be of our folk or the
Woodlanders, men who cannot miss such a mark; and when we have loosed,
then let all loose, and stay not till our shot be spent.  Haste, now
haste! time presseth; for if the Host showeth on the brow of the hill,
these felons will hew down their slaughter-beasts before they turn on
their foemen.  Let the grey-goose wing speed trouble and confusion
amongst them.’

But ere she had done her words Wood-wise had got to speaking quietly with
the Woodlanders; and Bears-bane, who was amidst them, chose out eight of
the best of his folk, men who doubted nothing of hitting whatever they
could see in the Market-place; and they took their stand for shooting,
and with them besides Bow-may were two women and four men of the Wolf,
and Gold-ring withal, a carle of fifty winters, long, lean, and wiry, a
fell shooter if ever anyone were.

So all these notched their shafts and laid them on the yew, and each had
between the two last fingers of the shaft-hand another shaft ready, and a
half score more stuck into the ground before him.

Now giveth Wood-wise the word to these sixteen as to which of the felons
with the glaives they shall each one aim at; and he saith withal in a
soft voice: ‘Help cometh from the Hill; soon shall battle be joined in
Silver-dale.’

Thus stand they watching Bow-may and Gold-ring till they draw home the
notches; and amidst their waiting the glaive-bearing felons fall
a-singing a harsh and ugly hymn to their crooked-sword god, and the
Market-stead is thronged endlong and overthwart with the tribes of the
Dusky Men.

There now standeth Bow-may far-sighted and keen-eyed, her face as pale as
a linen sleeve, an awful smile on her glittering eyes and close-set lips,
and she feeling the twisted string of the red yew and the polished sides
of the notch, while the yelling song of the Dusky priests quavers now and
ends with a wild shrill cry, and she noteth the midmost of the priests
beginning to handle his weapon: then swift and steady she draweth home
the notches, while the yew bow standeth still as the oak-bole ere the
summer storm ariseth, and the twang of the sixteen strings maketh but one
fell sound as the feathered bane of men goeth on its way.

There was silence for a moment of time in the Market of Silver-stead, as
if the bolt of the Gods had fallen there; and then arose a huge wordless
yell from those about the altar, and one of the priests who was left hove
up his glaive two-handed to smite the naked slaughter-thralls; but or
ever the stroke fell, Bow-may’s second shaft was through his throat, and
he rolled over amidst his dead fellows; and the other fifteen had loosed
with her, and then even as they could Wood-wise and the others of their
company; and all they notched and loosed without tarrying, and no shout,
no word came from their lips, only the twanging strings spake for them;
for they deemed the minutes that hurried by were worth much joy of their
lives to be.  And few indeed were the passing minutes ere the dead men
lay in heaps about the Altar of the Crooked Sword, and the wounded men
wallowed amidst them.




CHAPTER XLIV.  OF THE ONSLAUGHT OF THE MEN OF THE STEER, THE BRIDGE, AND
THE BULL.


WILD was the turmoil and confusion in the Market-stead; for the more part
of the men therein knew not what had befallen about the altar, though
some clomb up to the top of that stack of faggots built for the burning
of the thralls, and when they saw what was toward fell to yelling and
cursing; and their fellows on the plain Place could not hear their story
for the clamour, and they also fell to howling as if a wood full of wild
dogs was there.

And still the shafts rained down on that throng from the Bent of the
Bowmen, for another two score men of the Woodlanders had crept down the
hill to them, and shafts failed them not.  But the Dusky Men about the
altar, for all their terror, or even maybe because of it, now began to
turn upon the scarce-seen foemen, and to press up wildly toward the
hill-side, though as it were without any order or aim.  Every man of them
had his weapons, and those no mere gilded toys, but their very tools of
battle; and some, but no great number, had their bows with them and a few
shafts; and these began to shoot at whatsoever they could see on the
hill-side, but at first so wildly and hurriedly that they did no harm.

It must be said of them that at first only those about the altar fell on
toward the hill; for those about the road that led southward knew not
what had betided nor whither to turn.  So that at this beginning of the
battle, of all the thousands in the great Place it was but a few hundreds
that set on the Bent of the Bowmen, and at these the bowmen of the
kindreds shot so close and so wholly together that they fell one over
another in the narrow ways between the houses whereby they must needs go
to gather on the plain ground betwixt the backs of the houses and the
break of the hill-side.  But little by little the archers of the Dusky
Men gathered behind the corpses of the slain, and fell to shooting at
what they could see of the men of the kindreds, which at that while was
not much, for as bold as they were, they fought like wary hunters of the
Wood and the Waste.

But now at last throughout all that throng of Felons in the Market-place
the tale began to spread of foemen come into the Dale and shooting from
the Bents, and all they turned their faces to the hill, and the whole set
of the throng was thitherward; though they fared but slowly, so evil was
the order of them, each man hindering his neighbour as he went.  And not
only did the Dusky Men come flockmeal toward the Bent of the Bowmen, but
also they jostled along toward the road that led southward.  That beheld
Wood-wise from the Bent, and he was minded to get him and his aback, now
that they had made so great a slaughter of the foemen; and two or three
of his fellows had been hurt by arrows, and Bow-may, she would have been
slain thrice over but for the hammer-work of the Alderman.  And no marvel
was that; for now she stood on a little mound not half covered by a thin
thorn-bush, and notched and loosed at whatever was most notable, as
though she were shooting at the mark on a summer evening in Shadowy Vale.
But as Wood-wise was at point to give the word to depart, from behind
them rang out the merry sound of the Burgdale horns, and he turned to
look at the wood-side, and lo! thereunder was the hill bright and dark
with men-at-arms, and over them floated the Banners of the Wolf, and the
Banners of the Steer, the Bridge, and the Bull.  Then gave forth the
bowmen of the kindreds their first shout, and they made no stay in their
shooting; but shot the eagerer, for they deemed that help would come
without their turning about to draw it to them: and even so it was.  For
straightway down the bent came striding Face-of-god betwixt the two
Banners of the Wolf, and beside him were Red-wolf the tall and War-grove,
and therewithal Wood-wont and Wood-wicked, and many other men of the
Wolf; for now that the men of the kindreds had been brought face to face
with the foe, and there was less need of them for way-leaders, the more
part of them were liefer to fight under their own banner along with the
Woodlanders; so that the company of those who went under the Wolves was
more than three long hundreds and a half; and the bowmen on the edge of
the bent shouted again and merrily, when they felt that their brothers
were amongst them, and presently was the arrow-storm at its fiercest, and
the twanging of bow-strings and the whistle of the shafts was as the wind
among the clefts of the mountains; for all the new-comers were bowmen of
the best.

But the kindreds of the Steer, the Bridge, and the Bull, they hung yet a
while longer on the hills’ brow, their banners floating over them and
their horns blowing; and the Dusky Felons in the Market-place beheld
them, and fear and rage at once filled their hearts, and a fierce and
dreadful yell brake out from them, and joyously did the Men of Burgdale
answer them, and song arose amongst them even such as this:

                      _The Men of the Bridge sing_:

   Why stand ye together, why bear ye the shield,
   Now the calf straineth tether at edge of the field?

   Now the lamb bleateth stronger and waters run clear,
   And the day groweth longer and glad is the year?

   Now the mead-flowers jostle so thick as they stand,
   And singeth the throstle all over the land?

                       _The Men of the Steer sing_:

   No cloud the day darkened, no thunder we heard,
   But the horns’ speech we hearkened as men unafeared.

   Yea, so merry it sounded, we turned from the Dale,
   Where all wealth abounded, to wot of its tale.

                      _The Men of the Bridge sing_:

   What white boles then bear ye, what wealth of the woods?
   What chafferers hear ye bid loud for your goods?

                       _The Men of the Bull sing_:

   O the bright beams we carry are stems of the steel;
   Nor long shall we tarry across them to deal.

   Hark the men of the cheaping, how loudly they cry
   On the hook for the reaping of men doomed to die!

                             _They all sing_:

   Heave spear up! fare forward, O Men of the Dale!
   For the Warrior, our war-ward, shall hearken the tale.

Therewith they ceased a moment, and then gave a great and hearty shout
all together, and all their horns blew, and they moved on down the hill
as one man, slowly and with no jostling, the spear-men first, and then
they of the axe and the sword; and on their flanks the deft archers
loosed on the stumbling jostling throng of the Dusky Men, who for their
part came on drifting and surging up the road to the hill.

But when those big spearmen of the Dale had gone a little way the horns’
voice died out, and their great-staved spears rose up from their
shoulders into the air, and stood so a moment, and then slowly fell
forward, as the oars of the longship fall into the row-locks, and then
over the shoulders of the foremost men showed the steel of the five ranks
behind them, and their own spears cast long bars of shadow on the
whiteness of the sunny road.  No sound came from them now save the rattle
of their armour and the tramp of their steady feet; but from the Dusky
Men rose up hideous confused yelling, and those that could free
themselves from the tangle of the throng rushed desperately against the
on-rolling hedge of steel, and the whole throng shoved on behind them.
Then met steel and men; here and there an ash-stave broke; here and there
a Dusky Felon rolled himself unhurt under the ash-staves, and hewed the
knees of the Dalesmen, and a tall man came tottering down; but what men
or wood-wights could endure the push of spears of those mighty
husbandmen?  The Dusky Ones shrunk back yelling, or turned their backs
and rushed at their own folk with such fierce agony that they entered
into the throng, till the terror of the spear reached to the midmost of
it and swayed them back on the hindermost; for neither was there outgate
for the felons on the flanks of the spearmen, since there the feathered
death beset them, and the bowmen (and the Bride amongst the foremost)
shot wholly together, and no shaft flew idly.  But the wise leaders of
the Dalesmen would not that they should thrust in too far amongst the
howling throng of the Dusky Men, lest they should be hemmed in by them;
for they were but a handful in regard to them: so there they stayed,
barring the way to the Dusky Men, and the bowmen still loosed from the
flanks of them, or aimed deftly from betwixt the ranks of the spearmen.

And now was there a space of ten strides or more betwixt the Dalesmen and
their foes, over which the spears hung terribly, nor durst the Dusky Men
adventure there; and thereon was nought but men dead or sorely hurt.
Then suddenly a horn rang thrice shrilly over all the noise and clamour
of the throng, and the ranks of the spearmen opened, and forth into that
space strode two score of the swordsmen and axe-wielders of the Dale,
their weapons raised in their hands, and he who led them was Iron-hand of
the House of the Bull: tall he was, wide-shouldered, exceeding strong,
but beardless and fair-faced.  He bore aloft a two-edged sword,
broad-bladed, exceeding heavy, so that few men could wield it in battle,
but not right long; it was an ancient weapon, and his father before him
had called it the Barley-scythe.  With him were some of the best of the
kindreds, as Wolf of Whitegarth, Long-hand of Oakholt, Hart of Highcliff,
and War-well the captain of the Bridge.  These made no tarrying on that
space of the dead, but cried aloud their cries: ‘For the Burg and the
Steer! for the Dale and the Bridge! for the Dale and the Bull!’ and so
fell at once on the Felons; who fled not, nor had room to flee; and also
they feared not the edge-weapons so sorely as they feared those huge
spears.  So they turned fiercely on the swordsmen, and chiefly on
Iron-hand, as he entered in amongst them the first of all, hewing to the
right hand and the left, and many a man fell before the Barley-scythe;
for they were but little before him.  Yet as one fell another took his
place, and hewed at him with the steel axe and the crooked sword; and
with many strokes they clave his shield and brake his helm and rent his
byrny, while he heeded little save smiting with the Barley-scythe, and
the blood ran from his arm and his shoulder and his thigh.

But War-well had entered in among the foe on his left hand, and
unshielded hove up a great broad-bladed axe, that clave the iron helms of
the Dusky Men, and rent their horn-scaled byrnies.  He was not very tall,
but his shoulders were huge and his arms long, and nought could abide his
stroke.  He cleared a ring round Iron-hand, whose eyes were growing dim
as the blood flowed from him, and hewed three strokes before him; then
turned and drew the champion out of the throng, and gave him into the
arms of his fellows to stanch the blood that drained away the might of
his limbs; and then with a great wordless roar leaped back again on the
Dusky Men as the lion leapeth on the herd of swine; and they shrank away
before him; and all the swordsmen shouted, ‘For the Bridge, for the
Bridge!’ and pressed on the harder, smiting down all before them.  On his
left hand now was Hart of Highcliff wielding a good sword hight
Chip-driver, wherewith he had slain and hurt a many, fighting wisely with
sword and shield, and driving the point home through the joints of the
armour.  But even therewith, as he drave a great stroke at a lord of the
Dusky Ones, a cast-spear came flying and smote him on the breast, so that
he staggered, and the stroke fell flatlings on the shield-boss of his
foe, and Chip-driver brake atwain nigh the hilts; but Hart closed with
him, and smote him on the face with the pommel, and tore his axe from his
hand and clave his skull therewith, and slew him with his own weapon, and
fought on valiantly beside War-well.

Now War-well had fought so fiercely that he had rent his own hauberk with
the might of his strokes, and as he raised his arm to smite a huge
stroke, a deft man of the Felons thrust the spike of his war-axe up under
his arm; and when War-well felt the smart of the steel, he turned on that
man, and, letting his axe fall down to his wrist and hang there by its
loop, he caught the foeman up by the neck and the breech, and drave him
against the other Dusky Ones before him, so that their weapons pierced
and rent their own friend and fellow.  Then he put forth the might of his
arms and the pith of his body, and hove up that felon and cast him on to
the heads of his fellow murder-carles, so that he rent them and was rent
by them.  Then War-well fell on again with the axe, and all the champions
of the Dale shouted and fell on with him, and the foe shrank away; and
the Dalesmen cleared a space five fathoms’ length before them, and the
spearmen drew onward and stood on the space whereon the first onslaught
had been.

Then drew those hewers of the Dale together, and forth from the company
came the man that bare the Banner of the Bridget and the champions
gathered round him, and they ordered their ranks and strode with the
Banner before them three times to and fro across the road athwart the
front of the spearmen, and then with a great shout drew back within the
spear-hedge.  Albeit five of the champions of the Dale had been slain
outright there, and the more part of them hurt more or less.

But when all were well within the ranks, once again blew the horn, and
all the spears sank to the rest, and the kindreds drave the spear-furrow,
and a space was swept clear before them, and the cries and yells of the
Dusky Men were so fierce and wild that the rough voices of the Dalesmen
were drowned amidst them.

Forth then came every bowman of the kindred that was there and loosed on
the Dusky Men; and they forsooth had some bowmen amongst them, but cooped
up and jostled as they were they shot but wildly; whereas each shaft of
the Dale went home truly.

But amongst the bowmen forth came the Bride in her glittering war-gear,
and stepped lightly to the front of the spearmen.  Her own yew bow had
been smitten by a shaft and broken in her hand: so she had caught up a
short horn bow and a quiver from one of the slain of the Dusky Men; and
now she knelt on one knee under the shadow of the spears nigh to her
grandsire Hall-ward, and with a pale face and knitted brow notched and
loosed, and notched and loosed on the throng of foemen, as if she were
some daintily fashioned engine of war.

So fared the battle on the road that went from the south into the
Market-stead.  Valiantly had the kindred fought there, and no man of them
had blenched, and much had they won; but the way was perilous before
them, for the foe was many and many.




CHAPTER XLV.  OF FACE-OF-GOD’S ONSLAUGHT.


NOW the banners of the Wolf flapped and rippled over the heads of the
Woodlanders and the Men of the Wolf; and the men shot all they might, nor
took heed now to cover themselves against the shafts of the Dusky Men.
As for these, for all they were so many, their arrow-shot was no great
matter, for they were in very evil order, as has been said; and moreover,
their rage was so great to come to handy strokes with these foemen, that
some of them flung away their bows to brandish the axe or the sword.
Nevertheless were some among the kindred hurt or slain by their arrows.

Now stood Face-of-god with the foremost; and from where he stood he could
see somewhat of the battle of the Dalesmen, and he wotted that it was
thriving; therefore he looked before him and close around him, and noted
what was toward there.  The space betwixt the houses and the break of the
bent was crowded with the fury of the Dusky Men tossing their weapons
aloft, crying to each other and at the kindred, and here and there
loosing a bow-string on them; but whatever was their rage they might not
come a many together past a line within ten fathom of the bent’s end; for
three hundred of the best of bowmen were shooting at them so ceaselessly
that no Dusky man was safe of any bare place of his body, and they fell
over one another in that penfold of slaughter, and for all their madness
did but little.

Yet was the heart of the War-leader troubled; for he wotted that it might
not last for ever, and there seemed no end to the throng of
murder-carles; and the time would come when the arrowshot would be spent,
and they must needs come to handy strokes, and that with so many.

Now a voice spake to him as he gazed with knitted brows and careful heart
on that turmoil of battle:

‘What now hast thou done with the Sun-beam, and where is her brother?  Is
the Chief of the Wolf skulking when our work is so heavy?  And thou
meseemeth art overlate on the field: the mowing of this meadow is no
sluggard’s work.’

He turned and beheld Bow-may, and gazed on her face for a moment, and saw
her eyes how they glittered, and how the pommels of her cheeks were
burning red and her lips dry and grey; but before he answered he looked
all round about to see what was to note; and he touched Bow-may on the
shoulder and pointed to down below where a man of the Felons had just
come out of the court of one of the houses: a man taller than most, very
gaily arrayed, with gilded scales all over him, so that, with his dark
face and blue eyes, he looked like some strange dragon.  Bow-may spake
not, but stamped her foot with anger.  Yet if her heart were hot, her
hand was steady; for she notched a shaft, and just as the Dusky Chief
raised his axe and brandished it aloft, she loosed, and the shaft flew
and smote the felon in the armpit and the default of the armour, and he
fell to earth.  But even as she loosed, Face-of-god cried out in a loud
voice:

‘O lads of battle! shoot close and all together.  Tarry not, tarry not!
for we need a little time ere sword meets sword, and the others of the
kindreds are at work!’

But Bow-may turned round to him and said: ‘Wilt thou not answer me?
Where is thy kindness gone?’

Even as she was speaking she had notched and loosed another shaft,
speaking as folk do who turn from busy work at loom or bench.

Then said Face-of-god: ‘Shoot on, sister Bow-may!  The Sun-beam is gone
with her brother, and he is with the Men of the Face.’

He broke off here, for a man fell beside him hurt in the neck, and
Face-of-god took his bow from his hands and shot a shaft, while one of
the women who had been hurt also tended the newly-wounded man.  Then
Face-of-god went on speaking:

‘She was unwilling to go, but Folk-might and I constrained her; for we
knew that this is the most perilous place of the battle—hah! see those
three felons, Bow-may! they are aiming hither.’

And again he loosed and Bow-may also, but a shaft rattled on his helm
withal and another smote a Woodlander beside him, and pierced through the
calf of his leg, as he turned and stooped to take fresh arrows from a
sheaf that lay there; but the carle took it by the notch and the point,
and brake it and drew it out, and then stood up and went on shooting.
And Face-of-god spake again:

‘Folk-might skulketh not; nor the Men of the Vine, and the Sickle, and
the Face, nor the Shepherd-Folk: soon shall they be making our work easy
to us, if we can hold our own till then.  They are on the other roads
that lead into the square.  Now suffer me, and shoot on!’

Therewith he looked round about him, and he saw on the left hand that all
was quiet; and before him was the confused throng of the Dusky Men
trampling their own dead and wounded, and not able as yet to cross that
death-line of the arrow so near to them.  But on his right hand he saw
how they of the kindreds held them firm on the way.  Then for a moment of
time he considered and thought, till him-seemed he could see the whole
battle yet to be foughten; and his face flushed, and he said sharply:
‘Bow-may, abide here and shoot, and show the others where to shoot, while
the arrows hold out; but we will go further for a while, and ye shall
follow when we have made the rent great enough.’

She turned to him and said: ‘Why art thou not more joyous? thou art like
an host without music or banners.’

‘Nay,’ said he, ‘heed not me, but my bidding!’

She said hastily: ‘I think I shall die here; since for all we have shot
we minish them nowise.  Now kiss me this once amidst the battle, and say
farewell.’

He said: ‘Nay, nay; it shall not go thus.  Abide a little while, and thou
shalt see all this tangle open, as the sun cleaveth the clouds on the
autumn morning.  Yet lo thou! since thou wilt have it so.’

And he bent forward and kissed her face, and now the tears ran over it,
and she said smiling somewhat: ‘Now is this more than I looked for,
whatso may betide.’

But while she was yet speaking he cried in a great voice:

‘Ye who have spent your shot, or have nigh spent it, to axe and sword,
and follow me to clear the ground ’twixt the bent and the halls.  Let
each help each, but throng not each other.  Shoot wisely, ye bowmen, and
keep our backs clear of the foe.  On, on! for the Burg and the Face, for
the Burg and the Face!’

Therewith he leapt down the steep of the hill, bounding like the hart,
with Dale-warden naked in his hand; and they that followed were two score
and ten; and the arrows of their bowmen rained over their heads on the
Dusky Men, as they smote down the first of the foemen, and the others
shrieked and shrank from them, or turned on them smiting wildly and
desperately.

But Face-of-god swept round the great sword and plunged into that sea of
turmoil and noise and evil sights and savours, and even therewith he
heard clearly a voice that said: ‘Goldring, I am hurt; take my bow a
while!’ and knew it for Bow-may’s; but it came to his ears like the song
of a bird without meaning; for it was as if his life were changed at
once; and in a minute or two he had cut thrice with the edge and thrust
twice with the point, eager, but clear-eyed and deft; and he saw as in a
picture the foe before him, and the grey roofs of Silver-stead, and
through the gap in them the tops of the blue ridges far aloof.  And now
had three fallen before him, and they feared him, and turned on him, and
smote so many together that their strokes crossed each other, and one
warded him from the other; and he laughed aloud and shielded himself, and
drave the point of Dale-warden amidst the tangle of weapons through the
open mouth of a captain of the Felons, and slashed a cheek with a
back-stroke, and swept round the edge to his right hand and smote off a
blue-eyed snub-nosed head; and therewith a pole-axe smote him on the left
side of his helm, so that he tottered; but he swung himself round, and
stood stark and upright, and gave a short hack with the edge, keeping
Dale-warden well in hand, and a gold-clad felon, a champion of them, and
their tallest on the ground, fell aback, his throat gaping more than the
mouth of him.

Then Face-of-god shouted and waved Dale-warden aloft to the Banner of the
Wolf that floated behind and above him, and he cried out: ‘As I have
promised so have I done!’  And he looked about, and beheld how valiantly
his fellows had been doing; for before him now was a space of earth with
no man standing on his feet thereon, like the swathe of the mowers of
June; and beyond that was the crowd of the Dusky Men wavering like the
tall grass abiding the scythe.

But a minute, and they fell to casting at Face-of-god and his fellows
spears and knives and shields and whatsoever would fly; and a spear smote
him on the breast, but entered not; and a bossed shield fell over his
face withal, and a plummet of sling-lead smote his helm, and he fell to
earth; but leapt up again straightway, and heard as he arose a great
shout close to him, and a shrill cry, and lo! at his left side Bow-may,
her sword in her hand, and the hand red with blood from a shaft-graze on
her wrist, and a white cloth stained with blood about her neck; and on
his right side Wood-wise bearing the banner and crying the Wolf-whoop;
for the whole company was come down from the slope and stood around him.

Then for a little while was there such a stilling of the tumult about him
there, that he heard great and glad cries from the Road of the South of
‘The Burg and the Steer!  The Dale and the Bridge!  The Dale and the
Bull!’  And thereafter a terrible great shrieking cry, and a huge voice
that cried: ‘Death, death, death to the Dusky Men!’  And thereafter again
fierce cries and great tumult of the battle.

Then Face-of-god shook Dale-warden in the air, and strode forward
fiercely, but not speedily, and the whole company went foot for foot
along with him; and as he went, would he or would he not, song came into
his mouth, a song of the meadows of the Dale, even such as this:

   The wheat is done blooming and rust’s on the sickle,
      And green are the meadows grown after the scythe.
   Come, hands for the dance!  For the toil hath been mickle,
      And ’twixt haysel and harvest ’tis time to be blithe.

   And what shall the tale be now dancing is over,
      And kind on the meadow sits maiden by man,
   And the old man bethinks him of days of the lover,
      And the warrior remembers the field that he wan?

   Shall we tell of the dear days wherein we are dwelling,
      The best days of our Mother, the cherishing Dale,
   When all round about us the summer is telling,
      To ears that may hearken, the heart of the tale?

   Shall we sing of these hands and these lips that caress us,
      And the limbs that sun-dappled lie light here beside,
   When still in the morning they rise but to bless us,
      And oft in the midnight our footsteps abide?

   O nay, but to tell of the fathers were better,
      And of how we were fashioned from out of the earth;
   Of how the once lowly spurned strong at the fetter;
      Of the days of the deeds and beginning of mirth.

   And then when the feast-tide is done in the morning,
      Shall we whet the grey sickle that bideth the wheat,
   Till wan grow the edges, and gleam forth a warning
      Of the field and the fallow where edges shall meet.

   And when cometh the harvest, and hook upon shoulder
      We enter the red wheat from out of the road,
   We shall sing, as we wend, of the bold and the bolder,
      And the Burg of their building, the beauteous abode.

   As smiteth the sickle amid the sun’s burning
      We shall sing how the sun saw the token unfurled,
   When forth fared the Folk, with no thought of returning,
      In the days when the Banner went wide in the world.

Many saw that he was singing, but heard not the words of his mouth, for
great was the noise and clamour.  But he heard Bow-may, how she laughed
by his side, and cried out:

‘Gold-mane, dear-heart, now art thou merry indeed; and glad am I, though
they told me that I am hurt.—Ah! now beware, beware!’

For indeed the Dusky Men, seeing the wall of steel rolling down on them,
and cooped up by the houses, so that they scarce knew how to flee, turned
in the face of death, the foremost of them, and rushed furiously on the
array of the Woodlanders, and all those behind pressed on them like the
big wave of the ebbing sea when the gust of the wind driveth it landward.

The Woodlanders met them, shouting out: ‘The Greenwood and the Wolf, the
Greenwood and the Wolf!’  But not a few of them fell there, though they
gave not back a foot; for so fierce now were the Dusky Men, that hewing
and thrusting at them availed nought, unless they were slain outright or
stunned; and even if they fell they rolled themselves up against their
tall foe-men, heeding not death or wounds if they might but slay or
wound.  There then fell War-grove and ten others of the Woodlanders, and
four men of the Wolf, but none before he had slain his foeman; and as
each man fell or was hurt grievously, another took his place.

Now a felon leapt up and caught Gold-ring by the neck and drew him down,
while another strove to smite his head off; but the stout carle drave a
wood-knife into the side of the first felon, and drew it out speedily and
smote the other, the smiter, in the face with the same knife, and
therewith they all three rolled together on the earth amongst the feet of
men.  Even so did another felon by Bow-may, and dragged her down to the
ground, and smote her with a long knife as she tumbled down; and this was
a feat of theirs, for they were long-armed like apes.

But as to this felon, Dale-warden’s edge split his skull, and Face-of-god
gathered his might together and bestrode Bow-may, till he had hewed a
space round about him with great two-handed strokes; and yet the blade
brake not.  Then he caught up Bow-may from the earth, and the felon’s
knife had not pierced her hauberk, but she was astonied, and might not
stand upon her feet; and Face-of-god turned aside a little with her, and
half bore her, half thrust her through the throng to the rearward of his
folk, and left her there with two carlines of the Wolf who followed the
host for leechcraft’s sake, and then turned back shouting: ‘For the Face,
for the Face!’ and there followed him back to the battle, a band of those
who were fresh as yet, and their blades unbloodied, the young men of the
Woodlands.

The wearier fighters made way for them as they came on shouting, and
Face-of-god was ahead of them all, and leapt at the foemen as a man
unwearied and striking his first stroke, so wondrous hale he was; and
they drave a wedge amidst of the Dusky Men, and then turned about and
stood back to back hewing at all that drifted on them.  But as
Face-of-god cleared a space about him, lo! almost within reach of his
sword-point up rose a grim shape from the earth, tall, grey-haired, and
bloody-faced, who uttered the Wolf-whoop from amidst the terror of his
visage, and turned and swung round his head an axe of the Dusky Men, and
fell to smiting them with their own weapon.  The Dusky Men shrieked in
answer to his whoop, and all shrunk from him and Face-of-god; but a cry
of joy went up from the kindred, for they knew Gold-ring, whom they
deemed had been slain.  So they all pressed on together, smiting down the
foe before them, and the Dusky Men, some turned their backs and drave
those behind them, till they too turned and were strained through the
passages and courts of the houses, and some were overthrown and trodden
down as they strove to hold face to the Woodlanders, and some were hewn
down where they stood; but the whole throng of those that were on their
feet drifted toward the Market-place, the Woodlanders following them ever
with point and edge, till betwixt the bent and the houses no foeman stood
up against them.

Then they stood together, and raised the whoop of victory, and blew their
horns long and loud in token of their joy, and the Woodland men lifted up
their voices and sang:

      Now far, far aloof
      Standeth lintel and roof,
      The dwelling of days
      Of the Woodland ways:
      Now nought wendeth there
      Save the wolf and the bear,
      And the fox of the waste
      Faring soft without haste.
   No carle the axe whetteth on oak-laden hill;
   No shaft the hart letteth to wend at his will;
   None heedeth the thunder-clap over the glade,
   And the wind-storm thereunder makes no man afraid.
   Is it thus then that endeth man’s days on Mid-earth,
   For no man there wendeth in sorrow or mirth?

      Nay, look down on the road
      From the ancient abode!
      Betwixt acre and field
      Shineth helm, shineth shield.
      And high over the heath
      Fares the bane in his sheath;
      For the wise men and bold
      Go their ways o’er the wold.
   Now the Warrior hath given them heart and fair day,
   Unbidden, undriven, they fare to the fray.
   By the rock and the river the banners they bear,
   And their battle-staves quiver ’neath halbert and spear;
   On the hill’s brow they gather, and hang o’er the Dale
   As the clouds of the Father hang, laden with bale.

      Down shineth the sun
      On the war-deed half done;
      All the fore-doomed to die,
      In the pale dust they lie.
      There they leapt, there they fell,
      And their tale shall we tell;
      But we, e’en in the gate
      Of the war-garth we wait,
   Till the drift of war-weather shall whistle us on,
   And we tread all together the way to be won,
   To the dear land, the dwelling for whose sake we came
   To do deeds for the telling of song-becrowned fame.
   Settle helm on the head then!  Heave sword for the Dale!
   Nor be mocked of the dead men for deedless and pale.




CHAPTER XLVI.  MEN MEET IN THE MARKET OF SILVER-STEAD.


SO sang they; but Face-of-god went with Red-wolf, who was hurt sorely,
but not deadly, and led him back toward the place just under the break of
the bent; and there he found Bow-may in the hands of the women who were
tending her hurts.  She smiled on him from a pale face as he drew nigh,
and he looked kindly at her, but he might not abide there, for haste was
in his feet.  He left Red-wolf to the tending of the women, and clomb the
bent hastily, and when he deemed he was high enough, he looked about him;
and somewhat more than half an hour had worn since Bow-may had sped the
first shaft against the Dusky Men.

He looked down into the Market-stead, and deemed he could see that nigh
the Mote-house the Dusky Men were gathering into some better order; but
they were no longer drifting toward the southern bents, but were standing
round about the altar as men abiding somewhat; and he deemed that they
had gotten more bowshot than before, and that most of them bare bows.
Though so many had been slain in the battles of the southern bents, yet
was the Market-stead full of them, so to say, for others had come thereto
in place of those that had fallen.

But now as he looked arose mighty clamour amongst them; and a little west
of the Altar was a stir and a hurrying onward and around as in the eddies
of a swift stream.  Face-of-god wotted not what was betiding there, but
he deemed that they were now ware of the onfall of Folk-might and
Hall-face and the men of Burgdale, for their faces were all turned to
where that was to be looked for.

So he turned and looked on the road to the east of him, where had been
the battle of the Steer, but now it was all gone down toward the
Market-place, and he could but hear the clamour of it; but nought he saw
thereof, because of the houses that hid it.

Then he cast his eyes on the road that entered the Market-stead from the
north, and he saw thereon many men gathered; and he wotted not what they
were; for though there were weapons amongst them, yet were they not all
weaponed, as far as he could see.

Now as he looked this way and that, and deemed that he must tarry no
longer, but must enter into the courts of the houses before him and make
his way into the Market-stead, lo! a change in the throng of Dusky
Warriors nigh the Mote-house, and the ordered bands about the Altar fell
to drifting toward the western way with one accord, with great noise and
hurry and fierce cries of wrath.  Then made Face-of-god no delay, but ran
down the bent at once, and at the break of it came upon Bow-may standing
upright and sword in hand; and as he passed, she joined herself to him,
and said: ‘What new tidings now, Gold-mane?’

‘Tidings of battle!’ he cried; ‘tidings of victory!  Folk-might hath
fallen on, and the Dusky Men run hastily to meet him.  Hark, hark!’

For as he spoke came a great noise of horns, and Bow-may said: ‘What horn
is that blowing?’

He stayed not, but shouted aloud: ‘For the Face, for the Face!  Now will
we fall upon their backs!’

Therewith was he come to his company, and he cried out to them: ‘Heard ye
the horn, heard ye the horn?  Now follow me into the Market-place; much
is yet to do!’

Even therewith came the sound of other horns, and all men were silent a
moment, and then shouted all together, for the Wood-landers knew it for
the horn of the Shepherds coming on by the eastward way.

But Face-of-god waved his sword aloft and set on at once, and they
followed and gat them through the courts of the houses and their passages
into the Market-place.  There they found more room than they looked to
find; for the foemen had drawn away on the left hand toward the battle of
Folk-might, and on the right hand toward the battle of the Steer; and
great was the noise and cry that came thence.

Now stood Face-of-god under the two banners of the Wolf in the
Market-place of Silver-stead, and scarce had he time to be high-hearted,
for needs must he ponder in his mind what thing were best to do.  For on
the left hand he deemed the foe was the strongest and best ordered; but
there also were the kindreds the doughtiest, and it was little like that
the felons should overcome the spear-casters of the Face and the
glaive-bearers of the Sickle, and the bowmen of the Vine: there also were
the wisest leaders, as the stark elder Stone-face, and the tall
Hall-face, and his father of the unshaken heart, and above all
Folk-might, fierce in his wrath, but his anger burning steady and clear,
like the oaken butt on the hearth of the hall.

Then as his mind pictured him amongst the foe, it made therewith another
picture of the slender warrior Sun-beam caught in the tangle of battle,
and longing for him and calling for him amidst the hard hand-play.  And
thereat his face flushed, and all his body waxed hot, and he was on the
very point of leading the onset against the foe on the left.  But
therewith he bethought him of the bold men of the Steer and the Bridge
and the Bull weary with much fighting; and he remembered also that the
Bride was amongst them and fighting, it might be, amidst the foremost,
and if she were slain how should he ever hold up his head again.  He
bethought him also that the Shepherds, who had fallen on by the eastern
road, valiant as they were, were scarce so well armed or so well led as
the others.  Therewithal he bethought him (and again it came like a
picture into his mind) of falling on the foemen by whom the southern
battle was beset, and then the twain of them meeting the Shepherds, and
lastly, all those three companies joined together clearing the
Market-place, and meeting the men under Folk-might in the midst thereof.

Therefore, scant had he been pondering these things in his mind for a
minute ere he cried out: ‘Blow up horns, blow up! forward banners, and
follow me, O valiant men! to the helping of the Steer, the Bridge, and
the Bull; deep have they thrust into the Dusky Throng, and belike are
hard pressed.  Hark how the clamour ariseth from their besetters!  On
now, on!’

Therewith hung a star of sunlight on his sword as he raised it aloft, and
the Wolf-whoop rang out terribly in the Market-place, for now had the
Woodlanders also learned it, and the hearts of the foemen sank as they
heard the might and the mass thereof.  Then the battle of the Woodlanders
swept round and fell upon the flank of them who were besetting the
kindreds, as an iron bar smiteth the soft fir-wood; and they of the
kindreds heard their cry, but faintly and confusedly, so great was the
turmoil of battle about them.

Now once more was Bow-may by the side of Face-of-god; and if she had not
the might of the mightiest, yet had she the deftness of the deftest.  And
now was she calm and cool, shielding herself with a copper-bossed target,
and driving home the point of her sharp sword; white was her face, and
her eyes glittered amidst it, and she seemed to men like to those on
whose heads the Warrior hath laid the Holy Bread.

As to Wood-wise, he had given the Banner of the red-jawed Wolf to
Stone-wolf, a huge and dreadful warrior some forty winters old, who had
fought in the Great Overthrow, and now hewed down the Dusky Men, wielding
a heavy short-sword left-handed.  But Wood-wise himself fought with a
great sword, giving great strokes to the right hand and the left, and was
no more hasty than is the hewer in the winter wood.

Face-of-god fought wisely and coldly now, and looked more to warding his
friends than destroying his foes, and both to Bow-may and Wood-wise his
sword was a shield; for oft he took the life from the edge of the
upraised axe, and stayed the point of the foeman in mid-air.

Even so wisely fought the whole band of the Woodlanders and the Wolves,
who got within smiting space of the foe; for they had no will to cast
away their lives when assured victory was so nigh to them.  Sooth to say,
the hand-play was not so hard to them as it had been betwixt the bent and
the houses; for the Dusky Men were intent on dealing with the men of the
kindreds from the southern road, who stood war-wearied before them; and
they were hewing and casting at them, and baying and yelling like dogs;
and though they turned about to meet the storm of the Woodlanders, yet
their hearts failed them withal, and they strove to edge away from
betwixt those two fearful scythes of war, fighting as men fleeing, not as
men in onset.  But still the Woodlanders and the Wolves came on, hewing
and thrusting, smiting down the foemen in heaps, till the Dusky Throng
grew thin, and the staves of the Dalesmen and their bright banners in the
morning sun were clear to see, and at last their very faces, kindly and
familiar, worn and strained with the stress of battle, or laughing
wildly, or pale with the fury of the fight.  Then rose up to the heavens
the blended shout of the Woodlanders and the Dalesmen, and now there was
nought of foemen betwixt them save the dead and the wounded.

Then Face-of-god thrust his sword into its sheath all bloody as it was,
and strode over the dead men to where Hall-ward stood under the banner of
the Steer, and cast his arms about the old carle, and kissed him for joy
of the victory.  But Hall-ward thrust him aback and looked him in the
face, and his cheeks were pale and his lips clenched, and his eyes
haggard and staring, and he said in a harsh voice:

‘O young man, she is dead!  I saw her fall.  The Bride is dead, and thou
hast lost thy troth-plight maiden. O death, death to the Dusky Men!’

Then grew Face-of-god as pale as a linen sleeve, and all the new-comers
groaned and cried out.  But a bystander said: ‘Nay, nay, it is nought so
bad as that; she is hurt, and sorely; but she liveth yet.’

Face-of-god heard him not.  He forgot Dale-warden lying in his sheath,
and he saw that the last speaker had a great wood-axe broad and heavy in
his hand, so he cried: ‘Man, man, thine axe!’ and snatched it from him,
and turned about to the foe again, and thrust through the ranks,
suffering none to stay him till all his friends were behind and all his
foes before him.  And as he burst forth from the ranks waving his axe
aloft, bare-headed now, his yellow hair flying abroad, his mouth crying
out, ‘Death, death, death to the Dusky Men!’ fear of him smote their
hearts, and they howled and fled before him as they might; for they said
that the Dalesmen had prayed their Gods into the battle.  But not so fast
could they flee but he was presently amidst them, smiting down all about
him, and they so terror-stricken that scarce might they raise a hand
against him.  All that blended host followed him mad with wrath and
victory, and as they pressed on, they heard behind them the horns and
war-cries of the Shepherds falling on from the east.  Nought they heeded
that now, but drave on a fearful storm of war, and terrible was the
slaughter of the Felons.

It was but a few minutes ere they had driven them up against that great
stack of faggots that had been dight for the burnt-offering of men, and
many of the felons had mounted up on to it, and now in their anguish of
fear were shooting arrows and casting spears on all about them, heeding
little if they were friend or foe.  Now were the men of the kindreds at
point to climb this twiggen burg; but by this time the fury of
Face-of-god had run clear, and he knew where he was and what he was
doing; so he stayed his folk, and cried out to them: ‘Forbear, climb not!
let the torch help the sword!’  And therewith he looked about and saw the
fire-pot which had been set down there for the kindling of the bale-fire,
and the coals were yet red in it; so he snatched up a dry brand and
lighted it thereat, and so did divers others, and they thrust them among
the faggots, and the fire caught at once, and the tongues of flame began
to leap from faggot to faggot till all was in a light low; for the wood
had been laid for that very end, and smeared with grease and oil so that
the burning to the god might be speedy.

But the fierceness of the kindreds heeded not the fire, nor overmuch the
men who leapt down from the stack before it, but they left all behind
them, faring straight toward the western outgate from the Market-stead;
and Face-of-god still led them on; though by now he was wholly come to
his right mind again, albeit the burden of sorrow yet lay heavy on his
heart.  He had broken his axe, and had once more drawn Dale-warden from
his sheath, and many felt his point and edge.

But now, as they chased, came a rush of men upon them again, as though a
new onset were at hand.  That saw Face-of-god and Hall-ward and War-well,
and other wise leaders of men, and they bade their folk forbear the
chase, and lock their ranks to meet the onfall of this new wave of
foemen.  And they did so, and stood fast as a wall; but lo! the onrush
that drave up against them was but a fleeing shrieking throng, and no
longer an array of warriors, for many had cast away their weapons, and
were rushing they knew not whither; for they were being thrust on the
bitter edges of Face-of-god’s companies by the terror of the fleers from
the onset of the men of the Face, the Sickle, and the Vine, whom
Hall-face and Stone-face were leading, along with Folk-might.  Then once
again the men of Face-of-god gave forth the whoop of victory, and pressed
forward again, hewing their way through the throng of fleers, but turning
not to chase to the right or the left; while at their backs came on the
Shepherd-folk, who had swept down all that withstood them; for now indeed
was the Market-stead getting thinner of living men.

So led the War-leader his ordered ranks, till at last over the tangled
crowd of runaways he saw the banners of the Burg and the Face flashing
against the sun, and heard the roar of the kindreds as they drave the
chase towards them.  Then he lifted up his sword, and stood still, and
all the host behind him stayed and cast a huge shout up to the heavens,
and there they abode the coming of the other Dalesmen.

But the War-leader sent a message to Hound-under-Greenbury, bidding him
lead the Shepherds to the chase of the Dusky Men, who were now all
fleeing toward the northern outgate of the Market.  Howbeit he called to
mind the throng he had seen on the northern road before they were come
into the Market-stead, and deemed that way also death awaited the foemen,
even if the men of the kindreds forbore them.

But presently the space betwixt the Woodlanders and the men of the Face
was clear of all but the dead, so that friend saw the face of friend; and
it could be seen that the warriors of the Face were ruddy and smiling for
joy, because the battle had been easy to them, and but few of them had
fallen; for the Dusky Men who had left the Market-stead to fall on them,
had had room for fleeing behind them, and had speedily turned their backs
before the spear-casting of the men of the Face and the onrush of the
swordsmen.

There then stood these victorious men facing one another, and the
banner-bearers on either side came through the throng, and brought the
banners together between the two hosts; and the Wolf kissed the Face, and
the Sickle and the Vine met the Steer and the Bridge and the Bull: but
the Shepherds were yet chasing the fleers.

There in the forefront stood Hall-face the tall, with the joy of battle
in his eyes.  And Stone-face, the wise carle in war, stood solemn and
stark beside him; and there was the goodly body and the fair and kindly
visage of the Alderman smiling on the faces of his friends.  But as for
Folk-might, his face was yet white and aweful with anger, and he looked
restlessly up and down the front of the kindreds, though he spake no
word.

Then Face-of-god could no longer forbear, but he thrust Dale-warden into
his sheath, and ran forward and cast his arms about his father’s neck and
kissed him; and the blood of himself and of the foemen was on him, for he
had been hurt in divers places, but not sorely, because of the good
hammer-work of the Alderman.

Then he kissed his brother and Stone-face, and he took Folk-might by the
hand, and was on the point of speaking some word to him, when the ranks
of the Face opened, and lo! the Sun-beam in her bright war-gear, and the
sword girt to her side, and she unhurt and unsullied.

Then was it to him as when he met her first in Shadowy Vale, and he
thought of little else than her; but she stepped lightly up to him, and
unashamed before the whole host she kissed him on the mouth, and he cast
his mailed arms about her, and joy made him forget many things and what
was next to do, though even at that moment came afresh a great clamour of
shrieks and cries from the northern outgate of the Market-stead: and the
burning pile behind them cast a great wavering flame into the air,
contending with the bright sun of that fair day, now come hard on
noontide.  But ere he drew away his face from the Sun-beam’s, came memory
to him, and a sharp pang shot through his heart, as he heard Folk-might
say: ‘Where then is the Shield-may of Burgstead? where is the Bride?’

And Face-of-god said under his breath: ‘She is dead, she is dead!’  And
then he stared out straight before him and waited till someone else
should say it aloud.  But Bow-may stepped forward and said: ‘Chief of the
Wolf, be of good cheer; our kinswoman is hurt, but not deadly.’

The Alderman’s face changed, and he said: ‘Hast thou seen her, Bow-may?’

‘Nay,’ she said.  ‘How should I leave the battle? but others have told me
who have seen her.’

Folk-might stared into the ranks of men before him, but said nothing.
Said the Alderman: ‘Is she well tended?’

‘Yea, surely,’ said Bow-may, ‘since she is amongst friends, and there are
no foemen behind us.’

Then came a voice from Folk-might which said: ‘Now were it best to send
good men and deft in arms, and who know Silver-dale, from house to house,
to search for foemen who may be lurking there.’

The Alderman looked kindly and sadly on him and said:

‘Kinsman Stone-face, and Hall-face my son, the brunt of the battle is now
over, and I am but a simple man amongst you; therefore, if ye will give
me leave, I will go see this poor kinswoman of ours, and comfort her.’

They bade him go: so he sheathed his sword, and went through the press
with two men of the Steer toward the southern road; for the Bride had
been brought into a house nigh the corner of the Market-place.

But Face-of-god looked after his father as he went, and remembrance of
past days came upon him, and such a storm of grief swept over him, as he
thought of the Bride lying pale and bleeding and brought anigh to her
death, that he put his hands to his face and wept as a child that will
not be comforted; nor had he any shame of all those bystanders, who in
sooth were men good and kindly, and had no shame of his grief or
marvelled at it, for indeed their own hearts were sore for their lovely
kinswoman, and many of them also wept with Face-of-god.  But the Sun-beam
stood by and looked on her betrothed, and she thought many things of the
Bride, and was sorry, albeit no tears came into her eyes; then she looked
askance at Folk-might and trembled; but he said coldly, and in a loud
voice:

‘Needs must we search the houses for the lurking felons, or many a man
will yet be murdered.  Let Wood-wicked lead a band of men at once from
house to house.’

Then said a man of the Wolf hight Hardgrip: ‘Wood-wicked was slain
betwixt the bent and the houses.’

Said Folk-might: ‘Let it be Wood-wise then.’

But Bow-may said: ‘Wood-wise is even now hurt in the leg by a wounded
felon, and may not go afoot.’

Then said Folk-might: ‘Is Crow the Shaft-speeder anigh?’

‘Yea, here am I,’ quoth a tall man of fifty winters, coming from out the
ranks where stood the Wolves.

Said Folk-might: ‘Kinsman Crow, do thou take two score and ten of doughty
men who are not too hot-headed, and search every house about the
Market-place; but if ye come on any house that makes a stout defence,
send ye word thereof to the Mote-house, where we will presently be, and
we shall send you help.  Slay every felon that ye fall in with; but if ye
find in the houses any of the poor folk crouching and afraid, comfort
their hearts all ye may, and tell them that now is life come to them.’

So Crow fell to getting his band together, and presently departed with
them on his errand.




CHAPTER XLVII.  THE KINDREDS WIN THE MOTE-HOUSE.


THE din and tumult still came from the north side of the Market-place, so
that all the air was full of noise; and Face-of-god deemed that the
thralls had gotten weapons into their hands and were slaying their
masters.

Now he lifted up his face, and put his hand on Folk-might’s shoulder, and
said in a loud voice:

‘Kinsmen, it were well if our brother were to bid the banners into the
Mote-house of the Wolf, and let all the Host set itself in array before
the said house, and abide till the chasers of the foe come to us thither;
for I perceive that they are now become many, and are more than those of
our kindred.’

Then Folk-might looked at him with kind eyes, and said:

‘Thou sayest well, brother; even so let it be!’

And he lifted up his sword, and Face-of-god cried out in a loud voice:
‘Forward, banners! blow up horns! fare we forth with victory!’

So the Host drew its ranks together in good order, and they all set
forward, and old Stone-face took the Sun-beam by the hand and led on
behind Folk-might and the War-leader.  But when they came to the Hall,
then saw they how the steps that led up to the door were high and double,
going up from each side without any railing or fool-guard; and crowding
the stairs and the platform thereof was a band of the Dusky Men, as many
as could stand thereon, who shot arrows at the host of the kindreds,
howling like dogs, and chattering like apes; and arrows and spears came
from the windows of the Hall; yea, and on the very roof a score of these
felons were riding the ridge and mocking like the trolls of old days.

Now when they saw this they stayed a while, and men shielded them against
the shafts; but the leaders drew together in front of the Host, and
Folk-might fell to speech; and his face was very pale and stern; for now
he had had time to think of the case of the Bride, and fierce wrath, and
grief unholpen filled his soul.  So he said:

‘Brothers, this is my business to deal with; for I see before me the
stair that leadeth to the Mote-house of my people, and now would I sit
there whereas my fathers sat, when peace was on the Dale, as once more it
shall be to-morrow.  Therefore up this stair will I go, and none shall
hinder me; and let no man of the host follow me till I have entered into
the Hall, unless perchance I fall dead by the way; but stand ye still and
look on.’

‘Nay,’ said Face-of-god, ‘this is partly the business of the War-leader.
There are two stairs.  Be content to take the southern one, and I will
take the northern.  We shall meet on the plain stone at the top.’

But Hall-face said: ‘War-leader, may I speak?’

‘Speak, brother,’ said Face-of-god.

Said Hall-face: ‘I have done but little to-day, War-leader.  I would
stand by thee on the northern stair; so shall Folk-might be content, if
he doeth two men’s work who are not little-hearted.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘The doom of the War-leader is that Folk-might shall
fall on by the southern stair to slake his grief and increase his glory,
and Face-of-god and Hall-face by the northern.  Haste to the work, O
brothers!’

And he and Hall-face went to their places, while all looked on.  But the
Sun-beam, with her hand still in Stone-face’s, she turned white to the
lips, and stared with wild eyes before her, not knowing where she was;
for she had deemed that the battle was over, and Face-of-god saved from
it.

But Folk-might tossed up his head and laughed, and cried out, ‘At last,
at last!’  And his sword was in his hand, the Sleep-thorn to wit, a blade
of ancient fame; so now he let it fall and hang to his wrist by the
leash, while he clapped his hands together and uttered the Wolf-whoop
mightily, and all the men of the Wolf that were in the host, and the
Woodlanders withal, uttered it with him.  Then he put his shield over his
head and stood before the first of the steps, and the Dusky Men laughed
to see one man come against them, though there was death in their hearts.
But he laughed back at them in triumph, and set his foot on the step, and
let Sleep-thorn’s point go into the throat of a Dusky lord, and thrust
amongst them, hewing right and left, and tumbling men over the edge of
the stair, which was to them as the narrow path along the cliff-side that
hangeth over the unfathomed sea.  They hewed and thrust at him in turn;
but so close were they packed that their weapons crossed about him, and
one shielded him from the other, and they swayed staggering on that
fearful verge, while the Sleep-thorn crept here and there amongst them,
lulling their hot fury.  For, as desperate as they were, and fighting for
death and not for life, they had a horror of him and of the sea of hatred
below them, and feared where to set their feet, and he feared nought at
all, but from feet to sword-point was but an engine of slaughter, while
the heart within him throbbed with fury long held back as he thought upon
the Bride and her wounding, and all the wrongs of his people since their
Great Undoing.

So he smote and thrust, till him-seemed the throng of foes thinned before
him: with his sword-pommel he smote a lord of the Dusky Ones in the face,
so that he fell over the edge amongst the spears of the kindred; then he
thrust the point of Sleep-thorn towards the Hall-door through the breast
of another, and then it seemed to him that he had but one before him; so
he hove up the edges to cleave him down, but ere the stroke fell, close
to his ears exceeding loud rang out the cry, ‘For the Burg and the Face!
for the Face, for the Face!’ and he drew aback a little, and his eyes
cleared, and lo! it was Hall-face the tall, his long sword all reddened
with battle; and beside him stood Face-of-god, silent and panting, his
face pale with the fierce anger of the fight, and the weariness which was
now at last gaining upon him.  There stood those three with no other
living man upon the plain of the stairs.

Then Face-of-god turned shouting to the Folk, and cried:

‘Forth now with the banners!  For now is the Wolf come home.  On into the
Hall, O Kindred of the Gods!’

Then poured the Folk up over the stairs and into the Hall of the Wolf,
the banners flapping over their heads; and first went the War-leader and
Folk-might and Hall-face, and then the three delivered thralls,
Wolf-stone, God-swain, and Spear-fist, and Dallach with them, though both
he and Wolf-stone had been hurt in the battle; and then came blended
together the Men of the Face along with them of the Wolf who had entered
the Market-stead with them, and with these were Stone-face and Wood-wont
and Bow-may, leading the Sun-beam betwixt them; and now was she come to
herself again, though her face was yet pale, and her eyes gleamed as she
stepped across the threshold of the Hall.

But when a many were gotten in, and the first-comers had had time to
handle their weapons and look about them, a cry of the utmost wrath broke
from Folk-might and those others who remembered the Hall from of old.
For wretched and befouled was that well-builded house: the hangings rent
away; the goodly painted walls daubed and smeared with wicked tokens of
the Alien murderers: the floor, once bright with polished stones of the
mountain, and strewn with sweet-smelling flowers, was now as foul as the
den of the man-devouring troll of the heaths.  From the fair-carven roof
of oak and chestnut-beams hung ugly knots of rags and shapeless images of
the sorcery of the Dusky Men.  And furthermore, and above all, from the
last tie-beam of the roof over the daïs dangled four shapes of
men-at-arms, whom the older men of the Wolf knew at once for the embalmed
bodies of their four great chieftains, who had been slain on the day of
the Great Undoing; and they cried out with horror and rage as they saw
them hanging there in their weapons as they had lived.

There was the Hostage of the Earth, his shield painted with the green
world circled with the worm of the sea.  There was the older Folk-might,
the uncle of the living man, bearing a shield with an oak and a lion done
thereon.  There was Wealth-eker, on whose shield was done a golden sheaf
of wheat.  There was he who bore a name great from of old, Folk-wolf to
wit, bearing on his shield the axe of the hewer.  There they hung, dusty,
befouled, with sightless eyes and grinning mouths, in the dimmed sunlight
of the Hall, before the eyes of that victorious Host, stricken silent at
the sight of them.

Underneath them on the daïs stood the last remnant of the battle of the
Dusky Men; and they, as men mad with coming death, shook their weapons,
and with shrieking laughter mocked at the overcomers, and pointed to the
long-dead chiefs, and called on them in the tongue of the kindreds to
come down and lead their dear kinsmen to the high-seat; and then they
cried out to the living warriors of the Wolf, and bade them better their
deed of slaying, and set to work to make alive again, and cause their
kinsmen to live merry on the earth.

With that last mock they handled their weapons and rushed howling on the
warriors to meet their death; nor was it long denied them; for the sword
of the Wolf, the axe of the Woodland, and the spear of the Dale soon made
an end of the dreadful lives of these destroyers of the Folks.




CHAPTER XLVIII.  MEN SING IN THE MOTE-HOUSE.


THEN strode the Warriors of the Wolf over the bodies of the slain on to
the daïs of their own Hall; and Folk-might led the Sun-beam by the hand,
and now was his sword in its sheath, and his face was grown calm, though
it was stern and sad.  But even as he trod the daïs comes a slim swain of
the Wolves twisting himself through the throng, and so maketh way to
Folk-might, and saith to him:

‘Chieftain, the Alderman of Burgdale sendeth me hither to say a word to
thee; even this, which I am to tell to thee and the War-leader both: It
is most true that our kinswoman the Bride will not die, but live.  So
help me, the Warrior and the Face!  This is the word of the Alderman.’

When Folk-might heard this, his face changed and he hung his head; and
Face-of-god, who was standing close by, beheld him and deemed that tears
were falling from his eyes on to the hall-floor.  As for him, he grew
exceeding glad, and he turned to the Sun-beam and met her eyes, and saw
that she could scarce refrain her longing for him; and he was abashed for
the sweetness of his love.  But she drew close up to him, and spake to
him softly and said:

‘This is the day that maketh amends; and yet I long for another day.
When I saw thee coming to me that first day in Shadowy Vale, I thought
thee so goodly a warrior that my heart was in my mouth.  But now how
goodly thou art!  For the battle is over, and we shall live.’

‘Yea,’ said Face-of-god, ‘and none shall begrudge us our love.  Behold
thy brother, the hard-heart, the warrior; he weepeth because he hath
heard that the Bride shall live.  Be sure then that she shall not gainsay
him.  O fair shall the world be to-morrow!’

But she said: ‘O Gold-mane, I have no words.  Is there no minstrelsy
amongst us?’

Now by this time were many of the men of the Wolf and the Woodlanders
gathered on the daïs of the Hall; and the Dalesmen noting this, and
wotting that these men were now in their own Mote-house, withdrew them as
they might for the press toward the nether end thereof.  That the
Sun-beam noted, and that all those about her save the War-leader were of
the kindreds of the Wolf and the Woodland, and, still speaking softly,
she said to Face-of-god:

‘Gold-mane, meseemeth I am now in my wrong place; for now the Wolf
raiseth up his head, but I am departing from him.  Surely I should now be
standing amongst my people of the Face, whereto I am going ere long.’

He said: ‘Beloved, I am now become thy kindred and thine home, and it is
meet for thee to stand beside me.’

She cast her eyes adown and answered not; and she fell a-pondering of how
sorely she had desired that fair dale, and now she would leave it, and be
content and more than content.

But now the kindreds had sundered, they upon the daïs ranked themselves
together there in the House which their fathers had builded; and when
they saw themselves so meetly ordered, their hearts being full with the
sweetness of hope accomplished and the joy of deliverance from death,
song arose amongst them, and they fell to singing together; and this is
somewhat of their singing:

      Now raise we the lay
      Of the long-coming day!
      Bright, white was the sun
      When we saw it begun:
      O’er its noon now we live;
      It hath ceased not to give;
      It shall give, and give more
      From the wealth of its store.
   O fair was the yesterday!  Kindly and good
   Was the wasteland our guester, and kind was the wood;
   Though below us for reaping lay under our hand
   The harvest of weeping, the grief of the land;
   Dumb cowered the sorrow, nought daring to cry
   On the help of to-morrow, the deed drawing nigh.

      All increase throve
      In the Dale of our love;
      There the ox and the steed
      Fed down the mead;
      The grapes hung high
      ’Twixt earth and sky,
      And the apples fell
      Round the orchard well.
   Yet drear was the land there, and all was for nought;
   None put forth a hand there for what the year wrought,
   And raised it o’erflowing with gifts of the earth.
   For man’s grief was growing beside of the mirth
   Of the springs and the summers that wasted their wealth;
   And the birds, the new-comers, made merry by stealth.

      Yet here of old
      Abode the bold;
      Nor had they wailed
      Though the wheat had failed,
      And the vine no more
      Gave forth her store.
      Yea, they found the waste good
      For the fearless of mood.
   Then to these, that were dwelling aloof from the Dale,
   Fared the wild-wind a-telling the worst of the tale;
   As men bathed in the morning they saw in the pool
   The image of scorning, the throne of the fool.
   The picture was gleaming in helm and in sword,
   And shone forth its seeming from cups of the board.

      Forth then they came
      With the battle-flame;
      From the Wood and the Waste
      And the Dale did they haste:
      They saw the storm rise,
      And with untroubled eyes
      The war-storm they met;
      And the rain ruddy-wet.
   O’er the Dale then was litten the Candle of Day,
   Night-sorrow was smitten, and gloom fled away.
   How the grief-shackles sunder!  How many to morn
   Shall awaken and wonder how gladness was born!
   O wont unto sorrow, how sweet unto you
   Shall be pondering to-morrow what deed is to do!

      Fell many a man
      ’Neath the edges wan,
      In the heat of the play
      That fashioned the day.
      Praise all ye then
      The death of men,
      And the gift of the aid
      Of the unafraid!
   O strong are the living men mighty to save,
   And good is their giving, and gifts that we have!
   But the dead, they that gave us once, never again;
   Long and long shall they save us sore trouble and pain.
   O Banner above us, O God of the strong,
   Love them as ye love us that bore down our wrong!

So they sang in the Hall; and there was many a man wept, as the song
ended, for those that should never see the good days of the Dale, and all
the joy that was to be; and men swore, by all that they loved, that they
would never forget those that had fallen in the Winning of Silver-dale;
and that when each year the Cups of Memory went round, they should be no
mere names to them, but the very men whom they had known and loved.




CHAPTER XLIX.  DALLACH FARETH TO ROSE-DALE: CROW TELLETH OF HIS ERRAND:
THE KINDREDS EAT THEIR MEAT IN SILVER-DALE.


NOW Dallach, who had gone away for a while, came back again into the
Hall; and at his back were a half score of men who bore ladders with
them: they were stout men, clad in scanty and ragged raiment, but girt
with swords and bearing axes, those of them who were not handling the
ladders.  Men looked on them curiously, because they saw them to be of
the roughest of the thralls.  They were sullen and fierce-eyed to behold,
and their hands and bare arms were flecked with blood; and it was easy to
see that they had been chasing the fleers, and making them pay for their
many torments of past days.

But when Face-of-god beheld this he cried out: ‘Ho, Dallach! is it so
that thou hast bethought thee to bring in hither men to fall to the
cleansing of the Hall, and to do away the defiling of the Dusky Men?’

‘Even so, War-leader,’ said Dallach; ‘also ye shall know that all battle
is over in Silver-stead; for the thralls fell in numbers not to be
endured on the Dusky Men who had turned their backs to us, and hindered
them from fleeing north.  But though they have slain many, they have not
slain all, and the remnant have fled by divers ways westaway, that they
may gain the wood and the ways to Rose-dale; and the stoutest of the
thralls are at their heels, and ever as they go fresh men from the fields
join in the chase with great joy.  I have gathered together of the best
of them two hundreds and a half well-armed; and if thou wilt give me
leave, I will get to me yet more, and follow hard on the fleers, and so
get me home to Rose-dale; for thither will these runaways to meet whatso
of their kind may be left there.  Also I would fain be there to set some
order amongst the poor folk of mine own people, whom this day’s work hath
delivered from torment.  And if thou wilt suffer a few men of the
Dalesmen to come along with me, then shall all things be better done
there.’

‘Luck go with thine hands!’ said Face-of-god.  ‘Take whomso thou wilt of
the Burgdalers that have a mind to fare with thee to the number of five
score; and send word of thy thriving to Folk-might, the chieftain of the
Dale; as for us, meseemeth that we shall abide here no long while.  How
sayest thou, Folk-might, shall Dallach go?’

Then Folk-might, who stood close beside him, looked up and reddened
somewhat, as a man caught heedless when he should be heedful; but he
looked kindly on Face-of-god, and said:

‘War-leader, so long as thou art in the Dale which ye kindreds have won
back for us, thou art the chieftain, and no other, and I bid thee do as
thou wilt in this matter, and in all things; and I hereby give command to
all my kindred to do according to thy will everywhere and always, as they
love me; and indeed I deem that thy will shall be theirs; since it is
only fools who know not their well-wishers.  How say ye, kinsmen?’

Then those about cried out: ‘Hail to Face-of-god!  Hail to the Dalesmen!
Hail to our friends!’

But Folk-might went up to Face-of-god, and threw his arms about him and
kissed him, and he said therewithal, so that most men heard him:

‘Herewith I kiss not only thee, thou goodly and glorious warrior! but
this kiss and embrace is for all the men of the kindreds of the Dale and
the Shepherds; since I deem that never have men more valiant dwelt upon
the earth.’

Therewith all men shouted for joy of him, and were exceeding glad; but
Folk-might spake apart to Face-of-god and said:

‘Brother, I suppose that thou wilt deem it good to abide in this Hall or
anigh it; for hereabouts now is the heart of the Host.  But as for me, I
would have leave to depart for a little; since I have an errand, whereof
thou mayest wot.’

Then Face-of-god smiled on him, and said: ‘Go, and all good go with thee;
and tell my father that I would have tidings, since I may not be there.’
So he spake; yet in his heart was he glad that he might not go to behold
the Bride lying sick and sorry.  But Folk-might departed without more
words; and in the door of the Hall he met Crow the Shaft-speeder, who
would have spoken to him, and given him the tidings; but Folk-might said
to him: ‘Do thine errand to the War-leader, who is within the Hall.’  And
so went on his way.

Then came Crow up the Hall, and stood before Face-of-god and said:
‘War-leader, we have done that which was to be done, and have cleared all
the houses about the Market-stead.  Moreover, by the rede of Dallach we
have set certain men of the poor folk of the Dale, who are well looked to
by the others, to the burying of the slain felons; and they be digging
trenches in the fields on the north side of the Market-stead, and carry
the carcasses thither as they may.  But the slain whom they find of the
kindreds do they array out yonder before this Hall.  In all wise are
these men tame and biddable, save that they rage against the Dusky Men,
though they fear them yet.  As for us, they deem us Gods come down from
heaven to help them.  So much for what is good: now have I an ill word to
say; to wit, that in the houses whereas we have found many thralls alive,
yet also have we found many dead; for amongst these murder-carles were
some of an evil sort, who, when they saw that the battle would go against
them, rushed into the houses hewing down all before them—man, woman, and
child; so that many of the halls and chambers we saw running blood like
to shambles.  To be short: of them whom they were going to hew to the
Gods, we have found thirteen living and three dead, of which latter is
one woman; and of the living, seven women; and all these, living and
dead, with the leaden shackles yet on them wherein they should be burned.
To all these and others whom we have found, we have done what of service
we could in the way of victual and clothes, so that they scarce believe
that they are on this lower earth.  Moreover, I have with me two score of
them, who are men of some wits, and who know of the stores of victual and
other wares which the felons had, and these will fetch and carry for you
as much as ye will.  Is all done rightly, War-leader?’

‘Right well,’ said Face-of-god, ‘and we give thee our thanks therefor.
And now it were well if these thy folk were to dight our dinner for us in
some green field the nighest that may be, and thither shall all the Host
be bidden by sound of horn.  Meantime, let us void this Hall till it be
cleansed of the filth of the Dusky Ones; but hereafter shall we come
again to it, and light a fire on the Holy Hearth, and bid the Gods and
the Fathers come back and behold their children sitting glad in the
ancient Hall.’

Then men shouted and were exceeding joyous; but Face-of-god said once
more: ‘Bear ye a bench out into the Market-place over against the door of
this Hall: thereon will I sit with other chieftains of the kindreds, that
whoso will may have recourse to us.’

So therewith all the men of the kindreds made their ways out of the Hall
and into the Market-stead, which was by this time much cleared of the
slaughtered felons; and the bale for the burnt-offering was now but
smouldering, and a thin column of blue smoke was going up wavering amidst
the light airs of the afternoon.  Men were somewhat silent now; for they
were stiff and weary with the morning’s battle; and a many had been hurt
withal; and on many there yet rested the after-grief of battle, and
sorrow for the loss of friends and well-wishers.

For in the battle had fallen one long hundred and two of the men of the
Host; and of these were two score and five of the kindreds of the Steer,
the Bull, and the Bridge, who had made such valiant onslaught by the
southern road.  Of the Shepherds died one score save three; for though
they scattered the foe at once, yet they fell on with such headlong
valour, rather than wisely, that many were trapped in the throng of the
Dusky Men.  Of the Woodlanders were slain one score and nine; for hard
had been the fight about them, and no man of them spared himself one
whit.  Of the men of the Wolf, who were but a few, fell sixteen men, and
all save two of these in Face-of-god’s battle.  Of the Burgdale men whom
Folk-might led, to wit, them of the Face, the Vine, and the Sickle, were
but seven men slain outright.  In this tale are told all those who died
of their hurts after the day of battle.  Therewithal many others were
sorely hurt who mended, and went about afterwards hale and hearty.

So as the folk abode in the Market-place, somewhat faint and weary, they
heard horns blow up merrily, and Crow the Shaft-speeder came forth and
stood on the mound of the altar, and bade men fare to dinner, and
therewith he led the way, bearing in his hand the banner of the Golden
Bushel, of which House he was; and they followed him into a fair and
great mead on the southwest of Silver-stead, besprinkled about with
ancient trees of sweet chestnut.  There they found the boards spread for
them with the best of victual which the poor down-trodden folk knew how
to dight for them; and especially was there great plenty of good wine of
the sun-smitten bents.

So they fell to their meat, and the poor folk, both men and women, served
them gladly, though they were somewhat afeard of these fierce
sword-wielders, the Gods who had delivered them.  The said thralls were
mostly not of those who had fallen so bitterly on their fleeing masters,
but were men and women of the households, not so roughly treated as the
others, that is to say, those who had been wont to toil under the lash in
the fields and the silver-mines, and were as wild as they durst be.

As for these waiting-thralls, the men of the kindreds were gentle and
blithe with them, and often as they served them would they stay their
hands (and especially if they were women), and would draw down their
heads to put a morsel in their mouths, or set the wine-cup to their lips;
and they would stroke them and caress them, and treat them in all wise as
their dear friends.  Moreover, when any man was full, he would arise and
take hold of one of the thralls, and set him in his place, and serve him
with meat and drink, and talk with him kindly, so that the poor folk were
much bewildered with joy.  And the first that arose from table were the
Sun-beam and Bow-may and Hall-face, with many of the swains and the women
of the Woodlanders; and they went from table to table serving the others.

The Sun-beam had done off her armour, and went about exceeding fair and
lovely in her kirtle; but Bow-may yet bore her hauberk, for she loved it,
and indeed it was so fine and well-wrought that it was no great burden.
Albeit she had gone down with the Sun-beam and other women to a fair
stream thereby, and there had they bathed and washed themselves; and
Bow-may’s hurts, which were not great, had been looked to and bound up
afresh, and she had come to table unhelmed, with a wreath of wind-flowers
round her head.

There then they feasted; and their hearts were strengthened by the meat
and drink; and if sorrow were blended with their joy, yet were they
high-hearted through both joy and sorrow, looking forward to the good
days to be in the Dales at the Roots of the Mountains, and the love and
fellowship of Folks and of Houses.

But as for Face-of-god, he went not to the meadow, but abode sitting on
the bench in the Market-place, where were none else now of the kindreds
save the appointed warders.  They had brought him a morsel and a cup of
wine, and he had eaten and drunk; and now he sat there with Dale-warden
lying sheathed across his knees, and seeming to gaze on the thralls of
Silver-dale busied in carrying away the bodies of the slain felons, after
they had stripped them of their raiment and weapons.  Yet indeed all this
was before his eyes as a picture which he noted not.  Rather he sat
pondering many things; wondering at his being there in Silver-dale in the
hour of victory; longing for the peace of Burgdale and the bride-chamber
of the Sun-beam.  Then went his thought out toward his old playmate lying
hurt in Silver-dale; and his heart was grieved because of her, yet not
for long, though his thought still dwelt on her; since he deemed that she
would live and presently be happy—and happy thenceforward for many years.
So pondered Face-of-god in the Market-place of Silver-dale.




CHAPTER L.  FOLK-MIGHT SEETH THE BRIDE AND SPEAKETH WITH HER.


NOW tells the tale of Folk-might, that he went his ways from the Hall to
the house where the Bride lay; and the swain who had brought the message
went along with him, and he was proud of walking beside so mighty a
warrior, and he talked to Folk-might as they went; and the sound of his
voice was irksome to the chieftain, but he made as though he hearkened.
Yet when they came to the door of the house, which was just out of the
Place on the Southern road (for thereby had the Bride fallen to earth),
he could withhold his grief no longer, but turned on the threshold and
laid his head on the door-jamb, and sobbed and wept till the tears fell
down like rain.  And the boy stood by wondering, and wishing that
Folk-might would forbear weeping, but durst not speak to him.

In a while Folk-might left weeping and went in, and found a fair hall
sore befouled by the felons, and in the corner on a bed covered with furs
the wounded woman; and at first sight he deemed her not so pale as he
looked to see her, as she lay with her long dark-red hair strewed over
the pillow, her head moving about wearily.  A linen cloth was thrown over
her body, but her arms lay out of it before her.  Beside her sat the
Alderman, his face sober enough, but not as one in heavy sorrow; and
anigh him was another chair as if someone had but just got up from it.
There was no one else in the hall save two women of the Woodlanders, one
of whom was cooking some potion on the hearth, and another was sweeping
the floor anigh of bran or some such stuff, which had been thrown down to
sop up the blood.

So Folk-might went up to the Bride, sorely dreading the image of death
which she had grown to be, and sorely loving the woman she was and would
be.

He knelt down by the bedside, heeding Iron-face little, though he nodded
friendly to him, and he held his face close to hers; but she had her eyes
shut and did not open them till he had been there a little while; and
then they opened and fixed themselves on his without surprise or change.
Then she lifted her right hand (for it was in her left shoulder and side
that she had been hurt) and slowly laid it on his head, and drew his face
to hers and kissed it fondly, as she both smiled and let the tears run
over from her eyes.  Then she spake in a weak voice:

‘Thou seest, chieftain and dear friend, that I may not stand by thy
victorious side to-day.  And now, though I were fain if thou wouldst
never leave me, yet needs must thou go about thy work, since thou art
become the Alderman of the Folk of Silver-dale.  Yea, and even if thou
wert not to go from me, yet in a manner should I go from thee.  For I am
grievously hurt, and I know by myself, and also the leeches have told me,
that the fever is a-coming on me; so that presently I shall not know
thee, but may deem thee to be a woman, or a hound, or the very Wolf that
is the image of the Father of thy kindred; or even, it may be, someone
else—that I have played with time agone.’

Her voice faltered and faded out here, and she was silent a while; then
she said:

‘So depart, kind friend and dear love, bearing this word with thee, that
should I die, I call on Iron-face my kinsman to bear witness that I bid
thee carry me to bale in Silver-dale, and lay mine ashes with the ashes
of thy Fathers, with whom thine own shall mingle at the last, since I
have been of the warriors who have helped to bring thee aback to the land
of thy folk.’

Then she smiled and shut her eyes and said: ‘And if I live, as indeed I
hope, and how glad and glad I shall be to live, then shalt thou bring me
to thy house and thy bed, that I may not depart from thee while both our
lives last.’

And she opened her eyes and looked at him; and he might not speak for a
while, so ravished as he was betwixt joy and sorrow.  But the Alderman
arose and took a gold ring from off his arm, and spake:

‘This is the gold ring of the God of the Face, and I bear it on mine arm
betwixt the Folk and the God in all man-motes, and I bore it through the
battle to-day; and it is as holy a ring as may be; and since ye are
plighting troth, and I am the witness thereof, it were good that ye held
this ring together and called the God to witness, who is akin to the God
of the Earth, as we all be.  Take the ring, Folk-might, for I trust thee;
and of all women now alive would I have this woman happy.’

So Folk-might took the ring and thrust his hand through it, and took her
hand, and said:

‘Ye Fathers, thou God of the Face, thou Earth-god, thou Warrior, bear
witness that my life and my body are plighted to this woman, the Bride of
the House of the Steer!’

His face was flushed and bright as he spoke, but as his words ceased he
noted how feebly her hand lay in his, and his face fell, and he gazed on
her timidly.  But she lay quiet, and said softly and slowly:

‘O Fathers of my kindred!  O Warrior and God of the Earth! bear witness
that I plight my troth to this man, to lie in his grave if I die, and in
his bed if I live.’

And she smiled on him again, and then closed her eyes; but opened them
presently once more, and said:

‘Dear friend, how fared it with Gold-mane to-day?’

Said Folk-might: ‘So well he did, that none might have done better.  He
fared in the fight as if he had been our Father the Warrior: he is a
great chieftain.’

She said: ‘Wilt thou give him this message from me, that in no wise he
forget the oath which he swore upon the finger-ring as it lay on the
sundial of the Garden of the Face?  And say, moreover, that I am sorry
that we shall part, and have between us such breadth of wild-wood and
mountain-neck.’

‘Yea, surely will I give thy message,’ said Folk-might; and in his heart
he rejoiced, because he heard her speak as if she were sure of life.
Then she said faintly:

‘It is now thy work to depart from me, and to do as it behoveth a
chieftain of the people and the Alderman of Silver-dale.  Depart, lest
the leeches chide me: farewell, my dear!’

So he laid his face to hers and kissed her, and rose up and embraced
Iron-face, and went his ways without looking back.

But just over the threshold he met old Hall-ward of the House of the
Steer, who was at point to enter, and he greeted him kindly.  The old man
looked on him steadily, and said: ‘To-morrow or the day after I will
utter a word to thee, O Chief of the Wolf.’

‘In a good hour,’ said Folk-might, ‘for all thy words are true.’
Therewith he gat him away from the house, and came to Face-of-god, where
he sat before the altar of the Crooked Sword; and now were the chiefs
come back from their meat, and were sitting with him; there also were
Wood-father and Wood-wont; but Bow-may was with the Sun-beam, who was
resting softly in the fair meadow after all the turmoil.

So men made place for Folk-might beside the War-leader, who looked upon
his face, and saw that it was sober and unsmiling, but not heavy or moody
with grief.  So he deemed that all was as well as it might be with the
Bride, and with a good heart fell to taking counsel with the others; and
kindly and friendly were the redes which they held there, with no
gainsaying of man by man, for the whole folk was glad at heart.

So there they ordered all matters duly for that present time, and by then
they had made an end, it was past sunset, and men were lodged in the
chief houses about the Market-stead.

Albeit, though they ate their meat with all joy of heart, and were merry
in converse one with the other, the men of the Wolf would by no means
feast in their Hall again till it had been cleansed and hallowed anew.




CHAPTER LI.  THE DEAD BORNE TO BALE: THE MOTE-HOUSE RE-HALLOWED.


ON the morrow they bore to bale their slain men, and there withal what
was left of the bodies of the four chieftains of the Great Undoing.  They
brought them into a most fair meadow to the west of Silver-stead, where
they had piled up a very great bale for the burning.  In that meadow was
the Doom-ring and Thing-stead of the Folk of the Wolf, and they had
hallowed it when they had first conquered Silver-dale, and it was deemed
far holier than the Mote-house aforesaid, wherein the men of the kindred
might hold no due court; but rather it was a Feast-hall, and a house
where men had converse together, and wherein precious things and tokens
of the Fathers were stored up.

The Thing-stead in the meadow was flowery and well-grassed, and a little
stream winding about thereby nearly cast a ring around it; and beyond the
stream was a full fair grove of oak-trees, very tall and ancient.  There
then they burned the dead of the Host, wrapped about in exceeding fair
raiment.  And when the ashes were gathered, the men of Burgdale and the
Shepherds left those of their folk for the kindred to bury there in
Silver-dale; for they said that they had a right to claim such guesting
for them that had helped to win back the Dale.

But when the Burning was done and the bale quenched, and the ashes
gathered and buried (and that was on the morrow), then men bore forth the
Banners of the Jaws of the Wolf, and the Red Hand, and the Silver Arm,
and the Golden Bushel, and the Ragged Sword, and the Wolf of the
Woodland; and with great joy and triumph they brought them into the
Mote-house and hung them up over the daïs; and they kindled fire on the
Holy Hearth by holding up a disk of bright glass to the sun; and then
they sang before the banners.  And this is somewhat of the song that they
sang before them:

   Why are ye wending?  O whence and whither?
      What shineth over the fallow swords?
   What is the joy that ye bear in hither?
      What is the tale of your blended words?

   No whither we wend, but here have we stayed us,
      Here by the ancient Holy Hearth;
   Long have the moons and the years delayed us,
      But here are we come from the heart of the dearth.

   We are the men of joy belated;
      We are the wanderers over the waste;
   We are but they that sat and waited,
      Watching the empty winds make haste.

   Long, long we sat and knew no others,
      Save alien folk and the foes of the road;
   Till late and at last we met our brothers,
      And needs must we to the old abode.

   For once on a day they prayed for guesting;
      And how were we then their bede to do?
   Wild was the waste for the people’s resting,
      And deep the wealth of the Dale we knew.

   Here were the boards that we must spread them
      Down in the fruitful Dale and dear;
   Here were the halls where we would bed them:
      And how should we tarry otherwhere?

   Over the waste we came together:
      There was the tangle athwart the way;
   There was the wind-storm and the weather;
      The red rain darkened down the day.

   But that day of the days what grief should let us,
      When we saw through the clouds the dale-glad sun?
   We tore at the tangle that beset us,
      And stood at peace when the day was done.

   Hall of the Happy, take our greeting!
      Bid thou the Fathers come and see
   The Folk-signs on thy walls a-meeting,
      And deem to-day what men we be.

   Look on the Holy Hearth new-litten,
      How the sparks fly twinkling up aloof!
   How the wavering smoke by the sunlight smitten,
      Curls up around the beam-rich roof!

   For here once more is the Wolf abiding,
      Nor ever more from the Dale shall wend,
   And never again his head be hiding,
      Till all days be dark and the world have end.




CHAPTER LII.  OF THE NEW BEGINNING OF GOOD DAYS IN SILVER-DALE.


ON the third day there was high-tide and great joy amongst all men from
end to end of the Dale; and the delivered thralls were feasted and made
much of by the kindreds, so that they scarce knew how to believe their
own five senses that told them the good tidings.

For none strove to grieve them and torment them; what they would, that
did they, and they had all things plenteously; since for all was there
enough and to spare of goods stored up for the Dusky Men, as corn and
wine and oil and spices, and raiment and silver.  Horses were there also,
and neat and sheep and swine in abundance.  Withal there was the good and
dear land; the waxing corn on the acres; the blossoming vines on the
hillside; and about the orchards and alongside the ways, the plum-trees
and cherry-trees and pear-trees that had cast their blossom and were
overhung with little young fruit; and the fair apple-trees a-blossoming,
and the chestnuts spreading their boughs from their twisted trunks over
the green grass.  And there was the goodly pasture for the horses and the
neat, and the thymy hill-grass for the sheep; and beyond it all, the
thicket of the great wood, with its unfailing store of goodly timber of
ash and oak and holly and yoke-elm.  There need no man lack unless man
compelled him, and all was rich enough and wide enough for the waxing of
a very great folk.

Now, therefore, men betook them to what was their own before the coming
of the Dusky Men; and though at first many of the delivered thrall-folk
feasted somewhat above measure, and though there were some of them who
were not very brisk at working on the earth for their livelihood; yet
were the most part of them quick of wit and deft of hand, and they mostly
fell to presently at their cunning, both of husbandry and handicraft.
Moreover, they had great love of the kindreds, and especially of the
Woodlanders, and strove to do all things that might pleasure them.  And
as for those who were dull and listless because of their many torments of
the last ten years, they would at least fetch and carry willingly for
them of the kindreds; and these last grudged them not meat and raiment
and house-room, even if they wrought but little for it, because they
called to mind the evil days of their thralldom, and bethought them how
few are men’s days upon the earth.

Thus all things throve in Silver-dale, and the days wore on toward the
summer, and the Yule-tide rest beyond it, and the years beyond and far
beyond the winning of Silver-dale.




CHAPTER LIII.  OF THE WORD WHICH HALL-WARD OF THE STEER HAD FOR
FOLK-MIGHT.


BUT of the time then passing, it is to be said that the whole host abode
in Silver-dale in great mirth and good liking, till they should hear
tidings of Dallach and his company, who had followed hot-foot on the
fleers of the Dusky Men.  And on the tenth day after the battle,
Iron-face and his two sons and Stone-face were sitting about sunset under
a great oak-tree by that stream-side which ran through the Mote-stead;
there also was Folk-might, somewhat distraught because of his love for
the Bride, who was now mending of her hurts.  As they sat there in all
content they saw folk coming toward them, three in number, and as they
drew nigher they saw that it was old Hall-ward of the Steer, and the
Sun-beam and Bow-may following him hand in hand.

When they came to the brook Bow-may ran up to the elder to help him over
the stepping-stones; which she did as one who loved him, as the old man
was stark enough to have waded the water waist-deep.  She was no longer
in her war-gear, but was clad after her wont of Shadowy Vale, in nought
but a white woollen kirtle.  So she stood in the stream beside the
stones, and let the swift water ripple up over her ankles, while the
elder leaned on her shoulder and looked down upon her kindly.  The
Sun-beam followed after them, stepping daintily from stone to stone, so
that she was a fair sight to see; her face was smiling and happy, and as
she stepped forth on to the green grass the colour flushed up in it, but
she cast her eyes adown as one somewhat shamefaced.

So the chieftains rose up before the leader of the Steer, and Folk-might
went up to him, and greeted him, and took his hand and kissed him on the
cheek.  And Hall-ward said:

‘Hail to the chiefs of the kindred, and my earthly friends!’

Then Folk-might bade him sit down by him, and all the men sat down again;
but the Sun-beam leaned her back against a sapling ash hard by, her feet
set close together; and Bow-may went to and fro in short turns, keeping
well within ear-shot.

Then said Hall-ward: ‘Folk-might, I have prayed thy kinswoman Bow-may to
lead me to thee, that I might speak with thee; and it is good that I find
my kinsmen of the Face in thy company; for I would say a word to thee
that concerns them somewhat.’

Said Folk-might: ‘Guest, and warrior of the Steer, thy words are ever
good; and if this time thou comest to ask aught of me, then shall they be
better than good.’

Said Hall-ward: ‘Tell me, Folk-might, hast thou seen my daughter the
Bride to-day?’

‘Yea,’ said Folk-might, reddening.

‘What didst thou deem of her state?’ said Hall-ward.

Said Folk-might: ‘Thou knowest thyself that the fever hath left her, and
that she is mending.’

Hall-ward said: ‘In a few days belike we shall be wending home to
Burgdale: when deemest thou that the Bride may travel, if it were but on
a litter?’

Folk-might was silent, and Hall-ward smiled on him and said:

‘Wouldst thou have her tarry, O chief of the Wolf?’

‘So it is,’ said Folk-might, ‘that it might be labour lost for her to
journey to Burgdale at present.’

‘Thinkest thou?’ said Hall-ward; ‘hast thou a mind then that if she goeth
she shall speedily come back hither?’

‘It has been in my mind,’ said Folk-might, ‘that I should wed her.  Wilt
thou gainsay it?  I pray thee, Iron-face my friend, and ye Stone-face and
Hall-face, and thou, Face-of-god, my brother, to lay thy words to mine in
this matter.’

Then said Hall-ward stroking his beard: ‘There will be a seat missing in
the Hall of the Steer, and a sore lack in the heart of many a man in
Burgdale if the Bride come back to us no more.  We looked not to lose the
maiden by her wedding; for it is no long way betwixt the House of the
Steer and the House of the Face.  But now, when I arise in the morning
and miss her, I shall take my staff and walk down the street of
Burgstead; for I shall say, The Maiden hath gone to see Iron-face my
friend; she is well in the House of the Face.  And then shall I remember
how that the wood and the wastes lie between us.  How sayest thou,
Alderman?’

‘A sore lack it will be,’ said Iron-face; ‘but all good go with her!
Though whiles shall I go hatless down Burgstead street, and say, Now will
I go fetch my daughter the Bride from the House of the Steer; while many
a day’s journey shall lie betwixt us.’

Said Hall-ward: ‘I will not beat about the bush, Folk-might; what gift
wilt thou give us for the maiden?’

Said Folk-might: ‘Whatever is mine shall be thine; and whatsoever of the
Dale the kindred and the poor folk begrudge thee not, that shalt thou
have; and deemest thou that they will begrudge thee aught?  Is it
enough?’

Hall-ward said: ‘I wot not, chieftain; see thou to it!  Bow-may, my
friend, bring hither that which I would have from Silver-dale for the
House of the Steer in payment for our maiden.’

Then Bow-may came forward speedily, and went up to the Sun-beam, and led
her by the hand in front of Folk-might and Hall-ward and the other
chieftains.  Then Folk-might started, and leapt up from the ground; for,
sooth to say, he had been thinking so wholly of the Bride, that his
sister was not in his mind, and he had had no deeming of whither
Hall-ward was coming, though the others guessed well enough, and now
smiled on him merrily, when they saw how wild Folk-might stared.  As for
the Sun-beam, she stood there blushing like a rose in June, but looking
her brother straight in the face, as Hall-ward said:

‘Folk-might, chief of the Wolf, since thou wouldst take our maiden the
Bride away from us, I ask thee to make good her place with this maiden;
so that the House of the Steer may not lack, when they who are wont to
wed therein come to us and pray us for a bedfellow for the best of their
kindred.’

Then became Folk-might smiling and merry like unto the others, and he
said: ‘Chief of the Steer, this gift is thine, together with aught else
which thou mayst desire of us.’

Then he kissed the Sun-beam, and said: ‘Sister, we looked for this to
befall in some fashion.  Yet we deemed that he that should lead thee away
might abide with us for a moon or two.  But now let all this be, since if
thou art not to bear children to the kindreds of Silver-dale, yet shalt
thou bear them to their friends and fellows.  And now choose what gift
thou wilt have of us to keep us in thy memory.’

She said: ‘The memory of my people shall not fade from me; yet indeed I
ask thee for a gift, to wit, Bow-may, and the two sons of Wood-father
that are left since Wood-wicked was slain; and belike the elder and his
wife will be fain to go with their sons, and ye will not hinder them.’

‘Even so shall it be done,’ said Folk-might, and he was silent a while,
pondering; and then he said:

‘Lo you, friends! doth it not seem strange to you that peace sundereth as
well as war?  Indeed I deem it grievous that ye shall have to miss your
well-beloved kinswoman.  And for me, I am now grown so used to this woman
my sister, though at whiles she hath been masterful with me, that I shall
often turn about and think to speak to her, when there lie long days of
wood and waste betwixt her voice and mine.

The Sun-beam laughed in his face, though the tears stood in her eyes, as
she said: ‘Keep up thine heart, brother; for at least the way is shorter
betwixt Burgdale and Silver-dale than betwixt life and death; and the
road we shall learn belike.’

Said Hall-face: ‘So it is that my brother is no ill woodman, as ye
learned last autumn.’

Iron-face smiled, but somewhat sadly; for he beheld Face-of-god, who had
no eyes for anyone save the Sun-beam; and no marvel was that, for never
had she looked fairer.  And forsooth the War-leader was not utterly
well-pleased; for he was deeming that there would be delaying of his
wedding, now that the Sun-beam was to become a maid of the Steer; and in
his mind he half deemed that it would be better if he were to take her by
the hand and lead her home through the wild-wood, he and she alone; and
she looked on him shyly, as though she had a deeming of his thought.
Albeit he knew it might not be, that he, the chosen War-leader, should
trouble the peace of the kindred; for he wotted that all this was done
for peace’ sake.

So Hall-ward stood forth and took the Sun-beam’s right hand in his, and
said:

‘Now do I take this maiden, Sun-beam of the kindred of the Wolf, and lead
her into the House of the Steer, to be in all ways one of the maidens of
our House, and to wed in the blood wherein we have been wont to wed.
Neither from henceforth let anyone say that this woman is not of the
blood of the Steer; for we have given her our blood, and she is of us
duly and truly.’

Thereafter they talked together merrily for a little, and then turned
toward the houses, for the sun was now down; and as they went Iron-face
spake to his son, and said:

‘Gold-mane, wilt thou verily keep thine oath to wed the fairest woman in
the world?  By how much is this one fairer than my dear daughter who
shall no more dwell in mine house?’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Yea, father, I shall keep mine oath; for the Gods, who
know much, know that when I swore last Yule I was thinking of the fair
woman going yonder beside Hall-ward, and of none other.’

‘Ah, son!’ said Iron-face, ‘why didst thou beguile us?  Hadst thou but
told us the truth then!’

‘Yea, Alderman,’ said Face-of-god smiling, ‘and how thou wouldest have
raged against me then, when thou hast scarce forgiven me now!  In sooth,
father, I feared to tell you all: I was young; I was one against the
world.  Yea, yea; and even that was sweet to me, so sorely as I loved
her—Hast thou forgotten, father?’

Iron-face smiled, and answered not; and so came they to the house wherein
they were guested.




CHAPTER LIV.  TIDINGS OF DALLACH: A FOLK-MOTE IN SILVER-DALE.


THREE days thereafter came two swift runners from Rose-dale with tidings
of Dallach.  In all wise had he thriven, and had slain many of the
runaways, and had come happily to Rose-dale: therein by the mere shaking
of their swords had they all their will; for there were but a few of the
Dusky Warriors in the Dale, since the more part had fared to the
slaughter in Silver-stead.  Now therefore had Dallach been made Alderman
of Rose-dale; and the Burgdalers who had gone with him should abide the
coming thither of the rest of the Burgdale Host, and meantime of their
coming should uphold the new Alderman in Rose-dale.  Howbeit Dallach sent
word that it was not to be doubted but that many of the Dusky Men had
escaped to the woods, and should yet be the death of many a mother’s son,
unless it were well looked to.

And now the more part of the Burgdale men and the Shepherds began to look
toward home, albeit some amongst them had not been ill-pleased to abide
there yet a while; for life was exceeding soft to them there, though they
helped the poor folk gladly in their husbandry.  For especially the women
of the Dale, of whom many were very goodly, hankered after the fair-faced
tall Burgdalers, and were as kind to them as might be.  Forsooth not a
few, both carles and queens, of the old thrall-folk prayed them of
Burgdale to take them home thither, that they might see new things and
forget their old torments once for all, yea, even in dreams.  The
Burgdalers would not gainsay them, and there was no one else to hinder;
so that there went with the Burgdale men at their departure hard on five
score of the Silver-dale folk who were not of the kindreds.

And now was a great Folk-mote holden in Silver-dale, whereto the Burgdale
men and the Shepherds were bidden; and thereat the War-leader gave out
the morrow of the morrow for the day of the departure of the Host.  There
also were the matters of Silver-dale duly ordered: the Men of the Wolf
would have had the Woodlanders dwell with them in the fair-builded stead,
and take to them of the goodly stone houses there what they would; but
this they naysaid, choosing rather to dwell in scattered houses, which
they built for themselves at the utmost limit of the tillage.

Indeed, the most abode not even there a long while; for they loved the
wood and its deeds.  So they went forth into the wood, and cleared them
space to dwell in, and builded them halls such as they loved, and fell to
their old woodland crafts of charcoal-burning and hunting, wherein they
throve well.  And good for Silver-dale was their abiding there, since
they became a sure defence and stout outpost against all foemen.  For the
rest, wheresoever they dwelt, they were guest-cherishing and blithe, and
were well beloved by all people; and they wedded with the other Houses of
the Children of the Wolf.

As to the other matters whereof they took rede at this Folk-mote, they
had mostly to do with the warding of the Dale, and the learning of the
delivered thralls to handle weapons duly.  For men deemed it most like
that they would have to meet other men of the kindred of the Felons;
which indeed fell out as the years wore.

Moreover, Folk-might (by the rede of Stone-face) sent messengers to the
Plain and the Cities, unto men whom he knew there, doing them to wit of
the tidings of Silver-dale, and how that a peaceful and guest-loving
people, having good store of wares, now dwelt therein, so that chapmen
might have recourse thither.

Lastly spake Folk-might and said:

‘Guests and brothers-in-arms, we have been looking about our new house,
which was our old one, and therein we find great store of wares which we
need not, and which we can but use if ye use them.  Of your kindness
therefore we pray you to take of those things what ye can easily carry.
And if ye say the way is long, as indeed it is, since ye are bent on
going through the wood to Rose-dale, and so on to Burgdale, yet shall we
furnish you with beasts to bear your goods, and with such wains as may
pass through the woodland ways.’

Then rose up Fox of Upton and said: ‘O Folk-might, and ye men of the
Wolf, be it known unto you, that if we have done anything for your help
in the winning of Silver-dale, we have thus done that we might help
ourselves also, so that we might live in peace henceforward, and that we
might have your friendship and fellowship therewithal, so that here in
Silver-dale might wax a mighty folk who joined unto us should be strong
enough to face the whole world.  Such are the redes of wise men when they
go a-warring.  But we have no will to go back home again made rich with
your wealth; this hath been far from our thought in this matter.’

And there went up a murmur from all the Burgdalers yeasaying his word.

But Folk-might took up the word again and spake:

‘Men of Burgdale and the Sheepcotes, what ye say is both manly and
friendly; yet, since we look to see a road made plain through the
woodland betwixt Burgdale and Silver-dale, and that often ye shall face
us in the feast-hall, and whiles stand beside us in the fray, we must
needs pray you not to shame us by departing empty-handed; for how then
may we look upon your faces again?  Stone-face, my friend, thou art old
and wise; therefore I bid thee to help us herein, and speak for us to thy
kindred, that they naysay us not in this matter.’

Then stood up Stone-face and said: ‘Forsooth, friends, Folk-might is in
the right herein; for he may look for anger from the wights that come and
go betwixt his kindred and the Gods, if they see us faring back giftless
through the woods.  Moreover, now that ye have seen Silver-dale, ye may
wot how rich a land it is of all good things, and able to bring forth
enough and to spare.  And now meseemeth the Gods love this Folk that
shall dwell here; and they shall become a mighty Folk, and a part of our
very selves.  Therefore let us take the gifts of our friends, and thank
them blithely.  For surely, as saith Folk-might, henceforth the wood
shall become a road betwixt us, and the thicket a halting-place for
friends bearing goodwill in their hands.’

When he had spoken, men yeasaid his words and forbore the gifts no
longer; and the Folk-mote sundered in all loving-kindness.




CHAPTER LV.  DEPARTURE FROM SILVER-DALE.


ON morrow of the morrow were the Burgdale men and they of the Shepherds
gathered together in the Market-stead early in the morning, and they were
all ready for departure; and the men of the Wolf and the Woodlanders, and
of the delivered thralls a great many, stood round about them grieving
that they must go.  There was much talk between the folk of the Dale and
the Guests, and many promises were given and taken to come and go betwixt
the two Dales.  There also were the men of the thrall-folk who were to
wend home with the Burgdalers; and they had been stuffed with good things
by the men of the kindreds, and were as fain as might be.

As for the Sun-beam, she was somewhat out of herself at first, being
eager and restless beyond her wont, and yet at whiles weeping-ripe when
she called to mind that she was now leaving all those things, the gain
whereof had been a dream to her both waking and sleeping for these years
past.  But at last, as she stood in the door of the Mote-house, and
beheld all the throng of folk happy and friendly, it came over her that
she herself had done her full share to bring all this about, and that all
those pleasant places of Silver-dale now full of the goodly life of man
would be there even as she had striven for them, and that they would be a
part of her left behind, though she were dwelling otherwhere.

Therewithal she said to herself that it was now her part to wield the
life of men in Burgdale, and begin once more her days of a chieftain and
a swayer of the Folk, and the life of a stirring woman, which the edge of
the sword and the need of the hard hand-play had taken out of her hands
for a while, making her as a child in the hands of the strong wielders of
the blades.

So now she became calm once more, and her face was clad again with the
full measure of that majesty of beauty which had once overawed
Face-of-god amidst his love of her; and folk beheld her and marvelled at
her fairness, and said: ‘She hath an inward sorrow at leaving the fair
Dale wherein her Fathers dwelt, and where her mother’s ashes lie in
earth.’  Albeit now was her sorrow but little, and much was her hope, and
her foresight of days to be; though all the Dale, yea, every leaf and
twig of it whereby her feet had ever passed, and each stone of the fair
houses, was to her as a picture that she could look on from henceforth
for ever.

Of the Bride it is to be said that she was now much mended, and she
caused men bear her on a litter out into the Marketplace, that she might
look on the departure of her folk.  She had seen Face-of-god once and
again since the Day of Battle, and each time had been kind and blithe
with him; and for Iron-face, she loved him so well that she was ever loth
to let him depart from her, save when Folk-might was with her.

And now was the Alderman standing beside her, and she said to him:
‘Friend and kinsman, this is the day of departure, and though I must
needs abide behind, and am content to abide, yet doth mine heart ache
with the sundering; for to-morrow when I wake in the morning there will
be no more sending of a messenger to fetch thee to me.  Indeed, great
hath been the love between me and my people, and nought hath come between
us to mar it.  Now, kinsman, I would see Gold-mane, my cousin, that I may
bid him farewell; for who knoweth if I shall see him again hereafter?’

Then went Iron-face and found Face-of-god where he was speaking with
Folk-might and the chieftains, and said to him:

‘Come quickly, for thy cousin the Bride would speak with thee.’

Face-of-god reddened, and paled afterwards, but he went along with his
father silently; and his heart beat as he came and stood before the
litter whereas the Bride lay, clad all in white and propped up on fair
cushions of red silk.  She was frail to look on, and worn and pale yet;
but he deemed that she was very happy.

She smiled on him, and reached out her hand and said:

‘Welcome once more, cousin!’  And he held her hand and kissed it, and was
nigh weeping, so sore was he beset by a throng of memories concerning her
and him in the days when they were little; and he bethought him of her
loving-kindness of past days, beyond that of most children, beyond that
of most maidens; and how there was nothing in his life but she had a
share in it, till the day when he found the Hall on the Mountain.

So he said to her: ‘Kinswoman, is it well with thee?’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘I am now nigh whole of my hurts.’

He was silent a while; then he said:

‘And otherwise art thou merry at heart?’

‘Yea, indeed,’ said she; ‘yet thou wilt not find it hard to deem that I
am sorry of the sundering betwixt me and Burgdale.’

Again was he silent, and said in a while: ‘Dost thou deem that I wrought
that sundering?’

She smiled kindly on him and said: ‘Gold-mane, my playmate, thou art
become a mighty warrior and a great chief; but thou art not so mighty as
that.  Many things lay behind the sundering which were neither thou nor
I.’

‘Yet,’ said he, ‘it was but such a little time agone that all things
seemed so sure; and we—to both of us was the outlook happy.’

‘Let it be happy still,’ she said, ‘now begrudging is gone.  Belike the
sundering came because we were so sure, and had no defence against the
wearing of the days; even as it fareth with a folk that hath no foes.’

He smiled and said: ‘Even as it hath befallen _thy_ folk, O Bride, a
while ago.’

She reddened, and reached her hand to him, and he took it and held it,
and said: ‘Shall I see thee again as the days wear?’

Said she: ‘O chieftain of the Folk, thou shalt have much to do in
Burgdale, and the way is long.  Yet would I have thee see my children.
Forget not the token on my hand which thou holdest.  But now get thee to
thy folk with no more words; for after all, playmate, the sundering is
grievous to me, and I would not spin out the time thereof.  Farewell!’

He said no more, but stooped down and kissed her lips, and then turned
from her, and took his ways to the head of the Host, and fell to asking
and answering, and bidding and arraying; and in a little time was his
heart dancing with joy to think of the days that lay before him, wherein
now all seemed happy.

So was all arrayed for departure when it lacked three hours of noon.  As
Folk-might had promised, there were certain light wains drawn by bullocks
abiding the departure of the Host, and of sumpter bullocks and horses no
few; and all these were laden with fair gifts of the Dale, as silver, and
raiment, and weapons.  There were many things fair-wrought in the time of
the Sorrow, that henceforth should see but little sorrow.  Moreover,
there was plenty of provision for the way, both meal and wine, and sheep
and neat; and all things as fair as might be, and well-arrayed.

It was the Shepherds who were to lead the way; and after them were
arrayed the men of the Vine and the Sickle; then they of the Steer, the
Bridge, and the Bull; and lastly the House of the Face, with old
Stone-face leading them.  The Sun-beam was to journey along with the
House of the Steer, which had taken her in as a maiden of their blood;
and though she had so much liefer have fared with the House of the Face,
yet she went meekly as she was bidden, as one who has gotten a great
thing, and will make no stir about a small one.

Along with her were Wood-father and Wood-mother, and Wood-wise, now whole
of his hurt, and Wood-wont, and Bow-may.  Save Bow-may, they were not
very joyous; for they were fain of Silver-dale, and it irked them to
leave it; moreover, they also had liefer have gone along with the House
of the War-leader.

Last of all went those people of the once thralls of the Dusky Men who
had cast in their lot with the Burgdalers, and they were exceeding merry;
and especially the women of them, they were chattering like the stares in
the autumn evening, when they gather from the fields in the tall
elm-trees before they go to roost.

Now all the men of the Dale, both of the kindreds and of the thrall-folk,
made way for the Host and its havings, that they might go their ways down
the Dale; albeit the Woodlanders clung close to the line of their ancient
friends, and with them, as men who were sorry for the sundering, were
Wolf-stone and God-swain and Spear-fist.  But the chiefs, they drew
around Folk-might a little beside the way.

Now Red-coat of Waterless, who had been hurt, and was now whole again,
cast his arms about Folk-might and kissed him, and said:

‘All the way hence to Burgdale will I sow with good wishes for thee and
thine, and especially for my dear friend God-swain of the Silver Arm; and
I would wish and long that they might turn into spells to draw thy feet
to usward; for we love thee well.’

In like wise spake other of the Burgdalers; and Folk-might was kind and
blithe with them, and he said:

‘Friends, forget ye not that the way is no longer from you to us than it
is from us to you.  One half of this matter it is for you to deal with.’

‘True is that,’ said Red-beard of the Knolls, ‘but look you, Folk-might,
we be but simple husbandmen, and may not often stir from our meadows and
acres; even now I bethink me that May is amidst us, and I am beginning to
be drawn by the thought of the haysel.  Whereas thou—’ (and therewith he
reddened) ‘I doubt that thou hast little to do save the work of
chieftains, and we know that such work is but little missed if it be
undone.’

Thereat Folk-might laughed; and when the others saw that he laughed, they
laughed also, else had they foreborne for courtesy’s sake.

But Folk-might answered: ‘Nay, chief of the Sickle, I am not altogether a
chieftain, now we have gotten us peace; and somewhat of a husbandman
shall I be.  Moreover, doubt ye not that I shall do my utmost to behold
the fair Dale again; for it is but mountains that meet not.’

Now spake Face-of-god to Folk-might, smiling and somewhat softly, and
said: ‘Is all forgiven now, since the day when we first felt each other’s
arms?’

‘Yea, all,’ said Folk-might; ‘now hath befallen what I foretold thee in
Shadowy Vale, that thou mightest pay for all that had come and gone, if
thou wouldest but look to it.  Indeed thou wert angry with me for that
saying on that eve of Shadowy Vale; but see thou, in those days I was an
older man than thou, and might admonish thee somewhat; but now, though
but few days have gone over thine head, yet many deeds have abided in
thine hand, and thou art much aged.  Anger hath left thee, and wisdom
hath waxed in thee.  As for me, I may now say this word: May the Folk of
Burgdale love the Folk of Silver-dale as well as I love thee; then shall
all be well.’

Then Face-of-god cast his arms about him and kissed him, and turned away
toward Stone-face and Hall-face his brother, where they stood at the head
of the array of the Face; and even therewith came up the Alderman
somewhat sad and sober of countenance, and he pushed by the War-leader
roughly and would not speak with him.

And now blew up the horns of the Shepherds, and they began to move on
amidst the shouting of the men of Silver-dale; yet were there amongst the
Woodlanders those who wept when they saw their friends verily departing
from them.

But when they of the foremost of the Host were gotten so far forward that
the men of the Face could begin to move, lo! there was Redesman with his
fiddle amongst the leaders; and he had done a man’s work in the day of
battle, and all looked kindly on him.  About him on this morn were some
who had learned the craft of singing well together, and knew his
minstrelsy, and he turned to these and nodded as their array moved on,
and he drew his bow across the strings, and straightway they fell
a-singing, even as it might be thus:

   Back again to the dear Dale where born was the kindred,
      Here wend we all living, and liveth our mirth.
   Here afoot fares our joyance, whatever men hindred,
      Through all wrath of the heavens, all storms of the earth.

   O true, we have left here a part of our treasure,
      The ashes of stout ones, the stems of the shield;
   But the bold lives they spended have sown us new pleasure,
      Fair tales for the telling in fold and on field.

   For as oft as we sing of their edges’ upheaving,
      When the yellowing windows shine forth o’er the night,
   Their names unforgotten with song interweaving
      Shall draw forth dear drops from the depths of delight.

   Or when down by our feet the grey sickles are lying,
      And behind us is curling the supper-tide smoke,
   No whit shall they grudge us the joyance undying,
      Remembrance of men that put from us the yoke.

   When the huddle of ewes from the fells we have driven,
      And we see down the Dale the grey reach of the roof,
   We shall tell of the gift in the battle-joy given,
      All the fierceness of friends that drave sorrow aloof.

   Once then we lamented, and mourned them departed;
      Once only, no oftener.  Henceforth shall we fling
   Their names up aloft, when the merriest hearted
      To the Fathers unseen of our life-days we sing.

Then was there silence in the ranks of men; and many murmured the names
of the fallen as they fared on their way from out the Market-place of
Silver-stead.  Then once more Redesman and his mates took up the song:

   Come tell me, O friends, for whom bideth the maiden
      Wet-foot from the river-ford down in the Dale?
   For whom hath the goodwife the ox-waggon laden
      With the babble of children, brown-handed and hale?

   Come tell me for what are the women abiding,
      Till each on the other aweary they lean?
   Is it loitering of evil that thus they are chiding,
      The slow-footed bearers of sorrow unseen?

   Nay, yet were they toiling if sorrow had worn them,
      Or hushed had they bided with lips parched and wan.
   The birds of the air other tidings have borne them—
      How glad through the wood goeth man beside man.

   Then fare forth, O valiant, and loiter no longer
      Than the cry of the cuckoo when May is at hand;
   Late waxeth the spring-tide, and daylight grows longer,
      And nightly the star-street hangs high o’er the land.

   Many lives, many days for the Dale do ye carry;
      When the Host breaketh out from the thicket unshorn,
   It shall be as the sun that refuseth to tarry
      On the crown of all mornings, the Midsummer morn.

Again the song fell down till they were well on the western way down
Silver-dale; and then Redesman handled his fiddle once more, and again
the song rose up, and such-like were the words which were borne back into
the Market-place of Silver-stead:

   And yet what is this, and why fare ye so slowly,
      While our echoing halls of our voices are dumb,
   And abideth unlitten the hearth-brand the holy,
      And the feet of the kind fare afield till we come?

   For not yet through the wood and its tangle ye wander;
      Now skirt we no thicket, no path by the mere;
   Far aloof for our feet leads the Dale-road out yonder;
      Full fair is the morning, its doings all clear.

   There is nought now our feet on the highway delaying
      Save the friend’s loving-kindness, the sundering of speech;
   The well-willer’s word that ends words with the saying,
      The loth to depart while each looketh on each.

   Fare on then, for nought are ye laden with sorrow;
      The love of this land do ye bear with you still.
   In two Dales of the earth for to-day and to-morrow
      Is waxing the oak-tree of peace and good-will.

Thus then they departed from Silver-dale, even as men who were a portion
thereof, and had not utterly left it behind.  And that night they lay in
the wild-wood not very far from the Dale’s end; for they went softly,
faring amongst so many friends.




CHAPTER LVI.  TALK UPON THE WILD-WOOD WAY.


ON the morrow morning when they were on their way again Face-of-god left
his own folk to go with the House of the Steer a while; and amongst them
he fell in with the Sun-beam going along with Bow-may.  So they greeted
him kindly, and Face-of-god fell into talk with the Sun-beam as they went
side by side through a great oak-wood, where for a space was plain
green-sward bare of all underwood.

So in their talk he said to her: ‘What deemest thou, my speech-friend,
concerning our coming back to guest in Silver-dale one day?’

‘The way is long,’ she said.

‘That may hinder us but not stay us,’ said Face-of-god.

‘That is sooth,’ said the Sun-beam.

Said Face-of-god: ‘What things shall stay us?  Or deemest thou that we
shall never see Silver-dale again?’

She smiled: ‘Even so I think thou deemest, Gold-mane.  But many things
shall hinder us besides the long road.’

Said he: ‘Yea, and what things?’

‘Thinkest thou,’ said the Sun-beam, ‘that the winning of Silver-stead is
the last battle which thou shalt see?’

‘Nay,’ said he, ‘nay.’

‘Shall thy Dale—our Dale—be free from all trouble within itself
henceforward?  Is there a wall built round it to keep out for ever storm,
pestilence, and famine, and the waywardness of its own folk?’

‘So it is as thou sayest,’ quoth Face-of-god, ‘and to meet such troubles
and overcome them, or to die in strife with them, this is a great part of
a man’s life.’

‘Yea,’ she said, ‘and hast thou forgotten that thou art now a great
chieftain, and that the folk shall look to thee to use thee many days in
the year?’

He laughed and said: ‘So it is.  How many days have gone by since I
wandered in the wood last autumn, that the world should have changed so
much!’

‘Many deeds shall now be in thy days,’ she said, ‘and each deed as the
corn of wheat from which cometh many corns; and a man’s days on the earth
are not over many.’

‘Then farewell, Silver-dale!’ said he, waving his hand toward the north.
‘War and trouble may bring me back to thee, but it maybe nought else
shall.  Farewell!’

She looked on him fondly but unsmiling, as he went beside her strong and
warrior-like.  Three paces from him went Bow-may, barefoot, in her white
kirtle, but bearing her bow in her hand; a leash of arrows was in her
girdle, her quiver hung at her back, and she was girt with a sword.  On
the other side went Wood-wont and Wood-wise, lightly clad but weaponed.
Wood-mother was riding in an ox-wain just behind them, and Wood-father
went beside her bearing an axe.  Scattered all about them were the men of
the Steer, gaily clad, bearing weapons, so that the oak-wood was bright
with them, and the glades merry with their talk and singing and laughter,
and before them down the glades went the banner of the Steer, and the
White Beast led them the nearest way to Burgdale.




CHAPTER LVII.  HOW THE HOST CAME HOME AGAIN.


IT was fourteen days before they came to Rose-dale; for they had much
baggage with them, and they had no mind to weary themselves, and the wood
was nothing loathsome to them, whereas the weather was fair and bright
for the more part.  They fell in with no mishap by the way.  But a score
and three of runaways joined themselves to the Host, having watched their
goings and wotting that they were not foemen.  Of these, some had heard
of the overthrow of the Dusky Men in Silver-dale, and others not.  The
Burgdalers received them all, for it seemed to them no great matter for a
score or so of new-comers to the Dale.

But when the Host was come to Rose-dale, they found it fair arid lovely;
and there they met with those of their folk who had gone with Dallach.
But Dallach welcomed the kindreds with great joy, and bade them abide;
for he said that they had the less need to hasten, since he had sent
messengers into Burgdale to tell men there of the tidings.  Albeit they
were mostly loth to tarry; yet when he lay hard on them not to depart as
men on the morrow of a gild-feast, they abode there three days, and were
as well guested as might be, and on their departure they were laden with
gifts from the wealth of Rose-dale by Dallach and his folk.

Before they went their ways Dallach spake with Face-of-god and the chiefs
of the Dalesmen, and said:

‘Ye have given me much from the time when ye found me in the wood a naked
wastrel; yet now I would ask you a gift to lay on the top of all that ye
have given me.’

Said Face-of-god: ‘Name the gift, and thou shalt have it; for we deem
thee our friend.’

‘I am no less,’ said Dallach, ‘as in time to come I may perchance be able
to show you.  But now I am asking you to suffer a score or two of your
men to abide here with me this summer, till I see how this folk new-born
again is like to deal with me.  For pleasure and a fair life have become
so strange to them, that they scarce know what to do with them, or how to
live; and unless all is to go awry, I must needs command and forbid; and
though belike they love me, yet they fear me not; so that when my
commandment pleaseth them, they do as I bid, and when it pleaseth them
not, they do contrary to my bidding; for it hath got into their minds
that I shall in no case lift a hand against them, which indeed is the
very sooth.  But your folk they fear as warriors of the world, who have
slain the Dusky Men in the Market-place of Silver-stead; and they are of
alien blood to them, men who will do as their friend biddeth (think our
folk) against them who are neither friends or foes.  With such help I
shall be well holpen.’

In such wise spake Dallach; and Face-of-god and the chiefs said that so
it should be, if men could be found willing to abide in Rose-dale for a
while.  And when the matter was put abroad, there was no lack of such men
amongst the younger warriors, who had noted that the dale was fair
amongst dales and its women fairer yet amongst women.

So two score and ten of the Burgdale men abode in Rose-dale, no one of
whom was of more than twenty and five winters.  Forsooth divers of them
set up house in Rose-dale, and never came back to Burgdale, save as
guests.  For a half score were wedded in Rose-dale before the year’s
ending; and seven more, who had also taken to them wives of the goodliest
of the Rose-dale women, betook them the next spring to the Burg of the
Runaways, and there built them a stead, and drew a garth about it, and
dug and sowed the banks of the river, which they called Inglebourne.  And
as years passed, this same stead throve exceedingly, and men resorted
thither both from Rose-dale and Burgdale; for it was a pleasant place;
and the land, when it was cured, was sweet and good, and the wood
thereabout was full of deer of all kinds.  So their stead was called
Inglebourne after the stream; and in latter days it became a very goodly
habitation of men.

Moreover, some of the once-enthralled folk of Rose-dale, when they knew
that men of their kindred from Silver-dale were going home with the men
of Burgdale to dwell in the Dale, prayed hard to go along with them; for
they looked on the Burgdalers as if they were new Gods of the Earth.  The
Burgdale chiefs would not gainsay these men either, but took with them
three score and ten from Rose-dale, men and women, and promised them
dwelling and livelihood in Burgdale.

So now with good hearts the Host of Burgdale turned their faces toward
their well-beloved Dale; and they made good diligence, so that in three
days’ time they were come anigh the edge of the woodland wilderness.
Thither in the even-tide, as they were making ready for their last supper
and bed in the wood, came three men and two women of their folk, who had
been abiding their coming ever since they had had the tidings of
Silver-dale and the battles from Dallach.  Great was the joy of these
messengers as they went from company to company of the warriors, and saw
the familiar faces of their friends, and heard their wonted voices
telling all the story of battle and slaughter.  And for their part the
men of the Host feasted these stay-at-homes, and made much of them.  But
one of them, a man of the House of the Face, left the Host a little after
nightfall, and bore back to Burgstead at once the tidings of the coming
home of the Host.  Albeit since Dallach’s tidings of victory had come to
the Dale, the dwellers in the steads of the country-side had left
Burgstead and gone home to their own houses; so that there was no great
multitude abiding in the Thorp.

So early on the morrow was the Host astir; but ere they came to
Wildlake’s Way, the Shepherd-folk turned aside westward to go home, after
they had bidden farewell to their friends and fellows of the Dale; for
their souls longed for the sheepcotes in the winding valleys under the
long grey downs; and the garths where the last year’s ricks shouldered up
against the old stone gables, and where the daws were busy in the tall
unfrequent ash-trees; and the green flowery meadows adown along the
bright streams, where the crowfoot and the paigles were blooming now, and
the harebells were in flower about the thorn-bushes at the down’s foot,
whence went the savour of their blossom over sheep-walk and water-meadow.

So these went their ways with many kind words; and two hours afterwards
all the rest of the Host stood on the level ground of the Portway; but
presently were the ranks of war disordered and broken up by the joy of
the women and children, as they fell to drawing goodman or brother or
lover out of the throng to the way that led speediest to their homesteads
and halls.  For the War-leader would not hold the Host together any
longer, but suffered each man to go to his home, deeming that the men of
Burgstead, and chiefly they of the Face and the Steer, would suffice for
a company if any need were, and they would be easily gathered to meet any
hap.

So now the men of the Middle and Lower Dale made for their houses by the
road and the lanes and the meadows, and the men of the Upper Dale and
Burgstead went their ways along the Portway toward their halls, with the
throng of women and children that had come out to meet them.  And now men
came home when it was yet early, and the long day lay before them; and it
was, as it were, made giddy and cumbered with the exceeding joy of
return, and the thought of the day when the fear of death and sundering
had been ever in their hearts.  For these new hours were full of the
kissing and embracing of lovers, and the sweetness of renewed delight in
beholding the fair bodies so sorely desired, and hearkening the soft
wheedling of longed-for voices.  There were the cups of friends beneath
the chestnut trees, and the talk of the deeds of the fighting-men, and of
the heavy days of the home-abiders; many a tale told oft and o’er again.
There was the singing of old songs and of new, and the beholding the
well-loved nook of the pleasant places, which death might well have made
nought for them; and they were sweet with the fear of that which was
past, and in their pleasantness was fresh promise for the days to come.

So amid their joyance came evening and nightfall; and though folk were
weary with the fulness of delight, yet now for many their weariness led
them to the chamber of love before the rest of deep night came to them to
make them strong for the happy life to be begun again on the morrow.

House by house they feasted, and few were the lovers that sat not
together that even.  But Face-of-god and the Sun-beam parted at the door
of the House of the Face; for needs must she go with her new folk to the
House of the Steer, and needs must Face-of-god be amongst his own folk in
that hour of high-tide, and sit beside his father beneath the image of
the God with the ray-begirt head.




CHAPTER LVIII.  HOW THE MAIDEN WARD WAS HELD IN BURGDALE.


NOW May was well worn when the Host came home to Burgdale; and on the
very morrow of men’s home-coming they began to talk eagerly of the
Midsummer Weddings, and how the Maiden Ward would be the greatest and
fairest of all yet seen, whereas battle and the deliverance from battle
stir up the longing and love both of men and maidens; much also men spake
of the wedding of Face-of-god and the Sun-beam; and needs must their
wedding abide to the time of the Maiden Ward at Midsummer, and needs also
must the Sun-beam go on the Ward with the other Brides of the Folk.  So
then must Face-of-god keep his soul in patience till those few days were
over, doing what work came to hand; and he held his head high among the
people, and was well looked to of every man.

In all matters the Sun-beam helped him, both in doing and in forbearing;
and now so wonderful and rare was her beauty, that folk looked on her
with somewhat of fear, as though she came from the very folk of the Gods.

Indeed she seemed somewhat changed from what she had been of late; she
was sober of demeanour during these last days of her maidenhood, and sat
amongst the kindred as one communing with herself: of few words she was
and little laughter; but her face clear, not overcast by any gloom or
shaken by passion: soft and kind was she in converse with others, and
sweet were the smiles that came into her face if others’ faces seemed to
crave for them.  For it must be said that as some folk eat out their
hearts with fear of the coming evils, even so was she feeding her soul
with the joy of the days to be, whatever trouble might fall upon them,
whereof belike she foreboded some.

So wore the days toward Midsummer, when the wheat was getting past the
blossoming, and the grass in the mown fields was growing deep green again
after the shearing of the scythe; when the leaves were most and biggest;
when the roses were beginning to fall; when the apples were reddening,
and the skins of the grape-berries gathering bloom.  High aloft floated
the light clouds over the Dale; deep blue showed the distant fells below
the ice-mountains; the waters dwindled; all things sought the shadow by
daytime, and the twilight of even and the twilight of dawn were but
sundered by three hours of half-dark night.

So in the bright forenoon were seventeen brides assembled in the Gate of
Burgstead (but of the rest of the Dale were twenty and three looked for),
and with these was the Sun-beam, her face as calm as the mountain lake
under a summer sunset, while of the others many were restless, and
babbling like April throstles; and not a few talked to her eagerly, and
in their restless love of her dragged her about hither and thither.

No men were to be seen that morning; for such was the custom, that the
carles either departed to the fields and the acres, or abode within doors
on the morn of the day of the Maiden Ward; but there was a throng of
women about the Gate and down the street of Burgstead, and it may well be
deemed that they kept not silence that hour.

So fared the Brides of Burgstead to the place of the Maiden Ward on the
causeway, whereto were come already the other brides from steads up and
down the Dale, or were even then close at hand on the way; and among them
were Long-coat and her two fellows, with whom Face-of-god had held
converse on that morning whereon he had followed his fate to the
Mountain.

There then were they gathered under the cliff-wall of the Portway; and by
the road-side had their grooms built them up bowers of green boughs to
shelter them from the sun’s burning, which were thatched with bulrushes,
and decked with garlands of the fairest flowers of the meadows and the
gardens.

Forsooth they were a lovely sight to look on, for no fairer women might
be seen in the world; and the eldest of them was scant of five and twenty
winters.  Every maiden was clad in as goodly raiment as she might
compass; their sleeves and gown-hems and girdles, yea, their very shoes
and sandals were embroidered so fairly and closely, that as they shifted
in the sun they changed colour like the king-fisher shooting from shadow
to sunshine.  According to due custom every maiden bore some weapon.  A
few had bows in their hands and quivers at their backs; some had nought
but a sword girt to their sides; some bore slender-shafted spears, so as
not to overburden their shapely hands; but to some it seemed a merry game
to carry long and heavy thrust-spears, or to bear great war-axes over
their shoulders.  Most had their flowing hair coifed with bright helms;
some had burdened their arms with shields; some bore steel hauberks over
their linen smocks: almost all had some piece of war-gear on their
bodies; and one, to wit, Steed-linden of the Sickle, a tall and fair
damsel, was so arrayed that no garment could be seen on her but bright
steel war-gear.

As for the Sun-beam, she was clad in a white kirtle embroidered from
throat to hem with work of green boughs and flowers of the goodliest
fashion, and a garland of roses on her head.  Dale-warden himself was
girt to her side by a girdle fair-wrought of golden wire, and she bore no
other weapon or war-gear; and she let him lie quiet in his scabbard, nor
touched the hilts once; whereas some of the other damsels would be ever
drawing their swords out and thrusting them back.  But all noted that
goodly weapon, the yoke-fellow of so many great deeds.

There then on the Portway, between the water and the rock-wall, rose up
plenteous and gleeful talk of clear voices shrill and soft; and whiles
the maidens sang, and whiles they told tales of old days, and whiles they
joined hands and danced together on the sweet summer dust of the highway.
Then they mostly grew aweary, and sat down on the banks of the road or
under their leafy bowers.

Noon came, and therewithal goodwives of the neighbouring Dale, who
brought them meat and drink, and fruit and fresh flowers from the teeming
gardens; and thereafter for a while they nursed their joy in their
bosoms, and spake but little and softly while the day was at its hottest
in the early afternoon.

Then came out of Burgstead men making semblance of chapmen with a wain
bearing wares, and they made as though they were wending down the Portway
westward to go out of the Dale.  Then arose the weaponed maidens and
barred the way to them, and turned them back amidst fresh-springing
merriment.

Again in a while, when the sun was westering and the shadows growing
long, came herdsmen from down the Dale driving neat, and making as though
they would pass by into Burgstead, but to them also did the maidens
gainsay the road, so that needs must they turn back amidst laughter and
mockery, they themselves also laughing and mocking.

And so at last, when the maidens had been all alone a while, and it was
now hard on sunset, they drew together and stood in a ring, and fell to
singing; and one Gold-may of the House of the Bridge, a most sweet
singer, stood amidst their ring and led them.  And this is somewhat of
the meaning of their words:

   The sun will not tarry; now changeth the light,
   Fail the colours that marry the Day to the Night.

   Amid the sun’s burning bright weapons we bore,
   For this eve of our earning comes once and no more.

   For to-day hath no brother in yesterday’s tide,
   And to-morrow no other alike it doth hide.

   This day is the token of oath and behest
   That ne’er shall be broken through ill days and best.

   Here the troth hath been given, the oath hath been done,
   To the Folk that hath thriven well under the sun.

   And the gifts of its giving our troth-day shall win
   Are the Dale for our living and dear days therein.

   O Sun, now thou wanest! yet come back and see
   Amidst all that thou gainest how gainful are we.

   O witness of sorrow wide over the earth,
   Rise up on the morrow to look on our mirth!

   Thy blooms art thou bringing back ever for men,
   And thy birds are a-singing each summer again.

   But to men little-hearted what winter is worse
   Than thy summers departed that bore them the curse?

   And e’en such art thou knowing where thriveth the year,
   And good is all growing save thralldom and fear.

   Nought such be our lovers’ hearts drawing anigh,
   While yet thy light hovers aloft in the sky.

   Lo the seeker, the finder of Death in the Blade!
   What lips shall be kinder on lips of mine laid?

   La he that hath driven back tribes of the South!
   Sweet-breathed is thine even, but sweeter his mouth.

   Come back from the sea then, O sun! come aback,
   Look adown, look on me then, and ask what I lack!

   Come many a morrow to gaze on the Dale,
   And if e’er thou seest sorrow remember its tale!

   For ’twill be of a story to tell how men died
   In the garnering of glory that no man may hide.

   O sun sinking under!  O fragrance of earth!
   O heart!  O the wonder whence longing has birth!

So they sang, and the sun sank indeed; and amidst their singing the eve
was still about them, though there came a happy murmur from the face of
the meadows and the houses of the Thorp aloof.  But as their song fell
they heard the sound of footsteps a many on the road; so they turned and
stood with beating hearts in such order as when a band of the valiant
draw together to meet many foes coming on them from all sides, and they
stand back to back to face all comers.  And even therewith, their raiment
gleaming amidst the gathering dusk, came on them the young men of the
Dale newly delivered from the grief of war.

Then in very deed the fierce mouths of the raisers of the war-shout were
kind on the faces of tender maidens.  Then went spear and axe and helm
and shield clattering to the earth, as the arms of the new-comers went
round about the bodies of the Brides, weary with the long day of
sunshine, and glee and loving speech, and the maidens suffered the young
men to lead them whither they would, and twilight began to draw round
about them as the Maiden Band was sundered.

Some, they were led away westward down the Portway to the homesteads
thereabout; and for divers of these the way was long to their halls, and
they would have to wend over long stretches of dewy meadows, and hear the
night-wind whisper in many a tree, and see the east begin to lighten with
the dawn before they came to the lighted feast that awaited them.  But
some turned up the Portway straight towards Burgstead; and short was
their road to the halls where even now the lights were being kindled for
their greeting.

As for the Sun-beam, she had been very quiet the day long, speaking as
little as she might do, laughing not at all, and smiling for kindness’
sake rather than for merriment; and when the grooms came seeking their
maidens, she withdrew herself from the band, and stood alone amidst the
road nigher to Burgstead than they; and her heart beat hard, and her
breath came short and quick, as though fear had caught her in its grip;
and indeed for one moment of time she feared that he was not coming to
her.  For he had gone with the other grooms to that gathered band, and
had passed from one to the other, not finding her, till he had got him
through the whole company, and beheld her awaiting him.  Then indeed he
bounded toward her, and caught her by the hands, and then by the
shoulders, and drew her to him, and she nothing loth; and in that while
he said to her:

‘Come then, my friend; lo thou! they go each their own way toward the
halls of their houses; and for thee have I chosen a way—a way over the
foot-bridge yonder, and over the dewy meadows on this best even of the
year.’

‘Nay, nay,’ she said, ‘it may not be.  Surely the Burgstead grooms look
to thee to lead them to the gate; and surely in the House of the Face
they look to see thee before any other.  Nay, Gold-mane, my dear, we must
needs go by the Portway.’

He said: ‘We shall be home but a very little while after the first, for
the way I tell of is as short as the Portway.  But hearken, my sweet!
When we are in the meadows we shall sit down for a minute on a bank under
the chestnut trees, and thence watch the moon coming up over the southern
cliffs.  And I shall behold thee in the summer night, and deem that I see
all thy beauty; which yet shall make me dumb with wonder when I see it
indeed in the house amongst the candles.’

‘O nay,’ she said, ‘by the Portway shall we go; the torch-bearers shall
be abiding thee at the gate.’

Spake Face-of-god: ‘Then shall we rise up and wend first through a wide
treeless meadow, wherein amidst the night we shall behold the kine moving
about like odorous shadows; and through the greyness of the moonlight
thou shalt deem that thou seest the pink colour of the eglantine
blossoms, so fragrant they are.’

‘O nay,’ she said, ‘but it is meet that we go by the Portway.’

But he said: ‘Then from the wide meadow come we into a close of corn, and
then into an orchard-close beyond it.  There in the ancient walnut-tree
the owl sitteth breathing hard in the night-time; but thou shalt not hear
him for the joy of the nightingales singing from the apple-trees of the
close.  Then from out of the shadowed orchard shall we come into the open
town-meadow, and over its daisies shall the moonlight be lying in a grey
flood of brightness.

‘Short is the way across it to the brim of the Weltering Water, and
across the water lieth the fair garden of the Face; and I have dight for
thee there a little boat to waft us across the night-dark waters, that
shall be like wavering flames of white fire where the moon smites them,
and like the void of all things where the shadows hang over them.  There
then shall we be in the garden, beholding how the hall-windows are
yellow, and hearkening the sound of the hall-glee borne across the
flowers and blending with the voice of the nightingales in the trees.
There then shall we go along the grass paths whereby the pinks and the
cloves and the lavender are sending forth their fragrance, to cheer us,
who faint at the scent of the over-worn roses, and the honey-sweetness of
the lilies.

‘All this is for thee, and for nought but for thee this even; and many a
blossom whereof thou knowest nought shall grieve if thy foot tread not
thereby to-night; if the path of thy wedding which I have made, be void
of thee, on the even of the Chamber of Love.

‘But lo! at last at the garden’s end is the yew-walk arched over for
thee, and thou canst not see whereby to enter it; but I, I know it, and I
lead thee into and along the dark tunnel through the moonlight, and thine
hand is not weary of mine as we go.  But at the end shall we come to a
wicket, which shall bring us out by the gable-end of the Hall of the
Face.  Turn we about its corner then, and there are we blinking on the
torches of the torch-bearers, and the candles through the open door, and
the hall ablaze with light and full of joyous clamour, like the bale-fire
in the dark night kindled on a ness above the sea by fisher-folk
remembering the Gods.’

‘O nay,’ she said, ‘but by the Portway must we go; the straightest way to
the Gate of Burgstead.’

In vain she spake, and knew not what she said; for even as he was
speaking he led her away, and her feet went as her will went, rather than
her words; and even as she said that last word she set her foot on the
first board of the foot-bridge; and she turned aback one moment, and saw
the long line of the rock-wall yet glowing with the last of the sunset of
midsummer, while as she turned again, lo! before her the moon just
beginning to lift himself above the edge of the southern cliffs, and
betwixt her and him all Burgdale, and Face-of-god moreover.

Thus then they crossed the bridge into the green meadows, and through the
closes and into the garden of the Face and unto the Hall-door; and other
brides and grooms were there before them (for six grooms had brought home
brides to the House of the Face); but none deemed it amiss in the
War-leader of the folk and the love that had led him.  And old Stone-face
said: ‘Too many are the rows of bee-skeps in the gardens of the Dale that
we should begrudge wayward lovers an hour’s waste of candle-light.’

So at last those twain went up the sun-bright Hall hand in hand in all
their loveliness, and up on to the daïs, and stood together by the middle
seat; and the tumult of the joy of the kindred was hushed for a while as
they saw that there was speech in the mouth of the War-leader.

Then he spread his hands abroad before them all and cried out: ‘How then
have I kept mine oath, whereas I swore on the Holy Boar to wed the
fairest woman of the world?’

A mighty shout went rattling about the timbers of the roof in answer to
his word; and they that looked up to the gable of the Hall said that they
saw the ray-ringed image of the God smile with joy over the gathered
folk.

But spake Iron-face unheard amidst the clamour of the Hall: ‘How fares it
now with my darling and my daughter, who dwelleth amongst strangers in
the land beyond the wild-wood?’




CHAPTER LIX.  THE BEHEST OF FACE-OF-GOD TO THE BRIDE ACCOMPLISHED: A
MOTE-STEAD APPOINTED FOR THE THREE FOLKS, TO WIT, THE MEN OF BURGDALE,
THE SHEPHERDS, AND THE CHILDREN OF THE WOLF.


THREE years and two months thereafter, three hours after noon in the days
of early autumn, came a wain tilted over with precious webs of cloth, and
drawn by eight white oxen, into the Market-place of Silver-stead: two
score and ten of spearmen of the tallest, clad in goodly war-gear, went
beside it, and much people of Silver-dale thronged about them.  The wain
stayed at the foot of the stair that led up to the door of the
Mote-house, and there lighted down therefrom a woman goodly of fashion,
with wide grey eyes, and face and hands brown with the sun’s burning.
She had a helm on her head and a sword girt to her side, and in her arms
she bore a yearling child.

And there was come Bow-may with the second man-child born to Face-of-god.

She stayed not amidst the wondering folk, but hastened up the stair,
which she had once seen running with the blood of men: the door was open,
and she went in and walked straight-way, with the babe in her arms, up
the great Hall to the daïs.

There were men on the daïs: amidmost sat Folk-might, little changed since
the last day she had seen him, yet fairer, she deemed, than of old time;
and her heart went forth to meet the Chieftain of her Folk, and the glad
tears started in her eyes and ran down her cheeks as she drew near to
him.

By his side sat the Bride, and her also Bow-may deemed to have waxed
goodlier.  Both she and Folk-might knew Bow-may ere she had gone half the
length of the hall; and the Bride rose up in her place and cried out
Bow-may’s name joyously.

With these were sitting the elders of the Wolf and the Woodlanders, the
more part of whom Bow-may knew well.

On the daïs also stood aside a score of men weaponed, and looking as if
they were awaiting the word which should send them forth on some errand.

Now stood up Folk-might and said: ‘Fair greeting and love to my friend
and the daughter of my Folk!  How farest thou, Bow-may, best of all
friendly women?  How fareth my sister, and Face-of-god my brother? and
how is it with our friends and helpers in the goodly Dale?’

Said Bow-may: ‘It is well both with all those and with me; and my heart
laughs to see thee, Folk-might, and to look on the elders of the valiant,
and our lovely sister the Bride.  But I have a message for thee from
Face-of-god: wilt thou that I deliver it here?’

‘Yea surely,’ said Folk-might, and came forth and took her hand, and
kissed her cheeks and her mouth.  The Bride also came forth and cast her
arms about her, and kissed her; and they led her between them to a seat
on the daïs beside Folk-might.

But all men looked on the child in her arms and wondered what it was.
But Bow-may took the babe, which was both fair and great, and set it on
the knees of the Bride, and said:

‘Thus saith Face-of-god: “Friend and kinswoman, well-beloved playmate,
the gift which thou badest of me in sorrow do thou now take in joy, and
do all the good thou wouldest to the son of thy friend.  The ring which I
gave thee once in the garden of the Face, give thou to Bow-may, my trusty
and well-beloved, in token of the fulfilment of my behest.”’

Then the Bride kissed Bow-may again, and fell to fondling of the child,
which was loth to leave Bow-may.

But she spake again: ‘To thee also, Folk-might, I have a message from
Face-of-god, who saith: “Mighty warrior, friend and fellow, all things
thrive with us, and we are happy.  Yet is there a hollow place in our
hearts which grieveth us, and only thou and thine may amend it.  Though
whiles we hear tell of thee, yet we see thee not, and fain were we, might
we see thee, and wot if the said tales be true.  Wilt thou help us
somewhat herein, or wilt thou leave us all the labour?  For sure we be
that thou wilt not say that thou rememberest us no more, and that thy
love for us is departed.”  This is his message, Folk-might, and he would
have an answer from thee.’

Then laughed Folk-might and said: ‘Sister Bow-may, seest thou these
weaponed men hereby?’

‘Yea,’ she said.

Said he: ‘These men bear a message with them to Face-of-god my brother.
Crow the Shaft-speeder, stand forth and tell thy friend Bow-may the
message I have set in thy mouth, every word of it.’

Then Crow stood forth and greeted Bow-may friendly, and said: ‘Friend
Bow-may, this is the message of our Alderman: “Friend and helper, in the
Dale which thou hast given to us do all things thrive; neither are we
grown old in three years’ wearing, nor are our memories worsened.  We
long sore to see you and give you guesting in Silver-dale, and one day
that shall befall.  Meanwhile, know this: that we of the Wolf and the
Woodland, mindful of the earth that bore us, and the pit whence we were
digged, have a mind to go see Shadowy Vale once in every three years, and
there to hold high-tide in the ancient Hall of the Wolf, and sit in the
Doom-ring of our Fathers.  But since ye have joined yourselves to us in
battle, and have given us this Dale, our health and wealth, without price
and without reward, we deem you our very brethren, and small shall be our
hall-glee, and barren shall our Doom-ring seem to us, unless ye sit there
beside us.  Come then, that we may rejoice each other by the sight of
face and sound of voice; that we may speak together of matters that
concern our welfare; so that we three Kindreds may become one Folk.  And
if this seem good to you, know that we shall be in Shadowy Vale in a
half-month’s wearing.  Grieve us not by forbearing to come.”  Lo,
Bow-may, this is the message, and I have learned it well, for well it
pleaseth me to bear it.’

Then said Folk-might: ‘What say’st thou to the message, Bow-may?’

‘It is good in all ways,’ said she, ‘but is it timely?  May our folk have
the message and get to Shadowy Vale, so as to meet you there?’

‘Yea surely,’ said Folk-might, ‘for our kinsmen here shall take the road
through Shadowy Vale, and in four days’ time they shall be in Burgdale,
and as thou wottest, it is scant a two days’ journey thence to Shadowy
Vale.’

Therewith he turned to those men again, and said: ‘Kinsman Crow, depart
now, and use all diligence with thy message.’

So the messengers began to stir; but Bow-may cried out: ‘Ho!  Folk-might,
my friend, I perceive thou art little changed from the man I knew in
Shadowy Vale, who would have his dinner before the fowl were plucked.
For shall I not go back with these thy messengers, so that I also may get
all ready to wend to the Mote-house of Shadowy Vale?’

But the Bride looked kindly on her, and laughed and said: ‘Sister
Bow-may, his meaning is that thou shouldest abide here in Silver-dale
till we depart for the Folk-thing, and then go thither with us; and this
I also pray thee to do, that thou mayst rejoice the hearts of thine old
friends; and also that thou mayst teach me all that I should know
concerning this fair child of my brother and my sister.’

And she looked on her so kindly as she caressed the babe, that Bow-may’s
heart melted, and she cried out:

‘Would that I might never depart from the house wherein thou dwellest, O
Bride of my Kinsman!  And this that thou biddest me is easy and pleasant
for me to do.  But afterwards I must get me back to Burgdale; for I seem
to have left much there that calleth for me.’

‘Yea,’ said Folk-might, ‘and art thou wedded, Bow-may?  Shalt thou never
bend the yew in battle again?’

Said Bow-may soberly: ‘Who knoweth, chieftain?  Yea, I am wedded now
these two years; and nought I looked for less when I followed those twain
through the wild-wood to Burgdale.’

She sighed therewith, and said: ‘In all the Dale there is no better man
of his hands than my man, nor any goodlier to look on, and he is even
that Hart of Highcliff whom thou knowest well, O Bride!’

Said the Bride: ‘Thou sayest sooth, there is no better man in the Dale.’

Said Bow-may: ‘Sun-beam bade me wed him when he pressed hard upon me.’
She stayed awhile, and then said: ‘Face-of-god also deemed I should not
naysay the man; and now my son by him is of like age to this little one.’

‘Good is thy story,’ said Folk-might; ‘or deemest thou, Bow-may, that
such strong and goodly women as thou, and women so kind and friendly,
should forbear the wedding and the bringing forth of children?  Yea, and
we who may even yet have to gather to another field before we die, and
fight for life and the goods of life.’

‘Thou sayest well,’ she said; ‘all that hath befallen me is good since
the day whereon I loosed shaft from the break of the bent over yonder.’

Therewith she fell a-musing, and made as though she were hearkening to
the soft voice of the Bride caressing the new-come baby; but in sooth
neither heard nor saw what was going on about her, for her thoughts were
in bygone days.  Howbeit presently she came to herself again, and fell to
asking many questions concerning Silver-dale and the kindred, and those
who had once been thralls of the Dusky Men; and they answered all duly,
and told her the whole story of the Dale since the Day of the Victory.

So Bow-may and the carles who had come with her abode for that half-month
in Silver-dale, guested in all love by the folk thereof, both the
kindreds and the poor folk.  And Bow-may deemed that the Bride loved
Face-of-god’s child little less than her own, whereof she had two, a man
and a woman; and thereat was she full of joy, since she knew that
Face-of-god and the Sun-beam would be fain thereof.

Thereafter, when the time was come, fared Folk-might and the Bride, and
many of the elders and warriors of the Wolf and the Woodland, to Shadowy
Vale; and Dallach and the best of Rose-dale went with them, being so
bidden; and Bow-may and her following, according to the word of the
Bride.  And in Shadowy Vale they met Face-of-god and Alderman Iron-face,
and the chiefs of Burgdale and the Shepherds, and many others; and great
joy there was at the meeting.  And the Sun-beam remembered the word which
she spoke to Face-of-god when first he came to Shadowy Vale, that she
would be wishful to see again the dwelling wherein she had passed through
so much joy and sorrow of her younger days.  But if anyone were fain of
this meeting, the Alderman was glad above all, when he took the Bride
once more in his arms, and caressed her whom he had deemed should be a
very daughter of his House.

Now telleth the tale of all these kindreds, to wit, the Men of Burgdale
and the Sheepcotes; and the Children of the Wolf, and the Woodlanders,
and the Men of Rose-dale, that they were friends henceforth, and became
as one Folk, for better or worse, in peace and in war, in waning and
waxing; and that whatsoever befell them, they ever held Shadowy Vale a
holy place, and for long and long after they met there in mid-autumn, and
held converse and counsel together.

NO MORE AS NOW TELLETH THE TALE OF THESE KINDREDS AND FOLKS, BUT MAKETH
AN ENDING.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Child Christopher, by William Morris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included


CHAPTER I. OF THE KING OF OAKENREALM, AND HIS WIFE AND HIS CHILD.


Of old there was a land which was so much a woodland, that a minstrel
thereof said it that a squirrel might go from end to end, and all about,
from tree to tree, and never touch the earth: therefore was that land
called Oakenrealm.

The lord and king thereof was a stark man, and so great a warrior that
in his youth he took no delight in aught else save battle and tourneys.
But when he was hard on forty years old, he came across a daughter of
a certain lord, whom he had vanquished, and his eyes bewrayed him
into longing, so that he gave back to the said lord the havings he had
conquered of him that he might lay the maiden in his kingly bed. So he
brought her home with him to Oakenrealm and wedded her.

Tells the tale that he rued not his bargain, but loved her so dearly
that for a year round he wore no armour, save when she bade him play in
the tilt-yard for her desport and pride.

So wore the days till she went with child and was near her time, and
then it betid that three kings who marched on Oakenrealm banded them
together against him, and his lords and thanes cried out on him to lead
them to battle, and it behoved him to do as they would.

So he sent out the tokens and bade an hosting at his chief city, and
when all was ready he said farewell to his wife and her babe unborn, and
went his ways to battle once more: but fierce was his heart against the
foemen, that they had dragged him away from his love and his joy.

Even amidst of his land he joined battle with the host of the ravagers,
and the tale of them is short to tell, for they were as the wheat before
the hook. But as he followed up the chase, a mere thrall of the fleers
turned on him and cast his spear, and it reached him whereas his hawberk
was broken, and stood deep in, so that he fell to earth unmighty: and
when his lords and chieftains drew about him, and cunning men strove to
heal him, it was of no avail, and he knew that his soul was departing.
Then he sent for a priest, and for the Marshal of the host, who was a
great lord, and the son of his father's brother, and in few words bade
him look to the babe whom his wife bore about, and if it were a man, to
cherish him and do him to learn all that a king ought to know; and if it
were a maiden, that he should look to her wedding well and worthily: and
he let swear him on his sword, on the edges and the hilts, that he would
do even so, and be true unto his child if child there were: and he bade
him have rule, if so be the lords would, and all the people, till the
child were of age to be king: and the Marshal swore, and all the lords
who stood around bare witness to his swearing. Thereafter the priest
houselled the King, and he received his Creator, and a little while
after his soul departed.

But the Marshal followed up the fleeing foe, and two battles more he
fought before he beat them flat to earth; and then they craved for
peace, and he went back to the city in mickle honour.

But in the King's city of Oakenham he found but little joy; for both
the King was bemoaned, whereas he had been no hard man to his folk; and
also, when the tidings and the King's corpse came back to Oakenrealm,
his Lady and Queen took sick for sorrow and fear, and fell into labour
of her child, and in childing of a man-bairn she died, but the lad
lived, and was like to do well.

So there was one funeral for the slain King and for her whom his slaying
had slain: and when that was done, the little king was borne to the
font, and at his christening he gat to name Christopher.

Thereafter the Marshal summoned all them that were due thereto to come
and give homage to the new king, and even so did they, though he were
but a babe, yea, and who had but just now been a king lying in his
mother's womb. But when the homage was done, then the Marshal called
together the wise men, and told them how the King that was had given him
in charge his son as then unborn, and the ruling of the realm till the
said son were come to man's estate: but he bade them seek one worthier
if they had heart to gainsay the word of their dying lord. Then all they
said that he was worthy and mighty and the choice of their dear lord,
and that they would have none but he.

So then was the great folk-mote called, and the same matter was laid
before all the people, and none said aught against it, whereas no man
was ready to name another to that charge and rule, even had it been his
own self.

Now then by law was the Marshal, who hight Rolf, lord and earl of the
land of Oakenrealm. He ruled well and strongly, and was a fell warrior:
he was well befriended by many of the great; and the rest of them feared
him and his friends: as for the commonalty, they saw that he held the
realm in peace; and for the rest, they knew little and saw less of him,
and they paid to his bailiffs and sheriffs as little as they could, and
more than they would. But whereas that left them somewhat to grind their
teeth on, and they were not harried, they were not so ill content. So
the Marshal throve, and lacked nothing of a king's place save the bare
name.




CHAPTER II. OF THE KING'S SON.


As for the King's son, to whom the folk had of late done homage as king,
he was at first seen about a corner of the High House with his nurses;
and then in a while it was said, and the tale noted, but not much, that
he must needs go for his health's sake, and because he was puny, to some
stead amongst the fields, and folk heard say that he was gone to the
strong house of a knight somewhat stricken in years, who was called Lord
Richard the Lean. The said house was some twelve miles from Oakenham,
not far from the northern edge of the wild-wood. But in a while, scarce
more than a year, Lord Richard brake up house at the said castle, and
went southward through the forest. Of this departure was little said,
for he was not a man amongst the foremost. As for the King's little son,
if any remembered that he was in the hands of the said Lord Richard,
none said aught about it; for if any thought of the little babe at all,
they said to themselves, Never will he come to be king.

Now as for Lord Richard the Lean, he went far through the wood, and
until he was come to another house of his, that stood in a clearing
somewhat near to where Oakenrealm marched on another country, which
hight Meadham; though the said wild-wood ended not where Oakenrealm
ended, but stretched a good way into Meadham; and betwixt one and the
other much rough country there was.

It is to be said that amongst those who went to this stronghold of the
woods was the little King Christopher, no longer puny, but a stout
babe enough: so he was borne amongst the serving men and thralls to
the castle of the Outer March; and he was in no wise treated as a great
man's son; but there was more than one woman who was kind to him, and
as he waxed in strength and beauty month by month, both carle and
quean fell to noting him, and, for as little as he was, he began to be
well-beloved.

As to the stead where he was nourished, though it were far away amongst
the woods, it was no such lonely or savage place: besides the castle and
the houses of it, there was a merry thorpe in the clearing, the houses
whereof were set down by the side of a clear and pleasant little stream.
Moreover the goodmen and swains of the said township were no ill folk,
but bold of heart, free of speech, and goodly of favour; and the women
of them fair, kind, and trusty. Whiles came folk journeying in to
Oakenrealm or out to Meadham, and of these some were minstrels, who had
with them tidings of what was astir whereas folk were thicker in the
world, and some chapmen, who chaffered with the thorpe-dwellers, and
took of them the woodland spoil for such outland goods as those woodmen
needed.

So wore the years, and in Oakenham King Christopher was well nigh
forgotten, and in the wild-wood had never been known clearly for King's
son. At first, by command of Rolf the Marshal, a messenger came
every year from Lord Richard with a letter that told of how the lad
Christopher did. But when five years were worn, the Marshal bade send
him tidings thereof every three years; and by then it was come to the
twelfth year, and still the tidings were that the lad throve ever, and
meanwhile the Marshal sat fast in his seat with none to gainsay, the
word went to Lord Richard that he should send no more, for that he, the
Marshal, had heard enough of the boy; and if he throve it were well, and
if not, it was no worse. So wore the days and the years.




CHAPTER III. OF THE KING OF MEADHAM AND HIS DAUGHTER.


Tells the tale that in the country which lay south of Oakenrealm, and
was called Meadham, there was in these days a king whose wife was dead,
but had left him a fair daughter, who was born some four years after
King Christopher. A good man was this King Roland, mild, bounteous, and
no regarder of persons in his justice; and well-beloved he was of his
folk: yet could not their love keep him alive; for, whenas his daughter
was of the age of twelve years, he sickened unto death; and so, when he
knew that his end drew near, he sent for the wisest of his wise men,
and they came unto him sorrowing in the High House of his chiefest city,
which hight Meadhamstead. So he bade them sit down nigh unto his bed,
and took up the word and spake:

"Masters, and my good lords, ye may see clearly that a sundering is at
hand, and that I must needs make a long journey, whence I shall come
back never; now I would, and am verily of duty bound thereto, that I
leave behind me some good order in the land. Furthermore, I would that
my daughter, when she is of age thereto, should be Queen in Meadham, and
rule the land; neither will it be many years before she shall be of ripe
age for ruling, if ever she may be; and I deem not that there shall be
any lack in her, whereas her mother could all courtesy, and was as wise
as a woman may be. But how say ye, my masters?"

So they all with one consent said Yea, and they would ask for no better
king than their lady his daughter. Then said the King:

"Hearken carefully, for my time is short: Yet is she young and a maiden,
though she be wise. Now therefore do I need some man well looked to of
the folk, who shall rule the land in her name till she be of eighteen
winters, and who shall be her good friend and counsellor into all wisdom
thereafter. Which of you, my masters, is meet for this matter?"

Then they all looked one on the other, and spake not. And the King said:
"Speak, some one of you, without fear; this is no time for tarrying."

Thereon spake an elder, the oldest of them, and said: "Lord, this is
the very truth, that none of us here present are meet for this office:
whereas, among other matters, we be all unmeet for battle; some of us
have never been warriors, and other some are past the age for leading an
host. To say the sooth, King, there is but one man in Meadham who may do
what thou wilt, and not fail; both for his wisdom, and his might afield,
and the account which is had of him amongst the people; and that man is
Earl Geoffrey, of the Southern Marches."

"Ye say sooth," quoth the King; "but is he down in the South, or nigher
to hand?"

Said the elder: "He is as now in Meadhamstead, and may be in this
chamber in scant half an hour." So the King bade send for him, and there
was silence in the chamber till he came in, clad in a scarlet kirtle and
a white cloak, and with his sword by his side. He was a tall man,
bigly made; somewhat pale of face, black and curly of hair; blue-eyed,
thin-lipped, and hook-nosed as an eagle; a man warrior-like, and
somewhat fierce of aspect. He knelt down by the King's bedside, and
asked him in a sorrowful voice what he would, and the King said: "I ask
a great matter of thee, and all these my wise men, and I myself,
withal, deem that thou canst do it, and thou alone--nay, hearken: I am
departing, and I would have thee hold my place, and do unto my people
even what I would do if I myself were living; and to my daughter as
nigh to that as may be. I say all this thou mayst do, if thou wilt be as
trusty and leal to me after I am dead, as thou hast seemed to all men's
eyes to have been while I was living. What sayest thou?"

The Earl had hidden his face in the coverlet of the bed while the King
was speaking; but now he lifted up his face, weeping, and said: "Kinsman
and friend and King; this is nought hard to do; but if it were, yet
would I do it."

"It is well," said the King: "my heart fails me and my voice; so give
heed, and set thine ear close to my mouth: hearken, belike my daughter
Goldilind shall be one of the fairest of women; I bid thee wed her to
the fairest of men and the strongest, and to none other."

Thereat his voice failed him indeed, and he lay still; but he died not,
till presently the priest came to him, and, as he might, houselled him:
then he departed.

As for Earl Geoffrey, when the King was buried, and the homages done to
the maiden Goldilind, he did no worse than those wise men deemed of him,
but bestirred him, and looked full sagely into all the matters of the
kingdom, and did so well therein that all men praised his rule perforce,
whether they loved him or not; and sooth to say he was not much beloved.




CHAPTER IV. OF THE MAIDEN GOLDILIND.


AMIDST of all his other business Earl Geoffrey bethought him in a while
of the dead King's daughter, and he gave her in charge to a gentlewoman,
somewhat stricken in years, a widow of high lineage, but not over
wealthy. She dwelt in her own house in a fair valley some twenty miles
from Meadhamstead: thereabode Goldilind till a year and a half was worn,
and had due observance, but little love, and not much kindness from
the said gentlewoman, who hight Dame Elinor Leashowe. Howbeit, time
and again came knights and ladies and lords to see the little lady, and
kissed her hand and did obeisance to her; yet more came to her in the
first three months of her sojourn at Leashowe than the second, and more
in the second than the third.

At last, on a day when the said year and a half was fully worn, thither
came Earl Geoffrey with a company of knights and men-at-arms, and he did
obeisance, as due was, to his master's daughter, and then spake awhile
privily with Dame Elinor; and thereafter they went into the hall, he,
and she, and Goldilind, and there before all men he spake aloud and
said:

"My Lady Goldilind, meseemeth ye dwell here all too straitly; for
neither is this house of Leashowe great enough for thy state, and the
entertainment of the knights and lords who shall have will to seek to
thee hither; nor is the wealth of thy liege dame and governante as great
as it should be, and as thou, meseemeth, wouldst have it. Wherefore I
have been considering thy desires herein, and if thou deem it meet to
give a gift to Dame Elinor, and live queenlier thyself than now thou
dost, then mayst thou give unto her the Castle of Greenharbour, and the
six manors appertaining thereto, and withal the rights of wild-wood and
fen and fell that lie thereabout. Also, if thou wilt, thou mayst honour
the said castle with abiding there awhile at thy pleasure; and I shall
see to it that thou have due meney to go with thee thither. How sayest
thou, my lady?"

Amongst that company there were two or three who looked at each other
and half smiled; and two or three looked on the maiden, who was
goodly as of her years, as if with compassion; but the more part kept
countenance in full courtly wise.

Then spake Goldilind in a quavering voice (for she was afraid and wise),
and she said: "Cousin and Earl, we will that all this be done; and it
likes me well to eke the wealth of this lady and my good friend Dame
Elinor."

Quoth Earl Geoffrey: "Kneel before thy lady, Dame, and put thine hands
between hers and thank her for the gift." So Dame Elinor knelt down, and
did homage and obeisance for her new land; and Goldilind raised her
up and kissed her, and bade her sit down beside her, and spake to her
kindly; and all men praised the maiden for her gentle and courteous
ways; and Dame Elinor smiled upon her and them, what she could.

She was small of body and sleek; but her cheeks somewhat flagging; brown
eyes she had, long, half opened; thin lips, and chin somewhat falling
away from her mouth; hard on fifty winters had she seen; yet there have
been those who were older and goodlier both.




CHAPTER V. GOLDILIND COMES TO GREENHARBOUR.


But a little while tarried the Earl Geoffrey at Leashowe, but departed
next morning and came to Meadhamstead. A month thereafter came folk from
him to Leashowe, to wit, the new meney for the new abode of Goldilind;
amongst whom was a goodly band of men-at-arms, led by an old lord
pinched and peevish of face, who kneeled to Goldilind as the new
burgreve of Greenharbour; and a chaplain, a black canon, young,
broad-cheeked and fresh-looking, but hard-faced and unlovely; three
new damsels withal were come for the young Queen, not young maids, but
stalworth women, well-grown, and two of them hard-featured; the third,
tall, black-haired, and a goodly-fashioned body.

Now when these were come, who were all under the rule of Dame Elinor,
there was no gainsaying the departure to the new home; and in two days'
time they went their ways from Leashowe. But though Goldilind was young,
she was wise, and her heart misgave her, when she was amidst this new
meney, that she was not riding toward glory and honour, and a world of
worship and friends beloved. Howbeit, whatso might lie before her, she
put a good face upon it, and did to those about her queenly and with all
courtesy.

Five days they rode from Leashowe north away, by thorpe and town and
mead and river, till the land became little peopled, and the sixth day
they rode the wild-wood ways, where was no folk, save now and again the
little cot of some forester or collier; but the seventh day, about
noon, they came into a clearing of the wood, a rugged little plain of
lea-land, mingled with marish, with a little deal of acre-land in barley
and rye, round about a score of poor frame-houses set down scattermeal
about the lea. But on a long ridge, at the northern end of the said
plain, was a grey castle, strong, and with big and high towers, yet
not so much greater than was Leashowe, deemed Goldilind, as for a
dwelling-house.

Howbeit, they entered the said castle, and within, as without, it was
somewhat grim, though nought was lacking of plenishing due for folk
knightly. Long it were to tell of its walls and baileys and chambers;
but let this suffice, that on the north side, toward the thick forest,
was a garden of green-sward and flowers and potherbs; and a garth-wall
of grey stone, not very high, was the only defence thereof toward the
wood, but it was overlooked by a tall tower of the great wall, which
hight the Foresters' Tower. In the said outer garth-wall also was a
postern, whereby there was not seldom coming in and going out.

Now when Goldilind had been in her chamber for a few days, she found out
for certain, what she had before misdoubted, that she had been brought
from Leashowe and the peopled parts near to Meadhamstead unto the
uttermost parts of the realm to be kept in prison there.

Howbeit, it was in a way prison courteous; she was still served with
observance, and bowed before, and called my lady and queen, and so
forth: also she might go from chamber to hall and chapel, to and fro,
yet scarce alone; and into the garden she might go, yet not for the more
part unaccompanied; and even at whiles she went out a-gates, but then
ever with folk on the right hand and the left. Forsooth, whiles and
again, within the next two years of her abode at Greenharbour, out of
gates she went and alone; but that was as the prisoner who strives to be
free (although she had, forsooth, no thought or hope of escape), and as
the prisoner brought back was she chastised when she came within gates
again.

Everywhere, to be short, within and about the Castle of Greenharbour,
did Goldilind meet the will and the tyranny of the little sleek widow,
Dame Elinor, to whom both carle and quean in that corner of the world
were but as servants and slaves to do her will; and the said Elinor, who
at first was but spiteful in word and look toward her lady, waxed worse
as time wore and as the blossom of the King's daughter's womanhood began
to unfold, till at last the she-jailer had scarce feasted any day
when she had not in some wise grieved and tormented her prisoner; and
whatever she did, none had might to say her nay.

But Goldilind took all with a high heart, and her courage grew with
her years, nor would she bow the head before any grief, but took to her
whatsoever solace might come to her; as the pleasure of the sun and the
wind, and the beholding of the greenery of the wood, and the fowl and
the beasts playing, which oft she saw afar, and whiles anear, though
whiles, forsooth, she saw nought of it all, whereas she was shut up
betwixt four walls, and that not of her chamber, but of some bare and
foul prison of the Castle, which, with other griefs, must she needs
thole under the name and guise of penance.

However, she waxed so exceeding fair and sweet and lovely, that the
loveliness of her pierced to the hearts of many of her jailers, so that
some of them, and specially of the squires and men-at-arms, would do her
some easement which they might do unrebuked, or not sorely rebuked;
as bringing her flowers in the spring, or whiles a singing-bird or a
squirrel; and an old man there was of the men-at-arms, who would ask
leave, and get it at whiles, to come to her in her chamber, or the
garden? and tell her minstrel tales and the like for her joyance. Sooth
to say, even the pinched heart of the old Burgreve was somewhat touched
by her; and he alone had any might to stand between her and Dame Elinor;
so that but for him it had gone much harder with her than it did.

For the rest, none entered the Castle from the world without, nay not so
much as a travelling monk, or a friar on his wanderings, save and except
some messenger of Earl Geoffrey who had errand with Dame Elinor or the
Burgreve.

So wore the days and the seasons, till it was now more than four years
since she had left Leashowe, and her eighteenth summer was beginning.

But now the tale leaves telling of Goldilind, and goes back to
the matters of Oakenrealm, and therein to what has to do with King
Christopher and Rolf the Marshal.




CHAPTER VI. HOW ROLF THE MARSHAL DREAMS A DREAM AND COMES TO THE CASTLE
OF THE UTTERMOST MARCH.


Now this same summer, when King Christopher was of twenty years and
two, Rolf the Marshal, sleeping one noontide in the King's garden at
Oakenham, dreamed a dream. For himseemed that there came through the
garth-gate a woman fair and tall, and clad in nought but oaken-leaves,
who led by the hand an exceeding goodly young man of twenty summers, and
his visage like to the last battle-dead King of Oakenrealm when he was a
young man. And the said woman led the swain up to the Marshal, who asked
in his mind what these two were: and the woman answered his thought and
said: "I am the Woman of the Woods, and the Landwight of Oakenrealm; and
this lovely lad whose hand I hold is my King and thy King and the King
of Oakenrealm. Wake, fool--wake! and look to it what thou wilt do!"

And therewith he woke up crying out, and drew forth his sword. But when
he was fully awakened, he was ashamed, and went into the hall, and sat
in his high-seat, and strove to think out of his troubled mind; but for
all he might do, he fell asleep again; and again in the hall he dreamed
as he had dreamed in the garden: and when he awoke from his dream he had
no thought in his head but how he might the speediest come to the house
of Lord Richard the Lean, and look to the matter of his lord's son and
see him with his eyes, and, if it might be, take some measure with the
threat which lay in the lad's life. Nought he tarried, but set off in an
hour's time with no more company than four men-at-arms and an old squire
of his, who was wont to do his bidding without question, whether it were
good or evil.

So they went by frith and fell, by wood and fair ways, till in two days'
time they were come by undern within sight of the Castle of the Outer
March, and entered into the street of the thorpe aforesaid; and they saw
that there were no folk therein and at the house-doors save old carles
and carlines scarce wayworthy, and little children who might not go
afoot. But from the field anigh the thorpe came the sound of shouting
and glad voices, and through the lanes of the houses they saw on the
field many people in gay raiment going to and fro, as though there were
games and sports toward.

Thereof Lord Rolf heeded nought, but went his ways straight to the
Castle, and was brought with all honour into the hall, and thither came
Lord Richard the Lean, hastening and half afeard, and did obeisance to
him; and there were but a few in the hall, and they stood out of earshot
of the two lords.

The Marshal spoke graciously to Lord Richard, and made him sit beside
him, and said in a soft voice: "We have come to see thee, Lord, and how
the folk do in the Uttermost Marches. Also we would wot how it goes with
a lad whom we sent to thee when he was yet a babe, whereas he was some
byblow of the late King, our lord and master, and we deemed thee
both rich enough and kind enough to breed him into thriving without
increasing pride upon him: and, firstly, is the lad yet alive?"

He knitted his brow as he spake, for carefulness of soul; but Lord
Richard smiled upon him, though as one somewhat troubled, and answered:
"Lord Marshal, I thank thee for visiting this poor house; and I shall
tell thee first that the lad lives, and hath thriven marvellously,
though he be somewhat unruly, and will abide no correction now these
last six years. Sooth to say, there is now no story of his being anywise
akin to our late Lord King; though true it is that the folk in this
faraway corner of the land call him King Christopher, but only in a
manner of jesting. But it is no jest wherein they say that they will
gainsay him nought, and that especially the young women. Yet I will say
of him that he is wise, and asketh not overmuch; the more is the sorrow
of many of the maidens. A fell woodsman he is, and exceeding stark, and
as yet heedeth more of valiance than of the love of woman."

The Marshal looked no less troubled than before at these words; he said:
"I would see this young man speedily."

"So shall it be, Lord," said Lord Richard. Therewith he called to him
a squire, and said: "Go thou down into the thorpe, and bring hither
Christopher, for that a great lord is here who would set him to do a
deed of woodcraft, such as is more than the wont of men."

So the squire went his ways, and was gone a little while, and meantime
drew nigh to the hall a sound of triumphing songs and shouts, and right
up to the hall doors; then entered the squire, and by his side came a
tall young man, clad but in a white linen shirt and deerskin brogues,
his head crowned with a garland of flowers: him the squire brought up to
the lords on the dais, and louted to them, and said: "My lords, I bring
you Christopher, and he not overwilling, for now hath he been but just
crowned king of the games down yonder; but when the carles and queans
there said that they would come with him and bear him company to the
hall doors, then, forsooth, he yea-said the coming. It were not unmeet
that some shame were done him."

"Peace, man!" said Lord Richard, "what hath this to do with thee? Seest
thou not the Lord Marshal here?" The Lord Rolf sat and gazed on the lad,
and scowled on him; but Christopher saw therein nought but the face of
a great lord burdened with many cares; so when he had made his obeisance
he stood up fearlessly and merrily before them.

Sooth to say, he was full fair to look on: for all his strength, which,
as ye shall hear, was mighty, all the fashion of his limbs and his body
was light and clean done, and beauteous; and though his skin, where it
showed naked, was all tanned with the summer, it was fine and sleek and
kindly, every deal thereof: bright-eyed and round-cheeked he was, with
full lips and carven chin, and his hair golden brown of hue, and curling
crisp about the blossoms of his garland.

So must we say that he was such an youngling as most might have been in
the world, had not man's malice been, and the mischief of grudging and
the marring of grasping.

But now spake Lord Rolf: "Sir varlet, they tell me that thou art a
mighty hunter, and of mickle guile in woodcraft; wilt thou then hunt
somewhat for me, and bring me home a catch seldom seen?"

"Yea, Lord King," said Christopher, "I will at least do my best, if thou
but tell me where to seek the quarry and when."

"It is well," said the Marshal, "and to-morrow my squire, whom thou
seest yonder, and who hight Simon, shall tell thee where the hunt is up,
and thou shalt go with him. But hearken! thou shalt not call me king;
for to-day there is no king in Oakenrealm, and I am but Marshal, and
Earl of the king that shall be."

The lad fell a-musing for a minute, and then he said: "Yea, Lord
Marshal, I shall do thy will: but meseemeth I have heard some tale of
one who was but of late king in Oakenrealm: is it not so, Lord?"

"Stint thy talk, young man," cried the Marshal in a harsh voice, "and
abide to-morrow; who knoweth who shall be king, and whether thou or I
shall live to see him."

But as he spake the words they seemed to his heart like a foretelling
of evil, and he turned pale and trembled, and said to Christopher: "Come
hither, lad; I will give thee a gift, and then shalt thou depart till
to-morrow." So Christopher drew near to him, and the Marshal pulled off
a ring from his finger and set it on the lad's, and said to him: "Now
depart in peace;" and Christopher bent the knee to him and thanked him
for the gracious gift of the ruler of Oakenrealm, and then went his ways
out of the hall, and the folk without gave a glad cry as he came amongst
them.

But by then he was come to the door, Lord Rolf looked on his hand, and
saw that, instead of giving the youngling a finger-ring which he had
bought of a merchant for a price of five bezants, as he had meant to
do, he had given him a ring which the old King had had, whereon was the
first letter of his name (Christopher to wit), and a device of a crowned
rose, for this ring was a signet of his. Wherefore was the Marshal once
more sore troubled, and he arose, and was half minded to run down the
hall after Christopher; but he refrained him, and presently smiled
to himself, and then fell a-talking to Lord Richard, sweetly and
pleasantly.

SO wore the day to evening; but, ere he went to bed, the Lord Rolf had
a privy talk, first with Lord Richard, and after with his squire Simon.
What followed of that talk ye may hear after.




CHAPTER VII. HOW CHRISTOPHER WENT A JOURNEY INTO THE WILD-WOOD.


Next morning Christopher, who slept in the little hall of the inner
court of the Castle, arose betimes, and came to the great gate; but, for
as early as he was, there he saw the squire Simon abiding him, standing
between two strong horses; to him he gave the sele of the day, and the
squire greeted him, but in somewhat surly wise. Then he said to him:
"Well, King Christopher, art thou ready for the road?"

"Yea, as thou seest," said the youngling smiling. For, indeed, he had
breeches now beneath his shirt, and a surcoat of green woollen over it;
boots of deerskin had he withal, and spurs thereon: he was girt with a
short sword, and had a quiver of arrows at his back, and bare a great
bow in his hand.

"Yea," quoth Simon, "thou deemest thee a gay swain belike; but thou
lookest likelier for a deerstealer than a rider, thou, hung up to thy
shooting-gear. Deemest thou we go a-hunting of the hind?"

Quoth Christopher: "I wot not, squire; but the great lord who lieth
sleeping yonder, hath told me that thou shouldest give me his errand;
and of some hunting or feat of wood-craft he spake. Moreover, this
crooked stick can drive a shaft through matters harder than a hind's
side."

Simon looked confused, and he reddened and stammered somewhat as he
answered: "Ah, yea: so it was; I mind me; I will tell thee anon."

Said Christopher: "Withal, squire, if we are wending into the wood, as
needs we must, unless we ride round about this dale in a ring all day,
dost thou deem we shall go at a gallop many a mile? Nay, fair sir; the
horses shall wend a foot's pace oftenest, and we shall go a-foot not
unseldom through the thickets."

Now was Simon come to himself again, and that self was surly, so he
said: "Ay, ay, little King, thou deemest thee exceeding wise in these
woods, dost thou not? and forsooth, thou mayst be. Yet have I tidings
for thee."

"Yea, and what be they?" said Christopher.

Simon grinned: "Even these," said he, "that Dr. Knowall was no man's
cousin while he lived, and that he died last week."

Therewith he swung himself into his saddle, and Christopher laughed
merrily at his poor gibe and mounted in like wise.

Wherewithal they rode their ways through the thorpe, and at the southern
end thereof Simon drew rein, and looked on Christopher as if he would
ask him something, but asked not. Then said Christopher: "Whither go we
now?"

Said Simon: "It is partly for thee to say: hearken, I am bidden first to
ride the Redwater Wood with thee: knowest thou that?"

"Yea," said the lad, "full well: but which way shall we ride it? Wilt
thou come out of it at Redwater Head, or Herne Moss, or the Long Pools?"

Said Simon: "We shall make for the Long Pools, if thou canst bring me
there."

Christopher laughed: "Aha!" said he, "then am I some faraway cousin
of Dr. Knowall when the whole tale is told: forsooth I can lead thee
thither; but tell me, what shall I do of valiant deeds at the Long
Pools? for there is no fire-drake nor effit, nay, nor no giant, nor
guileful dwarf, nought save mallard and coot, heron and bittern; yea,
and ague-shivers to boot."

Simon looked sourly on him and said: "Thou are bidden to go with me,
young man, or gainsay the Marshal. Art thou mighty enough thereto? For
the rest, fear not but that the deed shall come to thee one day."

"Nay," said Christopher, "it is all one to me, for I am at home in these
woods and wastes, I and my shafts. Tell me of the deeds when thou
wilt." But indeed he longed to know the deed, and fretted him because of
Simon's surliness and closeness. Then he said: "Well, Squire Simon, let
us to the road; for thou shalt know that to-night we must needs house us
under the naked heaven; in nowise can we come to the Long Pools before
to-morrow morning."

"Yea, and why not?" said the squire; "I have lain in worse places."

"Wilt thou tell me thereof?" said Christopher.

"Mayhappen," said Simon, "if to-morrow comes and goes for both of us
twain."

So they rode their ways through the wood, and baited at midday with what
Simon bare in his saddle-bags, and then went on till night fell on them;
then asked Simon how long they were from the Long Pools, and Christopher
told him that they were yet short of them some fifteen miles, and those
long ones, because of the marish grounds. So they tethered their horses
there and ate their supper; and lay down to sleep in the house of the
woods, by a fire-side which they lighted.

But in the midnight Christopher, who was exceeding fine-eared, had an
inkling of someone moving afoot anigh him, and he awoke therewith, and
sprang up, his drawn short-sword in his hand, and found himself face to
face with Simon, and he also with his sword drawn. Simon sprang aback,
but held up his sword-point, and Christopher, not yet fully awake, cried
out: "What wouldst thou? What is it?"

Simon answered, stammering and all abashed: "Didst thou not hear then?
it wakened me."

"I heard nought," said Christopher; "what was it?"

"Horses going in the wood," said Simon

"Ah, yea," said Christopher, "it will have been the wild colts and the
mares; they harbour about these marsh-land parts. Go to sleep again,
neighbour, the night is not yet half worn; but I will watch a while."

Then Simon sheathed his sword, and turned about and stood uneasily a
little while, and then cast him down as one who would sleep hastily;
but slept not forsooth, though he presently made semblance of it: as for
Christopher, he drew together the brands of the fire, and sat beside it
with his blade over his knees, until the first beginning of the summer
dawn was in the sky; then he began to nod, and presently lay aback and
slept soundly. Simon slept not, but durst not move. So they lay till it
was broad day, and the sunbeams came thrusting through the boughs of the
thicket.




CHAPTER VIII. CHRISTOPHER COMES TO THE TOFTS.


When they arose in the sunshine, Simon went straightway to see to the
horses, while Christopher stayed by the fire to dight their victuals;
he was merry enough, and sang to himself the while; but when Simon came
back again, Christopher looked on him sharply, but for a while Simon
would not meet his eye, though he asked divers questions of him
concerning little matters, as though he were fain to hear Christopher's
voice; at last he raised his eyes, and looked on him steadily, and then
Christopher said: "Well, wayfarer mine, and whither away this morning?"

Said Simon: "As thou wottest, to the Long Pools."

Said the lad: "Well, thou keepest thy tidings so close, that I will ask
thee no more till we come to the Long Pools; since there, forsooth,
thou must needs tell me; unless we sunder company there, whereof I were
nought grieving."

"Mayhappen thou shalt fare a long way to-day," muttered Simon.

But the lad cried out aloud, while his eye glittered and his cheek
flushed: "Belike thou hadst well-nigh opened the door thereto last
night!" And therewith he leapt to his feet and drew his short-sword, and
with three deft strokes sheared asunder an overhanging beech-bough as
thick as a man's wrist, that it fell crashing down, and caught Simon
amongst the fall of its leafy twigs, while Christopher stood laughing
on him, but with a dangerous lofty look in his eyes: then he turned away
quietly toward the horses and mounted his nag, and Simon followed and
did the like, silently; crestfallen he looked, with brooding fierceness
in his face.

So they rode their ways, and spake but little each to each till they
came to where the trees of the wood thinned speedily, and gave out at
last at the foot of a low stony slope but little grassed; and when they
had ridden up to the brow and could see below, Christopher stretched
out his hand, and said: "Lo thou the Long Pools, fellow wayfarer! and lo
some of the tramping; horses that woke thee and not me last night."

Forsooth there lay below them a great stretch of grass, which whiles
ran into mere quagmire, and whiles was sound and better grassed; and
the said plain was seamed by three long shallow pools, with, as it were,
grassy causeways between them, grown over here and there with ancient
alder trees; but the stony slope whereon they had reined up bent round
the plain mostly to the east, as though it were the shore of a great
water; and far away to the south the hills of the forest rose up blue,
and not so low at the most, but that they were somewhat higher than
the crest of the White Horse as ye may see it from the little Berkshire
hills above the Thames. Down on the firm greensward there was indeed a
herd of wild horses feeding; mallard and coot swam about the waters; the
whimbrel laughed from the bent-sides, and three herons stood on the side
of the causeway seeking a good fishing-stead.

Simon sat a-horseback looking askance from the marish to Christopher,
and said nothing a while; then he spake in a low croaking voice, and
said: "So, little King, we have come to the Long Pools; now I will ask
thee, hast thou been further southward than this marish land?"

"That have I," said the lad, "a day's journey further; but according to
the tales of men it was at the peril of my life."

Simon seemed as if he had not noted his last word; he said: "Well then,
since thou knowest the wild and the wood, knowest thou amidst of the
thickets there, two lumps of bare hills, like bowls turned bottom up,
that rise above the trees, and on each a tower, and betwixt them a long
house."

"Save us, Allhallows!" quoth Christopher, "but thou wilt mean the Tofts!
Is it so, sir squire?"

"Even so," said Simon.

"And thou knowest what dwellest there, and wouldst have me lead thee
thither?" said the lad.

"I am so bidden," said Simon; "if thou wilt not do my bidding, seek thou
some place to hide thee in from the hand of the Earl Marshal."

Said the youngling: "Knowest thou not Jack of the Tofts and his seven
sons, and what he is, and that he dwelleth there?"

Said Simon: "I know of him; yea, and himself I know, and that he
dwelleth there; and I wot that men call him an outlaw, and that many
rich men shall lack ere he lacks. What then?"

"This," said Christopher, "that, as all tales tell, he will take my life
if I ride thither. And," said he, turning to Simon, "this is belike what
thou wouldest with me?" And therewith he drew out his sword, for his bow
was unstrung.

But Simon sat still and let his sword abide, and said, sourly enough:
"Thou art a fool to think I am training thee to thy death by him; for I
have no will to die, and why shall he not slay me also? Now again I say
unto thee, thou hast the choice, either to lead me to the Tofts, where
shall be the deed for thee to do, or to hide thee in some hole, as I
said afore, from the vengeance of the Lord of Oakenrealm. But as for thy
sword, thou mayst put it up, for I will not fight with thee, but rather
let thee go with a string to thy leg, if thou wilt not be wise and do as
thy lords ordain for thee."

Christopher sheathed his sword, and a smile came into his face, as if
some new thought were stirring in him, and he said: "Well, since thou
wilt not fight with me, and I but a lad, I will e'en do thy will and
thine errand to Jack of the Tofts. Maybe he is not so black as he is
painted, and not all tales told of him are true. But some of them I will
tell thee as we ride along."

"And some thereof I know already, O woodland knight," said Simon,
as they rode down the bent, and Christopher led on toward the green
causeway betwixt the waters. "Tell me," quoth he, when they had ridden
awhile, "is this one of thy tales, how Jack of the Tofts went to the
Yule feast of a great baron in the guise of a minstrel, and, even as
they bore in the boar's head, smote the said baron on the neck, so that
his head lay by the head of the swine on the Christmas board?"

"Yea," said Christopher, "and how Jack cried out: 'Two heads of swine,
one good to eat, one good to burn.' But, my master, thou shalt know that
this manslaying was not for nought: whereas the Baron of Greenlake had
erewhile slain Jack's father in felon wise, where he could strike no
stroke for life; and two of his brethren also had he slain, and made the
said Jack an outlaw, and he all sackless. In the Uttermost March we deem
that he had a case against the baron."

"Hah!" said Simon. "Is this next tale true, that this Jack o' the Tofts
slew a good knight before the altar, so that the priest's mass-hackle
was all wet with his blood, whereas the said priest was in the act of
putting the holy body into the open mouth of the said knight?"

Christopher said eagerly: "True was it, by the Rood! and well was it
done, for that same Sir Raoul was an ugly traitor, who had knelt down
where he died to wed the Body of the Lord to a foul lie in his mouth;
whereas the man who knelt beside him he had trained to his destruction,
and was even then doing the first deal of his treason by forswearing him
there."

"And that man who knelt with him there," said Simon, "what betid to
him?"

Said Christopher: "He went out of the church with Jack of the Tofts that
minute of the stroke; and to the Tofts he went with him, and abode with
him freely: and a valiant man he was...and is."

"Hah!" said Simon again. "And then there is this: that the seven sons
of Jack of the Tofts bore off perforce four fair maidens of gentle blood
from the castle wherein they dwelt, serving a high dame in all honour;
and that moreover, they hanged the said dame over the battlements of her
own castle. Is this true, fair sir?"

"True is it as the gospel," said Christopher: "yet many say that the
hanged dame had somewhat less than her deserts; for a foul & cruel whore
had she been; and had done many to be done to death, and stood by while
they were pined. And the like had she done with those four damsels, had
there not been the stout sons of Jack of the Tofts; so that the dear
maidens were somewhat more than willing to be borne away."

Simon grinned: "Well, lad," said he, "I see that thou knowest Jack of
the Tofts even better than I do; so why in the devil's name thou art
loth to lead me to him, I wot not."

Christopher reddened, and held his peace awhile; then he said: "Well
fellow-farer, at least I shall know something of him ere next midnight."

"Yea," said Simon, "and shall we not come to the Tofts before
nightfall?"

"Let us essay it," said Christopher, "and do our best, it yet lacketh
three hours of noon." Therewith he spurred on, for the greensward was
hard under the hooves, and they had yet some way to go before they
should come amongst the trees and thickets.

Into the said wood they came, and rode all day diligently, but night
fell on them before they saw either house or man or devil; then said
Simon: "Why should we go any further before dawn? Will it not be best to
come to this perilous house by daylight?"

Said Christopher: "There be perils in the wood as well as in the house.
If we lie down here, maybe Jack's folk may come upon us sleeping, and
some mischance may befall us. Withal, hereabout be no wild horses to
wake thee and warn thee of thy foeman anigh. Let us press on; there is
a moon, though she be somewhat hidden by clouds, and meseemeth the way
lieth clear before me; neither are we a great way from the Tofts."

Then Simon rode close up to Christopher, and took his rein and stayed
him, and said to him, as one who prayeth: "Young man, willest thou my
death?"

"That is as it may be," said Christopher; "willest thou mine?"

Simon held his peace awhile, and Christopher might not see what was in
his face amidst the gathering dusk; but he twitched his rein out of the
squire's hand, as if he would hasten onward; then the squire said: "Nay,
I pray thee abide and hear a word of me."

"Speak then," said Christopher, "but hasten, for I hunger, and I would
we were in the hall." And therewith he laughed.

Said Simon: "Thus it is: if I go back to my lord and bear no token of
having done his errand to Jack of the Tofts, then am I in evil case; and
if I come to the Tofts, I wot well that Jack is a man fierce of heart,
and ready of hand: now, therefore, I pray thee give me thy word to be my
warrant, so far as thou mayst be, with this woodman and his sons."

At that word Christopher brake out a-laughing loudly, till all the dusk
wood rang with the merry sound of his fresh voice; at last he said:
"Well, well, thou art but a craven to be a secret murderer: the Lord God
would have had an easy bargain of Cain, had he been such as thou. Come
on, and do thine errand to Jack of the Tofts, and I will hold thee
harmless, so far as I may. Though, sooth to say, I guessed what thine
errand was, after the horses waked thee and put a naked sword in thine
hand last night. Marry! I had no inkling of it when we left the Castle
yesterday morning, but deemed thy lord needed me to do him some service.
Come on then! or rather go thou on before me a pace; there, where thou
seest the glimmer betwixt the beech-trees yonder; if thou goest astray,
I am anigh thee for a guide. And I say that we shall not go far without
tidings."

Simon went on perforce, as he was bidden, and they rode thus a while
slowly, Christopher now and then crying, as they went: "To the right,
squire! To the left! Straight on now!" and so on. But suddenly they
heard voices, and it was as if the wood had all burst out into fire, so
bright a light shone out. Christopher shouted, and hastened on to pass
Simon, going quite close to his right side thereby, and as he did so, he
saw steel flashing in his hand, and turned sidling to guard him, but
ere he could do aught Simon drave a broad dagger into his side, and then
turned about and fled the way they had come, so far as he knew how.

Christopher fell from his horse at once as the stroke came home, but
straightway therewith were there men with torches round about him, a
dozen of them; men tall and wild-looking in the firelight; and one
of them, a slim young man with long red hair falling all about his
shoulders, knelt down by him, while the others held his horse and gat
his feet out of the stirrups.

The red-head laid his hand on his breast, and raised his head up till
the light of a torch fell on it, and then he cried out: "Masters, here
hath been a felon; the man hath been sticked, and the deed hath to do
with us; for lo you, this is none other than little Christopher of the
Uttermost March, who stumbled on the Tofts last Yule, and with whom we
were so merry together. Here, thou Robert of Maisey, do thy leechdom on
him if he be yet living; but if he be dead, or dieth of his hurt, then
do I take the feud on me, to follow it to the utmost against the slayer;
even I, David the Red, though I be the youngest of the sons of Jack of
the Tofts. For this man I meant should be my fellow in field and fell,
ganging and galloping, in hall and high-place, in cot and in choir,
before woman and warrior, and priest and proud-prince. Now thou Robert,
how does he?"

Said the man who had looked to Christopher's wound, and had put aside
his coat and shirt: "He is sore hurt, but meseemeth not deadly. Nay,
belike he may live as long as thou, or longer, whereas thou wilt ever be
shoving thy red head and lank body wheresoever knocks are going."

David rose with a sigh of one who is lightened of a load, and said:
"Well Robert, when thou hast bound his wound let us have him into the
house: Ho lads! there is light enough to cut some boughs and make a
litter for him. But, ho again! has no one gone after the felon to take
him?"

Robert grinned up from his job with the hurt man: "Nay, King David,"
said he, "it is mostly thy business; mayhappen thou wilt lay thy heels
on thy neck and after him."

The red-head stamped on the ground, and half drew his sax, and shoved
it back again unto the sheath, and then said angrily: "I marvel at thee,
Robert, that thou didst not send a man or two at once after the felon:
how may I leave my comrade and sweet board-fellow lying hurt in the
wild-wood? Art thou growing over old for our woodland ways, wherein
loitering bringeth louting?"

Robert chuckled and said: "I thought thou wouldst take the fly in thy
mouth, foster-son: if the felon escape Ralph Longshanks and Anthony
Green, then hath he the devil's luck; and they be after him."

"That is well," said the young man, "though I would I were with them."
And therewith he walked up and down impatiently, while the others were
getting ready the litter of boughs.

At last it was done, and Christopher laid thereon, and they all went
on together through the woodland path, the torches still flaring about
them. Presently they came out into a clearing of the wood, and lo,
looming great and black before them against the sky, where the moon had
now broken out of the clouds somewhat, the masses of the tofts, and at
the top of the northernmost of them a light in the upper window of a
tall square tower. Withal the yellow-litten windows of a long house
showed on the plain below the tofts; but little else of the house might
be seen, save that, as they drew near, the walls brake out in doubtful
light here and there as the torches smote them.

So came they to a deep porch, where they quenched all the torches save
one, and entered a great hall through it, David and two other tall young
men going first, and Robert Maisey going beside the bier. The said hall
was lighted with candles, but not very brightly, save at the upper end;
but amidmost a flickering heap of logs sent a thin line of blue smoke up
to the luffer. There were some sixty folk in the hall, scattered about
the end-long tables, a good few of whom were women, well grown and
comely enough, so far as could be seen under the scanty candle-light.
At the high-table, withal, were sitting both men and women, and as they
drew near to the greater light of it, there could be seen in the chief
seat a man, past middle age, tall, wide-shouldered and thin-flanked,
with a short peaked beard and close-cut grizzled hair; he was high of
cheekbones, thin-faced, with grey eyes, both big and gentle-looking; he
was clad in a green coat welted with gold. Beside him sat a woman, tall
and big-made, but very fair of face, though she were little younger,
belike, than the man. Out from these two sat four men and four women,
man by man and woman by woman, on either side of the high-seat. Of the
said men, one was of long red hair as David, and like to him in
all wise, but older; the others were of like fashion to him in the
high-seat. Shortly to say it, his sons they were, as David and the two
young men with him. The four women who sat with these men were all fair
and young, and one of them, she who drank out of the red-head's cup, so
fair, and with such a pleasant slim grace, that her like were not easy
to be found.

Again, to shorten the tale, there in the hall before Christopher, who
lay unwotting, were Jack of the Tofts and his seven sons, and the four
wives of four of the same, whom they had won from the Wailful Castle,
when they, with their father, put an end to the evil woman, and the
great she-tyrant of the Land betwixt the Wood and the River.

Now when David and his were come up to the dais, they stayed them,
and their father spake from his high-seat and said: "What is to do, ye
three? and what catch have ye?"

Said David: "I would fain hope 'tis the catch of a life that or I love;
for here is come thy guest of last Yule, even little Christopher, who
wrestled with thee and threw thee after thou hadst thrown all of us, and
he lying along and hurt, smitten down by a felon hard on our very doors.
What will ye do with him?"

"What," said Jack of the Tofts, "but tend him and heal him and cherish
him. And when he is well, then we shall see. But where is the felon who
smote him?"

Said David: "He fled away a-horseback ere we came to the field of deed,
and Anthony Green and Ralph Longshanks are gone after him, and belike,
will take him."

"Mayhappen not," said the master. "Now, forsooth, I have an inkling of
what this may mean; whereas there can be but one man whose business
may be the taking of our little guest's life. But let all be till he
be healed and may tell us his tale; and, if he telleth it as I deem
he will, then shall we seek further tidings. Meanwhile, if ye take the
felon, keep him heedfully till I may see him; for then may I have a true
tale out of him, even before Christopher is hale again."

So therewith David and Robert, with two or three others, brought
Christopher to a chamber, and did what leechdoms to him they might;
but Jack of the Tofts, and his sons and their fair wives, and his other
folk, made merry in the hall of the Tofts.




CHAPTER IX. SQUIRE SIMON COMES BACK TO OAKENHAM. THE EARL MARSHAL TAKEN
TO KING IN OAKENREALM.


Now as to Squire Simon, whether the devil helped him, or his luck, or
were it his own cunning and his, horse's stoutness, we wot not; but in
any case he fell not in with Ralph Longshanks and Anthony Green, but
rode as far and as fast as his horse would go, and then lay down in the
wild-wood; and on the morrow arose and went his ways, and came in the
even to the Castle of the Uttermost March, and went on thence the morrow
after on a fresh horse to Oakenham. There he made no delay but went
straight to the High House, and had privy speech of the Earl Marshal;
and him he told how he had smitten Christopher, and, as he deemed, slain
him. The Earl Marshal looked on him grimly and said: "Where is the ring
then?"

"I have it not," said Simon. "How might I light down to take it, when
the seven sons were hard on us?" And therewith he told him all the tale,
and how he had risen to slay Christopher the even before; and how he had
found out after that the youngling had become guest and fosterling of
the folk of the Tofts; and how warily Christopher had ridden, so that
he, Simon, had had to do his best at the last moment. "And now, Lord,"
quoth he, "I see that it will be my luck to have grudging of thee, or
even worse it may be; yea, or thou wilt be presently telling me that
I am a liar and never struck the stroke: but I warrant me that by
this time Jack of the Tofts knoweth better, for I left my knife in the
youngling's breast, and belike he wotteth of my weapons. Well, then, if
thou wilt be quit of me, thou hast but to forbear upholding me against
the Toft folk, and then am I gone without any to-do of thee."

Earl Rolf spake quietly in answer, though his face was somewhat
troubled: "Nay, Simon, I doubt thee not, not one word; for why shouldest
thou lie to me? nor do I deem thou wouldest, for thou art trusty and
worthy. Yet sore I doubt if the child be dead. Well, even so let it be,
for I am alive; and full surely I am mightier than Jack of the Tofts,
both to uphold thee against him (wherein I shall not fail), and
otherwise. But may God make me even as that young man if I be not
mightier yet in a few days. But now do thou go and eat and drink and
take thy disport; for thou hast served me well; and in a little while I
shall make thee knight and lord, and do all I can to pleasure thee."

So then Simon knelt to the Earl and made obeisance to him, and arose and
went his ways, light-hearted and merry.

But within the month it so befel that some of the lords and dukes came
to the Earl Marshal, and prayed him to call together a great Folk-mote
of all Oakenrealm; and he answered them graciously, and behight them to
do as they would; and even so did he.

And that Mote was very great, and whenas it was hallowed, there arose
a great lord, grey and ancient, and bewailed him before the folk, that
they had no king over Oakenrealm to uphold the laws & ward the land; and
"Will ye live bare and kingless for ever?" said he at last. "Will ye
not choose you a king, and crown him, before I die, and we others of the
realm who are old and worn?" Then he sat down, and another arose, and in
plain terms he bade them take the Earl Marshal to king. And then arose
one after other, and each sang the same song, till the hearts of the
people grew warm with the big words, and at first many, and then more
cried out: "A King, a King! The Earl Marshal for King! Earl Rolf for
King!" So that at last the voices rose into a great roar, and sword
clashed on shield, and they who were about the Earl turned to him and
upraised him on a great war-shield, and he stood thereon above the folk
with a naked sword in his hand, and all the folk shouted about him.

Thereafter the chiefs and all the mightiest came and did homage to him
for King of Oakenrealm as he sat on the Hill of the Folk-mote: and that
night there was once more a King of Oakenrealm, and Earl Rolf was no
more, but King Rolf ruled the people.

But now the tale leaves telling of him, and turns again to Christopher
the woodman, who lay sick of his hurt in the House of the Tofts.




CHAPTER X. OF CHRISTOPHER AT THE TOFTS.


Christopher was six weeks ere he could come and go as he was wont; but
it was but a few days ere he was well enough to tell his tale to Jack of
the Tofts and his seven bold sons; and they cherished him and made
much of him, and so especially did David, the youngest son, to his
board-fellow and troth-brother.

On a day when he was well-nigh whole, as he sat under an oak-tree nigh
the house, in the cool of the evening, Jack of the Tofts came to him and
sat beside him, and made him tell his tale to him once more, and when he
was done he said to him: "Foster-son, for so I would have thee deem of
thyself, what is the thing that thou rememberest earliest in thy days?"

Said Christopher: "A cot without the Castle walls at the Uttermost
Marches, and a kind woman therein, big, sandy-haired, and freckled, and
a lad that was white-haired and sturdy, somewhat bigger than I. And
I mind me standing up against the door-post of the cot and seeing
men-at-arms riding by in white armour, and one of them throwing an apple
to me, and I raised my arm to throw it back at him, but my nurse (for
somehow I knew she was not my mother) caught my hand and drew me back
indoors, and I heard the men laughing behind me. And then a little after
my nurse took me into the Castle court, and there was again the man who
had thrown me the apple, sitting on a bench therein, clad in a scarlet
gown furred with brown fur; and she led me up to him, and he stooped
down and chucked me under the chin and put his hand on my head, and
looked at my nurse and said: 'Yea, he is a big lad, and groweth apace,
whereas he is but of six winters.' 'Nay, Lord,' said my nurse, 'he is
but scantly five.' He knit his brows and said: 'Nay, I tell thee he is
six.' She shook her head, but said nought, and the great man scowled on
her and said: 'Mistress, wilt thou set thy word against mine? Know now
that this child is of six years. Now then, how old is he?' She said
faintly: 'Six years.' Said he: 'Look to it that thy head and thy mouth
forget it not, else shall we make thy back remember it.' Then he put his
hand on my head again, and said: 'Well, I say thou art a big lad for six
years;' and therewith he gave me a silver penny; and even as he spake,
came up a grey-clad squire to him and looked on me curiously. Then I
went away with my nurse, and wondered why she was grown so pale, whereas
she was mostly red-cheeked and jolly. But when she had brought me into
the cot again, she kissed me and clipped me, weeping sorely the while;
wherefore I wept, though I knew not why. Sithence, I soon came to know
that the man was the lord and governor of the Castle, as ye may well
wot; but to this hour I know not what he meant by threatening my nurse."

Said Jack: "And how old art thou now, Christopher mine?"

Said the youngling, laughing: "By my lord the Castellan's reckoning I am
twenty and two years; but if thou wilt trow my good and kind nurse, that
yet liveth a kind dame, thou must take twelve months off the tale."

Jack sat silent a little; then he laughed and said: "Well, thou art a
mickle babe, Christopher, and it may be that one day many a man shall
know it. But now tell me again; thou hadst said to me before that thou
hast known neither father nor mother, brother nor sisters: is it so,
verily?"

Said Christopher: "Never a kinsman of blood have I, though many
well-wishers."

Said Jack: "Well, now hast thou father and mother, brethren and sisters,
though they be of the sort of man-slayers and strong-thieves and
outlaws; yet they love thee, lad, and thou mayst one day find out how
far thou mayst trust them."

Christopher nodded and smiled at him merrily; then he fell silent
awhile, and the outlaw sat looking on him; at last he said suddenly:
"Foster-father, tell me what I am, and of what kindred, I pray thee;
for, methinks, thou knowest thereof; and what wonder, wise man as thou
art."

"Forsooth, son Christopher, I have a deeming thereof, or somewhat more,
and when it is waxen greater yet, I will tell it thee one day, but not
now. But hearken! for I have other tidings for thee. Thou art now whole
and strong, and in a few days thou mayst wend the wild-wood as stoutly
as e'er a one of us. Now, therefore, how sayest thou, if I bid thee fare
a two days' journey with David and Gilbert thy brethren, and thy sister
Joanna, till they bring thee to a fair little stead which I call mine
own, to dwell there awhile? For, meseemeth, lad, that the air of the
Tofts here may not be overwholesome unto thee."

Christopher reddened, and he half rose up, and said: "What is this,
foster-father? Is it that there shall be battle at the Tofts, and that
thou wouldst have me away thence? Am I then such a weakling?"

Said Jack, laughing: "Be still now, thou sticked one. The Tofts go down
to battle at some whiles; but seldom comet battle to the Tofts; and no
battle do I look for now. But do my bidding, sweet fosterling, and it
will be better for me and better for thee, and may, perchance, put off
battle for awhile; which to me as now were not unhandy. If thou wilt
but abide at Littledale for somewhile, there shall be going and coming
betwixt us, and thou shalt drink thy Yule at the Tofts, and go back
afterwards, and ever shalt thou have thy sweet fellows with thee; so be
wise, since thou goest not perforce."

"Yea, yea," said Christopher, laughing; "thou puttest force on no man,
is it not so, foster-father? Wherefore I will go, and uncompelled."

Therewith came up to them, from out of the wild-wood, David, and with
him Joanna, who was the wife of Gilbert, and one of those fair maidens
from the Wailful Castle, though not the fairest of them; they had been
a-hunting, for ever those three would willingly go together, Gilbert,
David, and Joanna; and now Gilbert had abided behind, to dight the
quarry for fetching home. Christopher looked on the two joyfully, as a
man getting whole after sickness smiles on goodly things; and Joanna was
fair to see in her hunter's attire, with brogues tied to her naked feet,
and the shapeliness of her legs bare to the knee beneath the trussing up
of her green skirts.

They greeted Christopher kindly, and Joanna sat down by him to talk,
but Jack of the Tofts took his son by the arm, and went toward the house
with him in earnest speech.




CHAPTER XI. HOW CHRISTOPHER CAME TO LITTLEDALE TO ABIDE THERE A WHILE.


In about a week's time from this, those four fellows went their ways
southward from the Tofts, having with them four good nags and four
sumpter beasts laden with such things as they needed, whereof were
weapons enough, though they all, save Christopher, bare bows; and he
and the others were girt with swords, and a leash of good dogs followed
them. Two milch kine also they drave with them.

Merry they were all as they went their ways through the woods, but the
gladness of Christopher was even past words; wherefore, after a little,
he spake scarce at all, but sat in his saddle hearkening the tales and
songs and jests of his fellows, who went close beside him, for more
often they went a-foot than rode. And, forsooth, as the sweet morning
wore, it seemed to him, so great was his joy, as if all the fair show
of the greenery, and the boles of the ancient oaks, and the squirrels
running from bough to bough, and the rabbits scuttling from under the
bracken, and the hind leaping in the wood-lawn, and the sun falling
through the rustling leaves, and the wind on his face, and the scent of
the forest, yea, and his fair companions and their loveliness & valiancy
and kindness, and the words and songs that came from their dear mouths,
all these seemed to him, as it were, one great show done for the behoof
and pleasure of him, the man come from the peril of death and the
sick-bed.

They lay that night in all glee under the green boughs; and arose on the
morrow, and went all day, and again slept in the greenwood, and the
next morning came down into a fair valley, which was indeed Littledale,
through which ran a pleasant little river; and on a grassy knoll, but
a short way from its bank, was a long framed hall, somewhat narrow,
and nought high, whitherward they turned them straightway, and were
presently before the door; then Gilbert drew a key from out of his scrip
and unlocked the door, and they entered, and found within a fair little
hall, with shut-beds out from it on the further side, and kitchen, and
store-bowers at the end; all things duly appointed with plenishing, and
meal and wine; for it was but some three months since one of Jack of the
Tofts' allies, Sir Launcelot a'Green and his wife and two bairns, had
left it till their affair was made straight; whereas he had dwelt there
a whole year, for he had been made an outlaw of Meadham, and was a dear
friend of the said Jack.

"Now," said David smiling, "here is now thy high house and thy castle,
little King Christopher; how doth it like thee?"

"Right well," said Christopher; "and, to say sooth, I would almost that
it were night, or my bones do else, that I might lie naked in a bed."

"Nay, lad," said Gilbert, "make it night now, and we will do all that
needs must be done, while thou liest lazy, as all kings use to do."

"Nay," said Christopher, "I will be more a king than so, for I will do
neither this nor that; I will not work and I will not go to bed, but
will look on, till it is time for me to take to the crooked stick and
the grey-goose wing and seek venison."

"That is better than well," said David; "for I can see by thine eyes,
that are dancing with pleasure, that in three or four days thou wilt be
about the thickets with us."

"Meantime," said Joanna, "thou shalt pay for thy meat and drink by
telling us tales when we come home weary."

"Yea," said Christopher laughing, "that ye may go to sleep before your
time."

So they talked, and were joyous and blithe together, and between them
they made the house trim, and decked it with boughs and blossoms; and
though Christopher told them no tale that night, Joanna and David sang
both; and in a night or two it was Christopher that was the minstrel. So
when the morrow came there began their life of the woodland; but, save
for the changing of the year and the chances of the hunt, the time
passed on from day to day with little change, and it was but seldom that
any man came their way. When Yule was, they locked the house door behind
them and went their ways home to the Tofts; and now of all of these
wayfarers was Christopher by far the hardest and strongest, for his side
had utterly forgotten Simon's knife. At the Tofts they were welcomed
with all triumph, and they were about there in the best of cheer, till
it was wearing toward Candlemas, and then they took occasion of a bright
and sunny day to go back to Littledale once more, and there they abode
till spring was come and was wearing into summer, and messages had come
and gone betwixt them and the Tofts, and it was agreed that with the
first of autumn they should go back to the Tofts and see what should
betide.

But now leave we Christopher and these good fellows of the Tofts and
turn to Goldilind, who is yet dwelling amid no very happy days in the
Castle of Greenharbour, on the northernmost marches of Meadham.




CHAPTER XII. OF GOLDILIND IN THE MAY MORNING AT GREENHARBOUR.


May was on the land now, and was come into its second week, and
Goldilind awoke on a morn in the Castle of Greenharbour; but little did
her eyes behold of the May, even when they were fully open; for she
was lying, not in her own chamber, which was proper, and even somewhat
stately, and from whence she could look on the sky and greenwood, but
in a chamber low down amidst the footings of the wall, little lighted,
unadorned, with nought in it for sport or pleasure; nought, forsooth,
save the pallet bed on which she lay, a joint stool and water ewer.
To be short, though it were called the Least Guard-chamber, it was a
prison, and she was there dreeing her penance, as Dame Elinor would
call the cruelty of her malice, which the chaplain, Dame Elinor's
led captain, had ordained her for some sin which the twain had forged
between them.

She lay there naked in her smock, with no raiment anigh her, and this
was the third morning whereon she had awakened to the dusky bare walls,
and a long while had their emptiness made of the hours: but she lay
quiet and musing, not altogether without cheer now; for indeed she was
not wont to any longer penance than this she had but now tholed, so she
looked for release presently: and, moreover, there had grown in her mind
during those three days a certain purpose; to wit, that she would get
hold of the governor of the castle privily, and two or three others of
the squires who most regarded her, and bewail her case to them, so that
she might perchance get some relief. Forsooth, as she called to mind
this resolve, her heart beat and her cheek flushed, for well she knew
that there was peril in it, and she forecast what might be the worst
that would come thereof, while, on the other hand, the best that might
be seemed to her like a glimpse of Paradise.

As she lay there and turned the matter over in her mind for this many an
hundred time, there came a key into the lock, and the door opened;
and thereby entered a tall woman, dark-haired, white-skinned, somewhat
young, and not ill-favoured: Goldilind still lay there, till the
new-comer said to her in a hard voice, wherein was both threatening and
mockery: "Rise up, our Lady! the Dame Elinor saith that it is enough,
and that thou art to go forth. Nay, hold a while; for I say unto thee
that it is yet early in the day, and that thy chamber is not yet dight
for thee, so thou must needs bestow thyself elsewhere till it be done."

Goldilind rose up, and said smiling: "Yea, Aloyse, but thou hast not
brought my raiment: and thou seest!"

The maid stood looking at her a moment somewhat evilly, and then said:
"Well, since it is but scant six o'clock, I may do that; but I bid thee
ask me not overmuch; for meseemeth Dame Elinor is not overwell pleased
with thee to-day, nor our chaplain either."

Therewith she turned and went out, locking the door behind her, and came
back presently bearing on her arm a green gown and other raiment: she
laid them on the stool before the Lady, and said: "Hasten, my Lady, and
let me go to my place: sooth to say, it may well be double trouble to
thee to don thy clothes, for thou mayst have to doff them again before
long."

Goldilind answered nought, but reddened and paled again as she clad her
under the waiting-maid's eyes. Then they went out together, and up a
short stone stair, till they were level with the greensward without.
Then the maid turned to Goldilind and said: "And now thou art clad and
out, my Lady, I wot not where thou art to go to, since to thy chamber
thou must not go. Nay, hold and hearken! here we be at the door which
opens on to the Foresters' Garth under the Foresters' Tower, thither
shalt thou abide till I come to fetch thee. How now, my Lady! what else
wouldst thou?"

Goldilind looked on her with a smile, yet with eagereyes, and said: "O
good Aloyse, wouldst thou but give me a piece of bread? for I hunger;
thou wottest my queenly board hath not been overloaded these last days."

"Ha!" said Aloyse; "if thou ask me overmuch I fear thou mayst pay for
it, my Lady; but this last asking thou shalt have, and then none other
till all thy penance thou hast dreed. Abide!"

Therewith she went up the stairs, and Goldilind, who now was but weak
with her prison and the sudden light, and the hope and fear of her
purpose of bewailing her story, sat her down on the stair there, almost,
as it were, 'twixt home and hell, till her heart came back to her and
the tears began to flow from her eyes. Forthright came back Aloyse,
bearing a white loaf and a little pitcher of milk on a silver
serving-dish; she laid them down, unlocked the door into the garden, and
thrust Goldilind through by the shoulders; then she turned and took up
her serving-dish with the bread and milk, and handed it to Goldilind
through the door, and said: "Now is my Lady served. It were indeed well
that my Lady should strengthen herself this hour for the hour next to
come."

Therewith she turned about, and shut and locked the door; and the King's
daughter fell to eagerly on her bread, and thought of little till
she had eaten and drunk, save that she felt the sweet scent of the
gilliflowers and eglantine as it were a part of her meal.

Then she went slowly down the garden, treading the greensward beside the
flowers; and she looked on the hold, and the low sun gilded the walls
thereof and glittered in a window here and there, and though there was
on her a foreboding of the hours of that day, she did what she might
to make the best of the fragrant May morning and the song of birds and
rustle of leaves, though, indeed, at whiles the tears would gush out of
her eyes when she thought how young she was and how feeble, and the pity
of herself became sweet unto her.




CHAPTER XIII. OF GOLDILIND IN THE GARTH.


Now, as she went in that garden with her face turned toward the postern
which led into the open space of the greenwood, which was but two
bow-shots from the thicket, she heard the clatter of horse-hoofs on the
loose stones of the path, and how they stopped at the said postern; and
presently there was a key in the lock, the door opened, and a man came
in walking stiffly, like a rider who has ridden far and fast. He was
clad in jack and sallet, and had a sword by his side, and on his sleeve
was done in green and gold a mountain aflame; so that Goldilind knew him
at once for a man of Earl Geoffrey's; and, indeed, she had seen the
man before, coming and going on errands that she knew nought of, and
on which nothing followed that was of import to her. Therefore, as
she watched him cross the garden and go straight up to the door of the
Foresters' Tower, and take out another key and enter, she heeded him but
little, nor did his coming increase her trouble a whit.

She walked on toward the postern, and now she saw that the errand-bearer
had left it open behind him, and when she came close up to it, she saw
his horse tied to a ring in the wall, a strong and good bay nag. The
sight of him, and the glimpse of the free and open land, stirred in her
the misery of her days and the yearning for the loveliness of the world
without, converse of friends, hope of the sufficiency of desire, and the
sweetness of love returned. And so strong a wave of anguish swept over
her, that she bowed her down upon the grass and wept bitterly. Yet but
a little while it lasted; she rose up presently and looked warily all
round her, and up to the Castle, and saw none stirring; she drew up the
skirts of her green gown into her girdle, till the hem but just hid her
knees; then she stepped lightly through the half-open door with flushed
cheeks and glittering eyes, while her heart rose within her; then she
lifted her hand, unhitched the reins from the iron ring, and quietly
led the horse close under the garth-wall, and stole gently up the
slope which, as all roads from the Castle, went straightway toward the
thicket, but this was the straightest. So she went, till she came to the
corner of the garth-wall, and a little further; and the Castle on that
side was blind, save for the swale on the battlement, whereon in that
deep peace was little going; and, moreover, it was not even yet six
o'clock.




CHAPTER XIV. GOLDILIND GOES FREE.


There then she stayed the horse, and, flushed and panting, got lightly
into the saddle and bestrode it, and, leaning over on the beast's neck,
smote his flanks with her heels; the horse was fresh, though his
master had been weary, whereas the said messenger had gotten him from
a forester some six miles away in the wood that morning, so the nag
answered to her call for speed, and she went a great gallop into the
wood, and was hidden in a twinkling from any eyes that might be looking
out of the Castle.

Without checking the nag she sped along, half mad with joy at the
freedom of this happy morn. Nigh aimless she was, but had an inkling
that it were well with her if she could hold northward ever; for the old
man aforesaid had told her of Oakenrealm, and how it lay northward of
them; so that way she drifted as the thicket would suffer her. When she
had gone as much of a gallop as she might for some half hour, she drew
rein to breathe her nag, and hearkened; she turned in the saddle, but
heard nought to affright her, so she went on again, but some what more
soberly; and thuswise she rode for some two hours, and the day waxed
hot, and she was come to a clear pool amidst of a little clearing,
covered with fine greensward right down to the water's edge.

There she made stay, and got off her horse, and stood awhile by him
as he cropped the sweet grass; and the birds sang at the edge of the
thicket, and the rabbits crept and gambolled on the other side of the
water; and from the pool's edge the moorhens cried. She stood half
leaning against the side of the horse till she became somewhat drowsy;
yea, and even dreamed a little, and that little but ill, it seemed, as
she gave a troubled cry and shrank together and turned pale. Then she
rubbed her eyes and smiled, and turned to the pool, where now a little
ripple was running over the face of it, and a thought came upon her,
and she set her hand to the clasp of her gown and undid it, and drew the
gown off her shoulders, and so did off all her raiment, and stood
naked a little on the warm sunny grass, and then bestirred her and went
lightly into the pool, and bathed and sported there, and then came on to
the grass again, and went to and fro to dry her in the air and sun. Then
she did on her raiment again, and laid her down under a thorn-bush
by the pool-side, and there, would she, would she not, went to sleep
soundly and dreamed not. And when she awoke she deemed her sleep had
been long, but it was not so, but scarce a score of minutes. Anyhow, she
sprang up now and went to her horse, and drew the girths tight (which
she had loosed erewhile,) and so bestrode the good horse, and shook the
reins, and rode away much comforted and enheartened.




CHAPTER XV. OF GOLDILIND IN THE WILD-WOOD.


Goldilind rode on, hastening yet to put as many miles as she might
betwixt her and Greenharbour. Within a three hours from her bathing she
fell a-hungering sore, and knew not what to do to eat, till she found a
pouch made fast to the saddle-bow, and therein a little white loaf, that
and no more, which she took and ate the half of with great joy, sitting
down by a brook-side, whence she had her drink.

Then again she mounted, and rode on till dusk overtook her just as she
came to a little river running from the north from pool to shallow, and
shallow to pool. And whereas she was now exceeding weary, and the good
horse also much spent, and that the grass was very sweet and soft down
to the water's edge, and that there was a thick thorn-bush to cover her,
she made up her mind that this place should be her bed-chamber. So she
took saddle and bridle off the horse, as he must needs bite the grass,
and then when she had eaten the other half of her bread, she laid her
down on the green grass, with her head on the saddle, and when she had
lain listening to the horse cropping the grass close anigh her for
a minute or two, she fell fast asleep, and lay there long and had no
dreams.




CHAPTER XVI. WHAT GOLDILIND FOUND IN THE WOOD.


When she awoke it was broad day and bright sun, and she rose up to her
feet and looked about, and saw the horse standing close by, and sharing
the shade with her, whisking his tail about lazily. Then she turned,
and saw the stream rippling out from the pool over the clean gravel, and
here and there a fish darting through the ripple, or making clean rings
on the pool as he quietly took a fly; the sky was blue and clear, there
was scarce a breath of air, and the morning was already hot; no worse
than yesterday sang the birds in the bushes; but as she looked across
the river, where, forsooth, the alders grew thick about the pool's edge,
a cock blackbird, and then another, flew out from the close boughs,
where they had been singing to their mates, with the sharp cry that they
use when they are frighted. Withal she saw the bush move, though, as
aforesaid, the morning was without wind. She had just stooped to do off
her foot-gear (for she was minded to bathe again), but now she stopped
with one shoe in her hand, and looked on the bushes keenly with beating
heart, and again she thought she saw the boughs shaken, and stood, not
daring to move a while; but they moved no more now when she had looked
steadily at them a space, and again a blackbird began singing loud just
where they had been shaken. So she gathered heart again, and presently
turned her hand once more to stripping her raiment off her, for she
would not be baulked of her bath; but when the stripping was done,
she loitered not naked on the bank as she had done the day before, but
walked swiftly into the shallow, and thence down into the pool, till
nothing but her head and the whiteness of her shoulders showed over the
dark water. Even then she turned her head about twice to look into the
over-side bushes, but when she saw nothing stir there she began to play
in the water, but not for long, but came splashing through the shallow
and hurried on her raiment.

When she was clad again she went up to the horse, and patted and
caressed him, and did bridle and saddle on him, and was going to climb
upon him, when, of a sudden, she thought she would lead him across, lest
there should be a hole near the other bank and he might stumble into
it unwarily; so she bared her feet once more and trussed up her gown
skirts, and so took the ford, leading the beast; the water was nowhere
up to mid-leg of her, and she stepped ashore on to short and fine grass,
which spread like a meadow before her, with a big thorn or two scattered
about it, and a little grassy hill beset with tall elms toward the top,
coming down into the flat of the meadow and drawing round it nearly up
to the river on the north side.

But now she stood staring in wonder and some deal of fear; for there
were three milch kine feeding on the meadow, and, moreover, under a
thorn, scarce a hundred yards from where she stood, was a tall man
standing gazing on her. So stricken was she that she might neither cry
out nor turn aside; neither did she think to pull her gown out of her
girdle to cover the nakedness of her legs.

When they had thus stood a little while the man began to move toward
her very slowly, nor did she dare to flee any the more. But when he was
within half a dozen paces her face flushed red, and she did pull her
gown out of its trusses and let it flow down. But he spake to her in a
pleasant voice, and said: "May I speak to thee, maiden?"

Fear was yet in her soul, so that she might not speak for a little, and
then she said: "O, I beseech thee, bring me not back to Greenharbour!"
And she paled sorely as she spake the word.

But he said: "I wot not of Greenharbour, how to find the way thereto,
though we have heard of it. But comfort thyself, I pray thee, there is
nought to fear in me."

The sound of his voice was full pleasant to her, and when she hearkened
him, how kind and frank it was, then she knew how much of terror was
blent with her joy in her newly-won freedom and the delight of the kind
and happy words. Yet still she spoke not, and was both shamefast and
still not altogether unafraid. Yet, sooth to say, though his attire was
but simple, he was nought wild or fierce to look on. From time to time
she looked on him, and then dropped her eyes again. In those glances she
saw that he was grey-eyed, and smooth-cheeked, and round-chinned, and
his hair curly and golden; and she must needs think that she had never
seen any face half so fair. He was clad but in a green coat that came
not down to his knees, and brogues were tied to his feet, and no more
raiment he had; and for hat he had made him a garland of white may
blossom, and well it sat there: and again she looked on him, and thought
him no worse than the running angel that goes before the throne of God
in the picture of the choir of Meadhamstead; and she looked on him and
marvelled.

Now she hung her head before him and wished he would speak, and even so
did he, and said: "Maiden, when I first saw thee from amidst of the bush
by the river yonder, I deemed thou wert a wood-wight, or some one of the
she-Gods of the Gentiles come back hither. For this is a lonely place,
and some might deem that the Devil hath might here more than in other
places; and when I saw thee, that thou wouldst do off thy raiment to
bathe thee, though soothly I longed to lie hidden there, I feared thee,
lest thou shouldst be angry with me if I were to see thee unclad; so I
came away; yet I went not far, for I was above all things yearning to
see thee; and sooth it is, that hadst thou not crossed the water, I
should presently have crossed it myself to seek thee, wert thou Goddess,
or wood-wife, or whatever might have come of it. But now thou art come
to us, and I have heard thy voice beseeching me not to bring thee to
Greenharbour, I see that thou art a woman of the kindred of Adam. And
yet so it is, that even now I fear thee somewhat. Yet I will pray thee
not to be wroth if I ask thee whether I may do aught for thy need."

Now she began somewhat to smile, and she looked him full in the face,
and said: "Forsooth, my need is simple, for I am hungry."

He smote himself on the breast, and said: "See now, what a great fool I
am, not to have known it without telling, instead of making long-winded
talk about myself. Come quickly, dear maiden, and leave thine horse to
crop the grass."

So he hurried on to the thorn-bush aforesaid, and she went foot to foot
with him, but he touched her not; and straightway she sat her down on
the root of the thorn, and smiled frankly on him, and said:

"Nay, sir, and now thou hast made me go all this way I am out of breath
and weary, so I pray thee of the victual at once."

But he had been busy with his scrip which he had left cast down there,
and therewithal reached out to her a mighty hunch of bread and a piece
of white cheese, and said:

"Now shall I fetch thee milk." Wherewith he took up a bowl of aspen tree
that had lain by the scrip, and ran off to one of the kine and milked
the bowl full, and came back with it heedfully, and set it down beside
her and said: "This was the nighest thing to hand, but when thou hast
eaten and rested then shall we go to our house, if thou wilt be so kind
to me; for there have we better meat and wine to boot."

She looked up at him smiling, but her pleasure of the meat and the
kindness was so exceeding, that she might not refrain from tears also,
but she spake not.

As for him, he knelt beside her, looking on her wistfully; and at last
he said: "I shall tell thee, that I am glad that thou wert hungry and
that I have seen thee eating, else might I have deemed thee somewhat
other than a woman of mankind even yet."

She said: "Yea, and why wouldst thou not believe my word thereto?"

He said, reddening: "I almost fear to tell thee, lest thou think me
overbold and be angry with me."

"Nay," she said, "tell me, for I would know."

Said he: "The words are not easy in my rude mouth; but this is what
I mean: that though I be young I have seen fair women not a few, but
beside any of them thou art a wonder;....and loth I were if thou wert
not really of mankind, if it were but for the glory of the world."

She hung her head and answered nought a while, and he also seemed
ashamed: but presently she spake: "Thou hast been kind to us, wouldst
thou tell us thy name? and then, if it like thee, what thou art?"

"Lady," he said, "my name is easy to tell, I hight Christopher; and
whiles folk in merry mockery call me Christopher King; meseems because I
am of the least account of all carles. As for what else I am, a woodman
I am, an outlaw, and the friend of them: yet I tell thee I have never
by my will done any harm to any child of man; and those friends of mine,
who are outlaws also, are kind and loving with me, both man and woman,
though needs must they dwell aloof from kings' courts and barons'
halls."

She looked at him wondering, and as if she did not altogether understand
him; and she said: "Where dost thou dwell?"

He said: "To-day I dwell hard by; though where I shall dwell to-morrow,
who knows? And with me are dwelling three of my kind fellows; and the
dearest is a young man of mine own age, who is my fellow in all matters,
for us to live and die each for the other. Couldst thou have seen him,
thou wouldst love him I deem."

"What name hath he?" said Goldilind.

"He hight David," said Christopher.

But therewith he fell silent and knit his brow, as though he were
thinking of some knotty point: but in a while his face cleared, and he
said: "If I durst, I would ask thee thy name, and what thou art?"

"As to my name," said she, "I will not tell it thee as now. As to what I
am, I am a poor prisoner; and much have I been grieved and tormented,
so that my body hath been but a thing whereby I might suffer anguish.
Something else am I, but I may not tell thee what as yet."

He looked on her long, and then arose and went his way along the very
track of their footsteps, and he took the horse and brought him back to
the thorn, and stood by the lady and reddened, and said: "I must tell
thee what I have been doing these last minutes."

"Yea," said she, looking at him wonderingly, "hast thou not been
fetching my horse to me?"

"So it is," said he; "but something else also. Ask me, or I cannot tell
thee."

She laughed, and said: "What else, fair sir?"

Said he: "Ask me what, or I cannot tell thee."

"Well, what, then?" said she.

He answered, stammering and blushing: "I have been looking at thy foot
prints, whereby thou camest up from the water, to see what new and
fairer blossoms have come up in the meadow where thy feet were set e'en
now."

She answered him nothing, and he held his peace. But in a while she
said: "If thou wouldst have us come to thine house, thou shalt lead
us thither now." And therewith she took her foot-gear from out of her
girdle, as if she would do it on, and he turned his face away, but
sighed therewith. Then she reddened and put them back again, and rose
up lightly, and said: "I will go afoot; and wilt thou lead the horse for
me?"

So did he, and led her by all the softest and most flowery ways, turning
about the end of a spur of the little hill that came close to the water,
and going close to the lip of the river. And when they had thus turned
about the hill there was a somewhat wider vale before them, grassy
and fair, and on a knoll, not far from the water, a long frame-house
thatched with reed.

Then said Christopher: "Lady, this is now Littledale, and yonder the
house thereof."

She said quietly: "Lovely is the dale, and fair the house by seeming,
and I would that they may be happy that dwell therein!"

Said Christopher: "Wilt thou not speak that blessing within the house as
without?"

"Fain were I thereof," she said. And therewith they came into the garth,
wherein the apple trees were blossoming, and Goldilind spread abroad
her hands and lifted up her head for joy of the sight and the scent, and
they stayed awhile before they went on to the door, which was half open,
for they feared none in that place, and looked for none whom they might
not deal with if he came as a foe.

Christopher would have taken a hand of her to lead her in, but both
hands were in her gown to lift up the hem as she passed over the
threshold; so he durst not.

Fair and bright now was the hall within, with its long and low windows
goodly glazed, a green halling on the walls of Adam and Eve and the
garden, and the good God walking therein; the sun shone bright through
the southern windows, and about the porch it was hot, but further toward
the dais cool and pleasant.

So Goldilind sat down in the coolest of the place at the standing table;
but Christopher bestirred himself, and brought wine and white bread, and
venison and honey, and said: "I pray thee to dine, maiden, for it is
now hard on noon; and as for my fair fellows, I look not for them before
sunset for they were going far into the wood."

She smiled on him, and ate and drank a little deal, and he with her.
Sooth to say, her heart was full, and though she had forgotten her fear,
she was troubled, because, for as glad as she was, she could not be as
glad as her gladness would have her, for the sake of some lack, she knew
not what.

Now spake Christopher: "I would tell thee something strange, to wit,
though it is little more than three hours since I first saw thee beside
the river, yet I seem to know thee as if thou wert a part of my life."

She looked on him shyly, and he went on: "This also is strange, and,
withal, it likes me not, that when I speak of my fair fellows here,
David, and Gilbert, and Joanna, they are half forgotten to my heart,
though their names are on my tongue; and this house, doth it like thee,
fair guest?"

"Yea, much," she said; "it seems joyous to me: and I shall tell thee
that I have mostly dwelt in unmerry houses, though they were of greater
cost than this."

Said Christopher: "To me it hath been merry and happy enough; but now it
seems to me as if it had all been made for thee and this meeting."

"Is it therefore no longer merry to thee because of that?" she said,
smiling, yet flushing much red therewith. Now it was his turn not to
answer her, and she cast down her eyes before him, and there was silence
between them.

Then she looked at him steadily, and said: "It is indeed grievous that
thou shouldest forget thine old friends for me, and that it should have
come into thy mind that this fair and merry house was not made for thy
fair fellows and thy delight with them, but for me, the chance-comer.
For, hearken, whereas thou saidst e'en now, that I was become a part of
thy life, how can that be? For if I become the poor captive again, how
canst thou get to me, thou who art thyself a castaway, as thou hast told
me? Yea, but even so, I shall be too low for thee to come down to me.
And if I become what I should be, then I must tell thee that I shall
be too high for thee to climb up to me; so that in one way or other we
shall be sundered, who have but met for an hour or two."

He hung his head a while as they stood there face to face, for both of
them had arisen from the board; but presently he looked up to her with
glittering eyes, and said: "Yea, for an hour or two; why then do we
tarry and linger, and say what we have no will to say, and refrain from
what our hearts bid us?"

Therewith he caught hold of her right wrist, and laid his hand on her
left shoulder, and this first time that he had touched her, it was as if
a fire ran through all his body and changed it into the essence of her:
neither was there any naysay in her eyes, nor any defence against him in
the yielding body of her. But even in that nick of time he drew back a
little, and turned his head, as a man listening, toward the door, and
said: "Hist! hist! Dost thou hear, maiden?" She turned deadly pale: "O
what is it? What is it? Yea, I hear; it is horses drawing nigh, and the
sound of hounds baying. But may it not be thy fellows coming back?"

"Nay, nay," he said; "they rode not in armour. Hark to it! and these
hounds are deep-voiced sleuth-dogs! But come now, there may yet be
time."

He turned, and caught up axe and shield from off the wall, and drew her
toward a window that looked to the north, and peered out of it warily;
but turned back straightway, and said: "Nay, it is too late that way,
they are all round about the house. Maiden, get thou up into the solar
by this stair, and thou wilt find hiding-place behind the traverse of
the bed; and if they go away, and my fellows come in due time, then art
thou safe. But if not, surely they shall do thee no hurt; for I think,
indeed, that thou art some great one."

And he fell to striding down the hall toward the door; but she ran after
him, and caught his arm, and said: "Nay, nay, I will not hide, to be
dragged out of my refuge like a thief: thou sayest well that I am of the
great; I will stand by thee and command and forbid as a Queen. O go not
to the door! Stay by me, stay!"

"Nay, nay," he said, "there is nought for it but the deed of arms. Look!
seest thou not steel by the porch?"

And therewith he broke from her and ran to the door, and was met upon
the very threshold by all-armed men, upon whom he fell without more ado,
crying out: "For the Tofts! For the Tofts! The woodman to the rescue!"
And he hewed right and left on whatsoever was before him, so that what
fell not, gave back, and for a moment of time he cleared the porch; but
in that nick of time his axe brake on the basnet of a huge man-at-arms,
and they all thrust them on him together and drave him back into the
hall, and came bundling after him in a heap. But he drave his shield
at one, and then with his right hand smote another on the bare face, so
that he rolled over and stirred no more till the day of doom. Then was
there a weapon before him, might he have stooped to pick it up; but he
might not; so he caught hold of a sturdy but somewhat short man by the
collar and the lap of his leather surcoat, and drew aback, and with a
mighty heave cast him on the rout of them, who for their parts had drawn
back a little also, as if he had been a huge stone, and down went two
before that artillery; and they set up a great roar of wonder and fear.
But he followed them, and this time got an axe in his hand, so mazed
they were by his onset, and he hewed at them again and drave them aback
to the threshold of the door: but could get them no further, and they
began to handle long spears to thrust at him.

But then came forward a knight, no mickle man, but clad in very goodly
armour, with a lion beaten in gold on his green surcoat; this man smote
up the spears, and made the men go back a little, while he stood on the
threshold; so Christopher saw that he would parley with him, and forbore
him, and the knight spake: "Thou youngling, art thou mad? What doest
thou falling on my folk?"

"And what do ye," said Christopher fiercely, "besetting the houses of
folk with weapons? Now wilt thou take my life. But I shall yet slay one
or two before I die. Get thee back, lord, or thou shalt be the first."

But the knight, who had no weapon in his hand, said: "We come but
to seek our own, and that is our Lady of Meadham, who dwelleth at
Greenharbour by her own will. And if thou wilt stand aside thou mayst go
free to the devil for us."

Now would Christopher have shouted and fallen on, and gone to his death
there and then; but even therewith a voice, clear and sweet, spake at
the back of him, and said: "Thou kind host, do thou stand aside and let
us speak that which is needful." And therewith stepped forth Goldilind
and stood beside Christopher, and said: "Sir Burgreve, we rode forth to
drink the air yesterday, and went astray amidst the wild-wood, and were
belated, so that we must needs lie down under the bare heaven; but this
morning we happened on this kind forester, who gave us to eat, and took
us to his house and gave us meat and drink; for which it were seemlier
to reward him than threaten him. Now it is our pleasure that ye lead us
back to Greenharbour; but as for this youth, that ye do him no hurt, but
let him go free, according to thy word spoken e'en now, Sir Burgreve."

She spake slowly and heavily, as one who hath a lesson to say, and it
was to be seen of her that all grief was in her heart, though her words
were queenly. Some of them that heard laughed; but the Burgreve spake,
and said: "Lady, we will do thy will in part, for we will lead thee to
Greenharbour in all honour; but as to this young man, if he will not be
slain here and now, needs must he with us. For he hath slain two of our
men outright, and hath hurt many, and, methinks, the devil of the woods
is in his body. So do thou bid him be quiet, if thou wouldst not see his
blood flow."

She turned a pale unhappy face on Christopher, and said: "My friend,
we bid thee withstand them no more, but let them do with thee as they
will."

Christopher stood aside therewith, and sat down on a bench and laughed,
and said in a high voice: "Stout men-at-arms, forsooth, to take a maid's
kirtle to their shield."

But therewith the armed men poured into the hall, and a half dozen of
the stoutest came up unto Christopher where he sat, and bound his hands
with their girdles, and he withstood them no whit, but sat laughing in
their faces, and made as if it were all a Yule-tide game. But inwardly
his heart burned with anger, and with love of that sweet Lady.

Then they made him stand up, and led him without the house, and set him
on a horse, and linked his feet together under the belly thereof. And
when that was done he saw them lead out the Lady, and they set her in a
horse litter, and then the whole troop rode off together, with two
men riding on either side of the said litter. In this wise they left
Littledale.




CHAPTER XVII. GOLDILIND COMES BACK TO GREENHARBOUR.


They rode speedily, and had with them men who knew the woodland ways,
so that the journey was nought so long thence as Goldilind had made it
thither; and they stayed not for nightfall, since the moon was bright,
so that they came before the Castle-gate before midnight. Now Goldilind
looked to be cast into prison, whatever might befall her upon the
morrow; but so it went not, for she was led straight to her own chamber,
and one of her women, but not Aloyse, waited on her, and when she tried
to have some tidings of her, the woman spake to her no more than if she
were dumb. So all unhappily she laid her down in her bed, foreboding the
worst, which she deemed might well be death at the hand of her jailers.
As for Christopher, she saw the last of him as they entered the
Castle-gate, and knew not what they had done with him. So she lay in
dismal thoughts, but at last fell asleep for mere weariness.

When she awoke it was broad day, and there was someone going about in
the chamber; she turned, and saw that it was Aloyse. She felt sick
at heart, and durst not move or ask of tidings; but presently Aloyse
turned, and came to the bed, and made an obeisance, but spake not.
Goldilind raised her head, and said wearily: "What is to be done,
Aloyse, wilt thou tell me? For my heart fails me, and meseems, unless
they have some mercy, I shall die to-day."

"Nay," said the chambermaid, "keep thine heart up; for here is one at
hand who would see thee, when it is thy pleasure to be seen."

"Yea," said Goldilind, "Dame Elinor to wit." And she moaned, and fear
and heart-sickness lay so heavy on her that she went nigh to swooning

But Aloyse lifted up her head, and brought her wine and made her drink,
and when Goldilind was come to herself again the maid said: "I say, keep
up thine heart, for it is not Dame Elinor and the rods that would see
thee, but a mighty man; nay, the most mighty, to wit, Earl Geoffrey, who
is King of Meadham in all but the name."

Goldilind did in sooth take heart at this tidings, and she said: "I
wonder what he may have to do here; all this while he hath not been to
Greenharbour, or, mayhappen, it might have been better for me."

"I wot not," said Aloyse, "but even so it is. I shall tell thee, the
messenger, whose horse thou didst steal, brought no other word in his
mouth save this, that my Lord Earl was coming; and come he did; but
that was toward sunset, long after they had laid the blood-hounds on thy
slot, and I had been whipped for letting thee find the way out a-gates.
Now, our Lady, when thou hast seen the Earl, and hast become our Lady
and Mistress indeed, wilt thou bethink thee of the morn before yesterday
on my behalf?"

"Yea," said Goldilind, "if ever it shall befall."

"Befall it shall," said Aloyse; "I dreamed of thee three nights ago, and
thou sitting on thy throne commanding and forbidding the great men. But
at worst no harm hath happened save to my shoulders and sides, by thy
stealing thyself, since thou hast come back in the nick of time, and of
thine own will, as men say. But tell me now of thine holiday, and if it
were pleasant to thee?"

Goldilind fell a-weeping at the word, bethinking her of yesterday
morning, and Aloyse stood looking on her, but saying nought. At last
spake Goldilind softly: "Tell me, Aloyse, didst thou hear any speaking
of that young man who was brought in hither last night? Have they slain
him?"

Said Aloyse: "Soothly, my Lady, I deem they have done him no hurt,
though I wot not for sure. There hath been none headed or hanged in the
base-court to-day. I heard talk amongst the men-at-arms of one whom they
took; they said he was a wonder of sheer strength, and how that he cast
their men about as though he were playing at ball. Sooth to say, they
seemed to bear him no grudge therefor. But now I would counsel thee to
arise; and I am bidden to tire and array thee at the best. And now I
would say a word in thine ear, to wit, that Dame Elinor feareth thee
somewhat this morn."

So Goldilind arose, and was arrayed like a very queen, and was served
of what she would by Aloyse and the other women, and sat in her chamber
awaiting the coming of the mighty Lord of Meadham.




CHAPTER XVIII. EARL GEOFFREY SPEAKS WITH GOLDILIND.


But a little while had she sat there, before footsteps a many came to
the door, which was thrown open, and straight it was as if the sun had
shone on a flower-bed, for there was come Earl Geoffrey and his lords
all arrayed most gloriously. Then came the Earl up the chamber to
Goldilind, and bent the knee before her, and said: "Lady and Queen, is
it thy pleasure that thy servant should kiss thine hand?"

She made him little cheer, but reached out to him her lily hand in its
gold sleeve, and said: "Thou must do thy will."

So he kissed the hand reverently, and said: "And these my lords, may
they enter and do obeisance and kiss hands, my Lady?"

Said Goldilind: "I will not strive to gainsay their will, or thine, my
Lord."

So they entered and knelt before her, and kissed her hand; and, to say
sooth, most of them had been fain to kiss both hands of her, yea, and
her cheeks and her lips; though but little cheer she made them, but
looked sternly on them.

Then the Earl spake to her, and told her of her realm, and how folk
thrived, and of the deep peace that was upon the land, and of the merry
days of Meadham, and the praise of the people. And she answered him
nothing, but as he spake her bosom began to heave, and the tears came
into her eyes and rolled down her cheeks. Then man looked on man, and
the Earl said: "My masters, I deem that my Lady hath will to speak to me
privily, as to one who is her chiefest friend and well-willer. Is it so,
my Lady?"

She might not speak for the tears that welled out from her heart; but
she bowed her head and strove to smile on him.

But the Earl waved his hand, and those lords, and the women also, voided
the chamber, and left those two alone, the Earl standing before her.
But ere he could speak, she arose from her throne and fell on her knees
before him, and joined hands palm to palm, and cried in a broken voice:
"Mercy! Mercy! Have pity on my young life, great Lord!"

But he lifted her up, and set her on her throne again, and said: "Nay,
my Lady, this is unmeet; but if thou wouldst talk and tell with me I am
ready to hearken."

She strove with her passion a while, and then she said: "Great Lord, I
pray thee to hearken, and to have patience with a woman's weak heart.
Prithee, sit down here beside me.

"It were unfitting," he said; "I shall take a lowlier seat." Then he
drew a stool to him, and sat down before her, and said: "What aileth
thee? What wouldest thou?"

Then she said: "Lord Earl, I am in prison; I would be free."

Quoth he: "Yea, and is this a prison, then?"

"Yea," she said, "since I may not so much as go out from it and come
back again unthreatened; yet have I been, and that unseldom, in a worser
prison than this: do thou go look on the Least Guard-chamber, and see if
it be a meet dwelling for thy master's daughter."

He spake nought awhile; then he said: "And, yet if it grieveth thee, it
marreth thee nought; for when I look on thee mine eyes behold the beauty
of the world, and the body wherein is no lack."

She reddened and said: "If it be so, it is God's work, and I praise him
therefor. But how long will it last? For grief slayeth beauty."

He looked on her long, and said: "To thy friends I betook thee, and I
looked that they should cherish thee; where then is the wrong that I
have done thee?"

She said: "Maybe no wrong wittingly; since now, belike, thou art come
to tell me that all this weary sojourn is at an end, and that thou wilt
take me to Meadhamstead, and set me on the throne there, and show my
father's daughter to all the people."

He held his peace, and his face grew dark before her while she watched
it. At last he spake in a harsh voice: "Lady," he said, "it may not be;
here in Greenharbour must thou abide, or in some other castle apart from
the folk."

"Yea," she said, "now I see it is true, that which I foreboded when
first I came hither: thou wouldst slay me, that thou mayest sit safely
in the seat of thy master's daughter; thou durst not send me a man with
a sword to thrust me through, therefore thou hast cast me into prison
amongst cruel jailers, who have been bidden by thee to take my life
slowly and with torments. Hitherto I have withstood their malice and
thine; but now am I overcome, and since I know that I must die, I have
now no fear, and this is why I am bold to tell thee this that I have
spoken, though I wot now I shall be presently slain. And now I tell thee
I repent it, that I have asked grace of a graceless face."

Although she spake strong words, it was with a mild and steady voice.
But the Earl was sore troubled, and he rose up and walked to and fro
of the chamber, half drawing his sword and thrusting it back into the
scabbard from time to time. At last he came back to her, and sat down
before her and spake:

"Maiden, thou art somewhat in error. True it is that I would sit firm in
my seat and rule the land of Meadham, as belike none other could. True
it is also that I would have thee, the rightful heir, dwell apart from
the turmoil for a while at least; for I would not have thy white hands
thrust me untimely from my place, or thy fair face held up as a banner
by my foemen. Yet nowise have I willed thy death or thine anguish; and
if all be true as thou sayest it, and thou art so lovely that I know not
how to doubt it, tell me then what these have done with thee."

She said: "Sir, those friends to whom thou hast delivered me are my
foes, whether they were thy friends or not. Wilt thou compel me to tell
thee all my shame? They have treated me as a thrall who had whiles to
play a queen's part in a show. To wit, thy chaplain whom thou hast given
me has looked on me with lustful eyes, and has bidden me buy of him ease
and surcease of pain with my very body, and hath threatened me more evil
else, and kept his behest."

Then leapt up the Earl and cried out: "Hah! did he so? Then I tell thee
his monk's hood shall not be stout enough to save his neck. Now, my
child, thou speakest; tell me more, since my hair is whitening."

She said: "The sleek, smooth-spoken woman to whom thou gavest me, didst
thou bid her to torment me with stripes, and the dungeon, and the dark,
and solitude, and hunger?"

"Nay, by Allhallows!" he said, "nor thought of it; trust me she shall
pay therefor if so she hath done."

She said: "I crave no vengeance, but mercy I crave, and thou mayst give
it me."

Then were they both silent, till he said: "Now I, for my part, will pray
thee bear what thou must bear, which shall be nought save this, that thy
queenship lie quiet for a while; nought else of evil shall betide thee
henceforth; but as much of pleasure and joy as may go with it. But tell
me, there is a story of thy snatching a holiday these two days, and of a
young man whom thou didst happen on. Tell me now, not as a maiden to
her father or warder, but as a great lady might tell a great lord, what
betid betwixt you two: for thou art not one on whom a young and doughty
man may look unmoved. By Allhallows! but thou art a firebrand, my Lady!"
And he laughed therewith.

Goldilind flushed red exceeding; but she answered steadily: "Lord Earl,
this is the very sooth, that I might not fail to see it, how he thought
me worth looking on, but he treated me with all honour, as a brother
might a sister."

"Tell me," said the Earl, "what like was this man?"

Said she: "He was young, but strong beyond measure; and full doughty:
true it is that I saw him with mine eyes take and heave up one of our
men in his hands and cast him away as a man would a clod of earth."

The Earl knit his brow: "Yea," said he, "and that story I have heard
from the men-at-arms also. But what was the man like of aspect?"

She reddened: "He was of a most goodly body," she said, "fair-eyed, and
of a face well carven; his speech kind and gentle." And yet more she
reddened.

Said the Earl: "Didst thou hear what he was, this man?"

She said: "I deem from his own words that he was but a simple forester."

"Yea," quoth the Earl, "a simple forester? Nay, but a woodman, an
outlaw, a waylayer; so say our men, that he fell on them with the cry:
A-Tofts! A-Tofts! Hast thou never heard of Jack of the Tofts?"

"Nay, never," said she.

Said the Earl: "He is the king of these good fellows; and a perilous
host they be. Now I fear me, if he be proven to be one of these, there
will be a gallows reared for him to-morrow, for as fair and as doughty
as he may be."

She turned all pale, and her lips quivered: then she rose up, and fell
on her knees before the Earl, and cried out: "O sir, a grace, a grace, I
pray thee! Pardon this poor man who was so kind to me!"

The Earl raised her up and smiled, and said: "Nay, my Lady Queen,
wouldst thou kneel to me? It is unmeet. And as for this woodman, it is
for thee to pardon him, and not for me; and since, by good luck, he is
not hanged yet, thy word hath saved his neck." She sat down in her chair
again, but still looked white and scared. But the Earl spake again, and
kindly:

"Now to all these matters I shall give heed, my Lady; wherefore I will
ask leave of thee, and be gone; and to-morrow I will see thee again, and
lay some rede before thee. Meantime, be of good cheer, for thou shalt be
made as much of as may be, and live in mickle joy if thou wilt. And if
any so much as give thee a hard word, it shall be the worse for them."

Therewith he arose, and made obeisance to her, and departed. And she
abode quiet, and looking straight before her, till the door shut, and
then she put her hands to her face and fell a-weeping, and scarce knew
what ailed her betwixt hope, and rest of body, and love, though that she
called not by its right name.




CHAPTER XIX. EARL GEOFFREY SPEAKETH WITH CHRISTOPHER.


Now it is to be said that the Earl had had much tidings told him of
Christopher, and had no intent to put him to death, but rather meant to
take him into the company of his guard, to serve him in all honour;
and that which he said as to hanging him was but to try Goldilind; but
having heard and seen of her such as we have told, he now thought it
good to have a privy talk with this young man. So he bade a squire lead
him to where Christopher was held in ward, and went much pondering.

So the squire brought him to the self-same Littlest Guardroom (in sooth
a prison) where Goldilind had lain that other morn; and he gave the
squire leave, and entered and shut the door behind him, so that he and
Christopher were alone together. The young man was lying on his back
on the pallet, with his hands behind his head, and his knees drawn up,
murmuring some fag-end of an old song; but when he heard the door shut
to he sat up, and, turning to the new-comer, said: "Art thou tidings? If
so, then tell me quickly which it is to be, the gallows or freedom?"

"Friend," said the Earl sternly, "dost thou know who I am?"

"Nay," said Christopher; "by thine attire thou shouldst be some great
man; but that is of little matter to me, since thou wilt neither bid
slay me, or let me go, for a heedless word."

Quoth the Earl: "I am the master of the land of Meadham, so there is
no need to tell thee that I have thy life or death in my hand. Now thou
wilt not deny that thou art of the company of Jack o' the Tofts?"

"It is sooth," said Christopher.

"Well," said the Earl, "thou art bold then to have come hither, for
thou sayest it that thou art a wolf's-head and forfeit of thy life. Now,
again, thou didst take the Lady of Meadham home to thy house yesterday,
and wert with her alone a great while. Now according to thy dealings
with her thou dost merit either the most evil of deaths, or else it may
be a reward: hah! what sayest thou?"

Christopher leapt up, and said in a loud voice: "Lord King, whatsoever I
may be, I am not each man's dastard; when I saw that pearl of all women,
I loved her indeed, as who should not, but it was even as I had loved
the Mother of God had she come down from the altar picture at the Church
of Middleham of the Wood. And whoso saith otherwise, I give him the lie
back in his teeth, and will meet him face to face if I may; and then,
meseems, it will go hard with him."

Spake the Earl, laughing: "I will be no champion against thee, for I
hold my skin and my bones of too much price thereto. And, moreover,
though meseemeth the Blessed Virgin would have a hot lover in thee were
she to come down to earth anigh thy dwelling, yet trow I thy tale, that
thou hast dealt with my Lady in honour. Therefore, lad, what sayest
thou, wilt thou be a man of mine, and bear arms for me, and do my will?"

Spake Christopher: "Lord, this is better than hanging."

"Why, so it is, lad," said the Earl, laughing again, "and some would
say better by a good deal. But hearken! if thou take it, thou must abide
here in Greenharbour--a long while, maybe; yea, even so long as my Lady
dwelleth here."

Christopher flushed and said: "Lord, thou art kind and gracious, and I
will take thy bidding."

The Earl said: "Well, so it shall be then; and presently thou shalt go
out of this guard-room a free man. But abide a while."

Therewith he drew a stool to him and sat down, and spake not for a long
while; and Christopher abode his pleasure; at last spake the Earl: "One
day, mayhappen, we may make a wedding for thee, and that no ill one."

Christopher laughed: "Lord," said he, "what lady will wed me, a no man's
son?"

Said the Earl: "Not if the Lord of Meadham be thy friend? Well then, how
if the Lady and Queen of Meadham make thee the wedding?"

Said Christopher: "I were liefer to make mine own wedding, whenso I
need a woman in my bed: I will compel no woman, nor ask others to compel
her."

The Earl rose up, and fell to pacing the prison to and fro; and at last
he stood over against Christopher, and said: "Hearken, forester: I will
foretell thy fortune; it is that thou shalt become great by wedding."

Christopher held his peace; and the Earl spake again: "Now is the
shortest word best. We deem thee both goodly and doughty, and would wed
thee to a great lady, even that one to whom thou hast shown kindness in
the wilderness."

Said Christopher: "It is the wont of great lords to mock poor folk,
therefore I must not show anger against thee."

"I mock thee not," said the Earl; "I mean nought, but as my words say."

"Nay then," said Christopher, "thou biddest me an evil deed, great Lord.
What I said was that I would compel no woman; and shall I compel her who
is the wonder of the world and my very own Lady?"

"Hold thy peace, sir fool," said the Earl; "let me tell thee that she
is as like to compel thee as thou her. And as to her being thy Lady, she
shall be thy Lady and wife indeed; but not here, for above all things
will she get her away from Greenharbour, and thou shalt be her champion,
to lead her about the world like a knight errant."

Now was Christopher so troubled that he knew not what countenance to
make, and scarce might he get a word out of his mouth a long while. At
last he said: "Lord, I see that I must needs do thy will if this be no
trap which thou hast set for me. But overwonderful it is, that a great
lady should be wedded to a gangrel churl."

The Earl laughed: "Many a ferly fares to the fair-eyed," quoth he; "and
also I will tell thee in thine ear that this Lady may not be so great as
her name is great. Did she praise her life-days to thee?"

"Nay," said Christopher; "I mind me well, she called herself the poor
captive."

"She said but sooth," quoth the Earl; "and her going away from
Greenharbour is instead of her captivity; and I tell thee it is by that
only I may make her joyous. And now one word: thou that criest out For
the Tofts in battle art not altogether unfriended, meseemeth."

Christopher looked up proudly and fiercely: he said: "Forsooth, Lord, my
friends are good, though thou callest them wolf-heads and gallows-meat."

"Champion," said the Earl, laughing, "that may well be sooth; and there
are a many ups and downs in the world. Bethink thee that the time may
come when thou and thy friends may wend to my help, and may win the
names of knight and baron and earl: such hap hath been aforetime. And
now I crave of thee, when thou comest back to the Tofts, to bid Jack
fall upon other lands than Meadham when he rideth, because of the gift
and wedding that I give thee now. So, lad, I deem that thou hast chosen
thy part; but let not the tale thereof go out of thy mouth, or thou wilt
gab away thy wedding. Lo, thou, I leave this door open behind me; and
presently shall the smith come here to do away thine irons; and I shall
send a squire to thee to lead thee to a fair chamber, and to bring thee
goodly raiment, and do thou play amongst thy fellows as one of the
best of them; and show them, if thou wilt, some such feats in peace as
yesterday thou showedst them in battle. And to-morrow there will be new
tidings." And therewith he departed.

No worse than his word he was, and anon came the smith and the squire;
and he was brought to a chamber, and raiment of fine linen and silk and
embroidery was brought to him: and when he was new clad he looked like
a king's son, whereas aforetime he looked like a God of the Gentiles of
old. All men praised his beauty and his courtesy, and after dinner was,
and they had rested, they bade him play with them and show them his
prowess, and he was nought loth thereto, and did what he might in
running and leaping, and casting of the bar, and shooting in the
bow. And in all these things he was so far before everyone, that they
marvelled at him, and said it was well indeed that he had not been slain
yesterday. As to wrestling, therein he might do but little; for all
forbore him after the first man had stood before him, a squire, well
learned in war, and long and tough, and deemed a very stark man; him
Christopher threw over his shoulder as though he had been a child of
twelve years. So wore the day at Greenharbour in merrier wise for all
good folk than for many a day had been the wont there.




CHAPTER XX. OF THE WEDDING OF CHRISTOPHER AND GOLDILIND.


Early on the morrow came the Earl unto Goldilind, and she received him
gladly, as one who had fashioned life anew for her. And when he had sat
down by her, he spake and said: "Lady, thou cravedst of me yesterday two
things; the first was freedom from the captivity of Greenharbour; and
the second, life and liberty for the varlet that cherished thee in the
wild-wood the other day. Now thy first asking grieved me, for that thou
hast been tyrannously done by; and thy second I wondered at; but since
I have seen the young man, I wonder the less; for he is both so goodly,
and so mighty of body, and of speech bold and free, yet gentle and of
all courtesy, that he is meet to be knight or earl, yea, or very king.
Now, therefore, in both these matters I will well to do thy pleasure,
and in one way it may be; and thou mayst then go forth from Greenharbour
as free as a bird, and thy varlet's life may be given unto him, and
mickle honour therewith. Art thou, then, willing to do after my rede and
my commandment, so that both these good things may betide thee?"

"Right willing am I," she said, "to be free and happy and to save the
life of a fair youth and kind."

"Then," said he, "there is one thing for thee to do: that this day
thou wed this fair and kind youth, and let him lead thee forth from
Greenharbour; and, belike, he will bring thee to no ill stead; for his
friends are mightier than mayhappen thou deemest."

She turned as red as blood at his word; she knit her brows, and her eyes
flashed as she answered: "Is it seemly for a King's daughter to wed a
nameless churl? And now I know thee, Lord Earl, what thou wouldst do;
thou wouldst be King of Meadham and put thy master's daughter to the
road." And she was exceeding wroth.

But he said, smiling somewhat: "Was it then seemly for the King's
daughter to kneel for this man's life, and go near to swooning for joy
when it was granted to her?"

"Yea," she said, "for I love him with all my body and soul; and I
would have had him love me par amours, and then should I have been his
mistress and he my servant; but now shall he be my master and I his
servant." And still was she very wroth.

Quoth the Earl: "As to the matter of my being King of Meadham, that will
I be, whatever befall, or die in the place else. So if thou wilt not do
my rede, then must the varlet whom thou lovest die, and at Greenharbour
must thou abide with Dame Elinor. There is no help for it."

She shrieked out at that word of his, and well nigh swooned, lying back
in her chair: but presently fell a-weeping sorely. But the Earl said:
"Hearken, my Lady, I am not without warrant to do this. Tell me, hast
thou ever seen any fairer or doughtier than this youngling?"

"Never," said she.

"So say we all," he said. "Now I shall tell thee (and I can bring
witness to it) that in his last hour the King, thy father, when he gave
thee into my keeping, spake also this: that I should wed thee to none
save the fairest and doughtiest man that might be found: even so would I
do now. What then sayest thou?"

She answered not, but still wept somewhat; then said the Earl: "Lady,
give me leave, and I shall send thy women to thee, and sit in the great
hall for an hour, and if within that while thou send a woman of thine
to say one word, Yes, unto me, then is all well. But if not, then do I
depart from Greenharbour straightway, and take the youngling with me to
hang him up on the first tree. Be wise, I pray thee."

And therewith he went his ways. But Goldilind, being left alone a
little, rose up and paced the chamber to and fro, and her tears and
sobbing ceased; and a great and strange joy grew up in her heart,
mingled with the pain of longing, so that she might rest in nowise. Even
therewith the door opened, and her women entered, Aloyse first, and she
called to her at once, and bade her to find Earl Geoffrey in the great
hall, and say to him: Yes. So Aloyse went her ways, and Goldilind bade
her other women to array her in the best and goodliest wise that they
might. And the day was yet somewhat young. Now it must be said of Earl
Geoffrey that, in spite of his hard word, he had it not in his heart
either to slay Christopher or to leave Goldilind at Greenharbour to the
mercy of Dame Elinor.




CHAPTER XXI. OF THE WEDDING OF THOSE TWAIN.


Now were folk gathered in the hall, and the Earl Geoffrey was standing
on the dais by the high-seat, and beside him a worthy clerk, the Abbot
of Meadhamstead, a monk of St. Benedict, and next to him the Burgreve
of Greenharbour, and then a score of knights all in brave raiment, and
squires withal, and sergeants; but down in the hall were the men-at-arms
and serving-men, and a half hundred of folk of the countryside, queans
as well as carles, who had been gathered for the show and bidden in. No
other women were there in the hall till Goldilind and her serving-women
entered. She went straight up the hall, and took her place in the
high-seat; and for all that her eyes seemed steady, she had noted
Christopher standing by the shot-window just below the dais.

Now when she was set down, and there was silence in the hall, Earl
Geoffrey came forth and said: "Lords and knights, and ye good people,
the Lady Goldilind, daughter of the Lord King Roland that last was, is
now of age to wed; and be it known unto you, that the King, her father,
bade me, in the last words by him spoken, to wed her to none but the
loveliest and strongest that might be, as witness I can bring hereto.
Now such a man have I sought hereto in Meadhamstead and the much-peopled
land of Meadham, and none have I come on, however worthy he were of
deeds, or well-born of lineage, but that I doubted me if he were so fair
or so doughty as might be found; but here in this half-desert corner of
the land have I gotten a man than whom none is doughtier, as some of you
have found to your cost. And tell me all you, where have ye seen any as
fair as this man?" And therewith he made a sign with his hand, and
forth strode Christopher up on to the dais; and he was so clad, that
his kirtle was of white samite, girt with a girdle of goldsmith's work,
whereby hung a good sword of like fashion, and over his shoulders was
a mantle of red cloth-of-gold, furred with ermine, and lined with green
sendall; and on his golden curled locks sat a chaplet of pearls.

Then to the lords and all the people he seemed so fair and fearless and
kind that they gave a great shout of welcome; and Goldilind came forth
from her chair, as fair as a June lily, and came to Christopher and
reached out her hand to him, but he refrained him a moment, so that all
they could see how sweet and lovely a hand it was, and then he took it,
and drew her to him, and kissed her mouth before them all; and still he
held her hand, till the Abbot of Meadhamstead aforetold came and stood
by them and blessed them.

Then spake the Earl again: "Lo ye, here hath been due betrothal of these
twain, and ye may see how meet they be for each other in goodliness
and kindness. Now there lacketh nought but they should be wedded
straightway; and all is arrayed in the chapel; wherefore if this holy
man will come with us and do on his mass-hackle, our joy shall be
fulfilled; save that thereafter shall feast and merriment await all you
in this hall, and we shall be there to welcome all comers in this house
of Greenharbour, whereas this our gracious Lady has long abided so
happily."

Man looked on man here and there, and smiled a little as he spake, but
none said aught, for there were none save the Earl's servants there, and
a sort of poor wretches.

So therewithal they went their ways to the chapel where was the wedding
done as grandly as might be, considering they were in no grander place
than Greenharbour. And when all was done, and folk began to flow away
from the chapel, and Goldilind sat shamefaced but strangely happy in
a great stall of the choir, the Earl called Christopher unto him, and
said: "My lad, I deem that some great fortune shall betide thee since
already thou hast begun so luckily. But I beseech thee mar not thy
fortune by coming back with thy fair wife to the land of Meadham; or
else it may be thou shalt cast thy life away, and that will bring her
sorrow, as I can see well."

He spake this grimly, though he smiled as he spake. But he went on more
gently: "I will not send you twain away empty-handed; when ye go out
a-gates into the wide world, ye shall find two fair horses for your
riding, well bedight, and one with a woman's saddle; and, moreover,
a sumpter beast, not very lightly burdened, for on one side of him he
beareth achest wherein is, first of all, the raiment of my Lady, and
beneath it some deal of silver and gold and gems; but on the other
side is victual and drink for the way for you, and raiment for thee,
youngling. How sayest thou, is it well?"

"It is well, Lord," said Christopher; "yet would I have with me the
raiment wherewith I came hither, and my bow and my sax."

"Yea and wherefore, carle?" said Earl Geoffrey.

Said the youngling: "We be going to ride the wild-wood, and it might be
better for safety's sake that I be so clad as certain folk look to see
men ride there."

But he reddened as he spake; and the Earl said: "By Allhallows! but it
is not ill thought of; and, belike, the same-like kind of attire might
be better to hide the queenship of the Lady from the wood-folk than that
which now she weareth?"

"True is that, Lord," quoth Christopher.

"Yet," said the Earl, "I will have you go forth from the Castle clad in
your lordly weed, lest folk of mine say that I have stripped my Lady and
cast her forth: don ye your poor raiment when in the wood ye be."

Therewith he called to a squire, and bade him seek out that poor raiment
of the new-wedded youngling, and bow withal and shafts good store, and
do all on the sumpter; and, furthermore, he bade him tell one of my
Lady's women to set on the sumpter some of Goldilind's old and used
raiment. So the squire did the Earl's will, and both got Christopher's
gear and also found Aloyse and gave her the Earl's word.

She smiled thereat, and went straightway and fetched the very same
raiment, green gown and all, which she had brought to Goldilind
in prison that other day, and in which Goldilind had fled from
Greenharbour. And when she had done them in the chest above all the
other gear, she stood yet beside the horses amidst of the varlets and
squires who were gathered there to see the new-wedded folk depart.

Presently then came forth through the gate those two, hand in hand, and
Earl Geoffrey with them. And he set Goldilind on her horse himself, and
knelt before her to say farewell, and therewith was Christopher on his
horse, and him the Earl saluted debonairly.

But just as they were about shaking their reins to depart, Aloyse fell
down on her knees before the Earl, who said: "What is toward, woman?"

"A grace, my Lord, a grace," said she.

"Stand up on thy feet," said the Earl, "and ye, my masters, draw out of
earshot."

Even so did they; and the Earl bade her speak, and she said: "Lord, my
Lady is going away from Greenharbour, and anon thou wilt be going, and
I shall be left with the sleek she-devil yonder that thou hast set over
us, and here there will be hell for me without escape, now that my Lady
is gone. Wherefore I pray thee take me with thee to Meadhamstead, even
if it be to prison; for here I shall die the worst of deaths."

Earl Geoffrey smiled on her sourly, and said: "If it be as I understand,
that thou hast lifted thine hand against my Lady, wert thou wending
with me, thou shouldst go just so far as the first tree. Thou mayst deem
thyself lucky if I leave thee behind here. Nor needest thou trouble
thee concerning Dame Elinor; little more shalt thou hear of her
henceforward."

But Goldilind spake and said: "My Lord Earl, I would ask grace for this
one; for what she did to me she did compelled, and not of her free will,
and I forgive it her. And moreover, this last time she suffered in her
body for the helping of me; so if thou mightest do her asking I were the
better pleased."

"It shall be as thou wilt, my Lady," said the Earl, "and I will have her
with me and keep her quiet in Meadhamstead; but, by Allhallows! had it
not been for thy word we would have had her whipped into the wild-wood,
and hanged up on to a tree thereafter."

Then Aloyse knelt before Goldilind and kissed her feet, and wept, and
drew back pale and trembling. But Goldilind shook her rein once for
all now, and her apple-grey horse went forth with her; Christopher came
after, leading the sumpter beast, and forth they went, and passed over
the open green about the Castle, and came on to the woodland way whereby
Goldilind had fled that other time.




CHAPTER XXII. OF THE WOODLAND BRIDE-CHAMBER.


They rode in silence a good way, and it was some three hours after noon,
and the day as fair and bright as might be. Christopher held his peace
for sweet shame that he was alone with a most fair maid, and she his
own, and without defence against him. But she amidst of her silence
turned, now red, and now somewhat pale, and now and again she looked
somewhat askance on him, and he deemed her looks were no kinder than
they should be.

At last she spake, yet not looking on him, and said: "So, Forester,
now is done what I must needs do: thy life is saved, and I am quit of
Greenharbour, and its prison, and its torments: whither away then?"

Quoth he, all dismayed, for her voice was the voice of anger: "I wot
not whither, save to the house thou hast blessed already with thy dear
body."

At that word she turned quite pale, and trembled, and spake not for a
while, and smote her horse and hastened on the way, and he after her;
but when he was come up with her again, then she said, still not
looking at him: "A house of woodmen and wolf-heads. Is that a meet
dwelling-place for me? Didst thou hear men at Greenharbour say that I am
a Queen?"

"Hear them I did," quoth he; "but meseemeth nought like a Queen had they
done with thee."

She said: "And dost thou mock me with that? thou?" And she burst out
weeping. He answered not, for sore grief smote him, remembering her hand
in his but a little while ago. And again she hurried on, and he followed
her.

When he came up with her she said: "And thou, didst thou woo me as a
Queen?"

"Lady," he said, "I wooed thee not at all; I was given to thee, would I,
would I not: great joy was that to me."

Then said she: "Thou sayest sooth, thou hast not wooed me, but taken
me." She laughed therewith, as one in bitterness. But presently she
turned to him, and he wondered, for in her face was longing and kindness
nought like to her words. But he durst not speak to her lest he should
anger her, and she turned her face from him again: and she said: "Wert
thou given to me? meseems I was given to thee, would I, would I not; the
Queen to the Churl, the Wood-man, the Wolf-head." And again she rode on,
and he followed, sick at heart and wondering sorely.

When they were riding together again, they spake not to each other,
though she stole glances at him to see how he fared; but he rode on with
knit brows and a stern countenance. So in a while she began to speak to
him again, but as if there were nought but courtesy between them, and
neither love nor hatred. She fell to asking him of woodland matters,
concerning bird and beast and things creeping; and at first he would
scarce answer her at all, and then were his answers short; but at last,
despite of all, he began to forget both grief and anger, so much the
sweetness of her speech wound about his heart; and, withal, she fell to
asking him of his fellows and their life in the woods, and of Jack of
the Tofts and the like; and now he answered her questions fully, and
whiles she laughed at his words, and he laughed also; and all pleasure
had there been of this converse, if he had not beheld her from time to
time and longed for the fairness of her body, and feared her wrath at
his longing.

So wore the day, and the sun was getting low, and they were come to
another woodland pool which was fed by a clear-running little brook,
and up from it went a low bank of greensward exceeding sweet, and
beyond that oak trees wide-branched and great, and still fair greensward
beneath them and hazel-thicket beyond them. There, then, Goldilind
reined up, and looked about her, but Christopher looked on her and
nought else. But she said: "Let to-morrow bring counsel; but now am I
weary to-night, and if we are not to ride night-long, we shall belike
find no better place to rest in. Wilt thou keep watch while I sleep?"

"Yea," he said, bowing his head to her soberly; and therewith he got
off his horse, and would have helped her down from hers, but she slipped
lightly down and stood before him face to face, and they were very nigh
to each other, she standing close to her horse. Her face was pale to
his deeming and there was a piteous look in her eyes, so that he yearned
towards her in his bowels, and reached his hand toward her; but she
shrank aback, leaning against her horse, and said in a trembling voice,
looking full at him, and growing yet paler: "Forester, dost thou think
it seemly that thou shouldst ride with us, thou such as thou hast told
thyself to be, in this lordly raiment, which they gave thee yonder as
part of the price for thy leading us away into the wild-wood?"

"Lady," said he, "whether it be seemly or not, I see that it is thy will
that I should go clad as a woodland churl; abide a little, and thy will
shall be done."

Therewith he did off the burden from the sumpter horse, and set the
chests on the earth; then he took her horse gently, and led him with
the other two in under the oak trees, and there he tethered them so that
they could bite the grass; and came back thereafter, and took his old
raiment out of the chest, and said: "What thou wilt have me do, I
will do now; and this all the more as to-morrow I should have done it
unbidden, and should have prayed thee to do on garments less glorious
than now thou bearest; so that we may look the less strange in the
woodland if we chance to fall in with any man."

Nought she answered as he turned toward the hazel copse; she had been
following him with her eyes while he was about that business, and when
his back was turned, she stood a moment till her bosom fell a-heaving,
and she wept; then she turned her about to the chest wherein was her
raiment, and went hastily and did off her glorious array, and did on the
green gown wherewith she had fled, and left her feet bare withal.
Then she looked up and saw Christopher, how he was coming from out the
hazel-thicket new clad in his old raiment, and she cried out aloud, and
ran toward him. But he doubted that some evil had betid, and that she
was chased; so he drew out his sword; but she ran up to him and cried
out: "Put up thy sword, here is none save me."

But he stood still, gazing on her in wonderment, and now she was drawn
near to him she stood still before him, panting. Then he said: "Nay,
Lady, for this night there was no need of thy disguising thee, to-morrow
it had been soon enough."

She said: "I were fain if thou wouldst take my hand, and lead me back to
our resting-place."

Even so he did, and as their palms met he felt how her hand loved him,
and a flood of sweetness swept over his heart, and made an end of all
its soreness. But he led her quietly back again to their place. Then she
turned to him and said: "Now art thou the woodland god again, and the
courtier no more; so now will I worship thee." And she knelt down before
him, and embraced his knees and kissed them; but he drew her up to him,
and cast his arms about her, and kissed her face many times, and said:
"Now art thou the poor captive again."

She said: "Now hast thou forgiven me; but I will tell thee that my
wilfulness and folly was not all utterly feigned; though when I was
about it I longed for thee to break it down with the fierceness of a
man, and bid me look to it how helpless I was, and thou how strong and
my only defence. Not utterly feigned it was: for I will say it, that
I was grieved to the heart when I bethought me of Meadhamstead and the
seat of my fathers. What sayest thou then? Shalt thou be ever a woodman
in these thickets, and a follower of Jack of the Tofts? If so thou wilt,
it is well."

He took her by the shoulders and bent her backwards to kiss her, and
held her up above the earth in his arms, waving her this way and that,
till she felt how little and light she was in his grasp, though she was
no puny woman; then he set her on her feet again, and laughed in her
face, and said: "Sweetling, let to-morrow bring counsel. But now let it
all be: thou hast said it, thou art weary; so now will I dight thee a
bed of our mantles, and thou shalt lie thee down, and I shall watch thee
as thou badest me."

Therewith he went about, and plucked armfuls of the young bracken, and
made a bed wide and soft, and spread the mantles thereover.

But she stood awhile looking on him; then she said: "Dost thou think
to punish me for my wilful folly, and to shame me by making me speak to
thee?"

"Nay," he said, "it is not so."

She said: "I am not shamed in that I say to thee: if thou watch this
night, I will watch by thee; and if I lie down to rest this night, thou
shalt lie by me. For my foemen have given me to thee, and now shalt thou
give thyself to me."

So he drew near to her shyly, like unto one who hath been forgiven. And
there was their bridal bed, and nought but the oak boughs betwixt them
and the bare heavens.




CHAPTER XXIII. THEY FALL IN WITH FRIENDS.


Now awoke Goldilind when the morning was young and fresh, and she drew
the mantle up over her shoulders; and as she did so, but half awake, she
deemed she heard other sounds than the singing of the black-birds and
throstles about the edge of the thicket, and she turned her eyes toward
the oak trees and the hazel-thicket, and saw at once three of mankind
coming on foot over the greensward toward her. She was afraid, so that
she durst not put out a hand to awaken Christopher, but sat gazing on
those three as they came toward her; she saw that two were tall men,
clad much as Christopher; but presently she saw that there was a woman
with them, and she took heart somewhat thereat; and she noted that one
of the men was short-haired and dark-haired, and the other had long red
hair falling about his shoulders; and as she put out her hand and laid
it on Christopher's shoulder, the red-haired one looked toward her a
moment under the sharp of his hand (for the sun was on their side),
and then set off running, giving out a great whoop therewithal. Even
therewith leapt up Christopher, still half awake, and the red-haired man
ran right up to him, and caught him by the shoulders, and kissed him on
both cheeks; so that Goldilind saw that these were the fellows whereof
Christopher had told, and she stood there shame-fast and smiling.

Presently came up the others, to wit, Gilbert and Joanna, and they also
kissed and embraced Christopher, and all they were as full of joy as
might be. Then came Joanna to Goldilind, and said: "I wot not who this
may be, brother, yet meseems she will be someone who is dear to thee,
wherefore is she my sister." And therewith she kissed Goldilind; and she
was kind, and sweet of flesh, and goodly of body, and Goldilind rejoiced
in her.

Joanna made much of her, and said to her: "Here is to do, whereas two
men have broken into a lady's chamber; come, sister, let us to the
thicket, and I will be thy tiring-maid, and while these others tell
their tales we shall tell ours." And she took her hand and they went
into the hazels; but the two new-come men seemed to find it hard to keep
their eyes off Goldilind, till the hazels had hidden her.

Then turned David to Christopher, and said: "Thy pardon, little King,
that we have waked thee so early; but we wotted not that thou hadst been
amongst the wood-women; and, sooth to say, my lad, we had little ease
till we found thee, after we came home and saw all those hoof-marks
yonder."

"Yea," said Gilbert, "if we had lost thee we had been finely holpen up,
for we could neither have gone back to the Tofts nor into the kingdom:
for I think my father would have hanged us if we had come back with a
'By the way, Christopher is slain.' But tell us, lad, what hath befallen
thee with yonder sweetling?"

"Yea, tell us," said David, "and sit down here betwixt us, with thy back
to the hazel-thicket, or we shall get no tale out of thee--tush, man,
Joanna will bring her back, and that right soon, I hope."

Christopher laughed, and sat down between them, and told all how it
had gone with him, and of Goldilind, who she was. The others hearkened
heedfully, and Gilbert said: "With all thou hast told us, brother, it
is clear we shall find it hard to dwell in Littledale; so soon as thy
loveling hath rested her at our house, we must go our ways to the Tofts,
and take counsel of our father."

Christopher yea-said this, and therewithal was come Joanna leading
Goldilind duly arrayed (yet still in her green gown, for she would none
other), fresh, blushing, and all lovely; and David and Christopher
did obeisance before her as to a great lady; but she hailed them as
brothers, merrily and kindly, and bade them kiss her; and they kissed
her cheek, but shyly, and especially David.

Thereafter they broke their fast under the oak trees, and spent a merry
hour, and then departed, the two women riding the horses, the others
afoot; so came they to the house of Littledale, some while before
sunset, and were merry and glad there. Young they were, troubles were
behind them, and many a joy before them.




CHAPTER XXIV. THEY TAKE COUNSEL AT LITTLEDALE.


Ten days they abode in the house of Littledale in all good cheer, and
Joanna led Goldilind here and there about the woods, and made much of
her, so that the heart within her was full of joy, for the freedom
of the wild-woods and all the life thereof was well-nigh new to her;
whereas on the day of her flight from Greenharbour, and on two other
such times, deadly fear, as is aforesaid, was mingled with her joyance,
and would have drowned it utterly, but for the wilfulness which hardened
her heart against the punishment to come. But now she was indeed free,
and it seemed to her, as to Christopher when he was but new healed of
his hurt, as if all this bright beauty of tree and flower, and beast and
bird, was but made for her alone, and she wondered that her fellow could
be so calm and sedate amidst of all this pleasure. And now, forsooth,
was her queenhood forgotten, and better and better to her seemed
Christopher's valiant love; and the meeting in the hall of the eventide
was so sweet to her, that she might do little but stand trembling whiles
Christopher came up to her, and Joanna's trim feet were speeding her
over the floor to meet her man, that she might be a sharer in his deeds
of the day.

Many tales withal Joanna told the Queen of the deeds of her husband and
his kindred, and of the freeing of her and the other three from their
captivity at Wailing Knowe, and of the evil days they wore there before
the coming of their lads, which must have been worser by far, thought
Goldilind, than the days of Greenharbour; so with all these tales, and
the happy days in the house of the wild-woods, Goldilind now began to
deem of this new life as if there had been none other fated for her,
so much a part was she now become of the days of those woodmen and
wolf-heads.

But when the last of those ten days was wearing to an end and those five
were sitting happy in the hall (albeit David sat somewhat pensive, now
staring at Goldilind's beauty, now rising from his seat to pace the
floor restlessly), Gilbert spake and said: "Brethren, and thou, Queen
Goldilind, it may be that the time is drawing near for other deeds
than letting fly a few shafts at the dun deer, and eating our meat, and
singing old songs as we lie at our ladies' feet; for though we be at
peace here in the wild-wood, forgetting all things save those that are
worthy to be remembered, yet in the cities and the courts of kings guile
is not forgotten, and pride is alive, and tyranny, and the sword is
whetted for innocent lives, and the feud is eked by the destruction of
those who be sackless of its upheaving. Wherefore it behoveth to defend
us by the ready hand and the bold heart and the wise head. So, I say,
let us loiter here no longer, but go our ways to-morrow to the Tofts,
and take the rede of our elders. How say ye, brethren?"

Quoth Christopher: "Time was, brother, when what thou sayest would have
been as a riddle to me, and I would have said: Here are we merry, though
we be few; and if ye lack more company, let me ride to the Tofts and
come back with a half score of lads and lasses, and thus let us eke our
mirth; and maybe they will tell us whitherward to ride. But now there is
a change, since I have gained a gift over-great for me, and I know that
they shall be some of the great ones who would be eager to take it from
me; and who knows what guile may be about the weaving even now, as on
the day when thou first sawest this hall, beloved."

Goldilind spake and sighed withal: "Whither my lord will lead me,
thither will I go; but here is it fair and sweet and peaceful; neither
do I look for it that men will come hither to seek the Queen of
Meadham."

David said: "Bethink thee, though, my Lady, that he who wedded thee to
the woodman may yet rue, and come hither to undo his deed, by slaying
the said woodman, and showing the Queen unto the folk."

Goldilind turned pale; but Joanna spake: "Nay, brother David, why
wilt thou prick her heart with this fear? For my part, I think that,
chance-hap apart, we might dwell here for years in all safety, and
happily enough, maybe. Yet also I say that we of the Tofts may well be
eager to show this jewel to our kindred, and especially to our father
and mother of the Tofts; so to-morrow we will set about the business of
carrying her thither, will she, nill she." And therewith she threw her
arms about Goldilind, and clipped her and kissed her; and Goldilind
reddened for pleasure and for joy that she was so sore prized by them
all.




CHAPTER XXV. NOW THEY ALL COME TO THE TOFTS.


Next morning, while the day was yet young, they rode together, all of
them, the nighest way to the Tofts, for they knew the wood right well.
Again they slept one night under the bare heavens, and, rising betimes
on the morrow, came out under the Tofts some four hours after high noon,
on as fair and calm a day of early summer as ever was seen.

They rode up straight to the door of the great hall, and found but few
folk about, and those mostly women and children; Jack was ridden abroad,
they said, but they looked to see him back to supper, him and his sons,
for he was no great way gone.

Meantime, when they got off their horses, the women and children
thronged round about them; and the children especially about
Christopher, whom they loved much. The maidens, also, would not have
him pass into the hall unkissed, though presently, after their faces had
felt his lips, they fell a-staring and wondering at Goldilind, and when
Christopher took her by the hand and gave her welcome to the House
of the Tofts, and they saw that she was his, they grew to be somewhat
afraid, or it might be shy, both of her and of him.

Anyhow, folk came up to them in the hall, and made much of them, and
took them unto chambers and washed their feet, and crowned them with
flowers, and brought them into the hall again, and up on to the dais,
and gave them to eat and drink. Thither came to them also the Lady
Margaret, Jack's wedded wife, and made them the most cheer that she
might; and unto her did Christopher tell his story as unto his very
mother; and what there was in the house, both of carle and of quean,
gathered round about to hearken, and Christopher nothing loth. And
Goldilind's heart warmed toward that folk, and in sooth they were a
goodly people to look on, and frank and happy, and of good will, and
could well of courtesy, though it were not of the courts.

Wore the bright day, and it drew toward sunset, and now the carles came
straight into the hall by twos and threes, till there were a many within
its walls. But to each one of these knots as they entered, someone,
carle or quean, spake a word or two, and straightway the new-comers went
up to the dais and greeted Christopher pleasantly, and made obeisance to
Goldilind.

At last was the hall, so quiet erst, grown busy as a beehive, and amidst
the throng thereof came in the serving-folk, women and men, and set the
endlong boards up (for the high-table was a standing one of oak, right
thick and strong); and then they fell to bringing in the service, all
but what the fire was dealing with in the kitchen. And whiles this was
a-doing, the sun was sinking fast, and it was dusk in the hall by then
it was done, though without the sky was fair and golden, and about the
edges of the thicket were the nightingales singing loud and sweet, but
within was the turmoil of many voices, whereof few heeded if their words
were loud or soft.

Amidst all this, from close to the hall, rang out the sound of many
horns winding a woodland tune. None was afeard or astonied, because
all knew it for the horns of Jack of the Tofts; but they stilled their
chattering talk somewhat, and abided his coming; and even therewith came
the sound of many feet and the clash of weapons, and men poured in, and
there was the gleam of steel, as folk fell back to the right and left,
and gave room to the new-comers. Then a loud, clear, and cheery voice
cried out from amidst of them: "Light in the hall, men and maids!
Candles, candles! Let see who is here before us!"

Straightway then was there running hither and thither and light sprang
up over all the hall, and there could folk see Jack of the Tofts, and
a score and a half of his best, every man of them armed with shield and
helm and byrny, with green coats over their armour, and wreaths of young
oak about their basnets; there they stood amidst of the hall, and every
man with his naked sword in his fist. Jack stood before his folk clad in
like wise with them, save that his head was bare but for an oak wreath.
Men looked on a while and said nought, while Jack looked proudly and
keenly over the hall, and at last his eye caught Christopher's, but he
made the youngling no semblance of greeting. Christopher's heart fell,
and he misdoubted if something were not wrong; but he spake softly to
one who stood by him, and said: "Is aught amiss, Will Ashcroft? this is
not the wont here."

Said the other: "Not in thy time; but for the last seven days it hath
been the wont, and then off weapons and to supper peaceably."




CHAPTER XXVI. OF THE KING OF OAKENREALM.


Even therewith, and while the last word had but come to Christopher's
ears, rang out the voice of Jack of the Tofts again, louder and clearer
than before: and he said: "Men in this hall, I bear you tidings! The
King of Oakenrealm is amongst us to-night."

Then, forsooth, was the noise and the turmoil, and cries and shouts and
clatter, and fists raised in air and weapons caught down from the wall,
and the glitter of spear-points and gleam of fallow blades. For the name
of Rolf, King of Oakenrealm, was to those woodmen as the name of the
Great Devil of Hell, so much was he their unfriend and their dastard.
But Jack raised up his hand, and cried: "Silence ye! Blow up, horns, The
Hunt's Up!"

Blared out the horns then, strong and fierce, under the hall-roof, and
when they were done, there was more silence in the hall than in the
summer night without; only the voice of the swords could not be utterly
still, but yet tinkled and rang as hard came against hard here and there
in the hush.

Again spake Jack: "Let no man speak! Let no man move from his place! I
SEE THE KING! Ye shall see him!"

Therewith he strode up the hall and on to the dais, and came up to
where stood Christopher holding Goldilind's hand, and she all pale
and trembling; but Jack took him by the shoulder, and turned him about
toward a seat which stood before the board, so that all men in the hall
could see it; then he set him down in it, and took his sword from his
girdle, and knelt down before the young man, and took his right hand,
and said in a loud voice: "I, Jack of the Tofts, a free man and a
sackless, wrongfully beguilted, am the man of King Christopher of
Oakenrealm, to live and die for him as need may be. Lo, Lord, my
father's blade! Wilt thou be good to me and gird me therewith, as thy
father girt him?"

Now when Christopher heard him, at first he deemed that all this
was some sport or play done for his pastime and the pleasure of the
hall-folk in all kindness and honour. But when he looked in the eyes of
him, and saw him fierce and eager and true, he knew well it was no jest;
and as the shouts of men went up from the hall and beat against the
roof, himseemed that he remembered, as in a dream, folk talking a-nigh
him when he was too little to understand, of a king and his son, and
a mighty man turned thief and betrayer. Then his brow cleared, and his
eyes shone bright, and he leaned forward to Jack and girt him with the
sword, and kissed his mouth, and said: "Thou art indeed my man and my
thane and my earl, and I gird thee with thy sword as my father girded
thy father."

Then stood up Jack o' the Tofts and said: "Men in this hall, happy is
the hour, and happy are ye! This man is the King of Oakenrealm, and he
yonder is but a thief of kings, a dastard!"

And again great was the shouting, for carle and quean, young and old,
they loved Christopher well: and Jack of the Tofts was not only their
war-duke and alderman, but their wise man also, and none had any thought
of gainsaying him. But he spake again and said: "Is there here any old
man, or not so old, who hath of past days seen our King that was, King
Christopher to wit, who fell in battle on our behalf? If so there be,
let him come up hither."

Then arose a greybeard from a bench nigh the high-table, and came up on
to the dais; a very tall man had he been, but was now somewhat bowed by
age. He now knelt before Christopher, and took his hand, and said: "I,
William of Whittenham, a free man, a knight, sackless of the guilt which
is laid on me, would be thy man, O my lord King, to serve thee in all
wise; if so be that I may live to strike one stroke for my master's son,
whom now I see, the very living image of the King whom I served in my
youth."

Then Christopher bent down to him and kissed him, and said: "Thou art
indeed my man and my thane & my baron; and who knows but that thou mayst
have many a stroke to strike for me in the days that are nigh at hand."

And again the people shouted: and then there came another and another,
and ten more squires and knights and men of estate, who were now indeed
woodmen and wolf-heads, but who, the worst of them, were sackless of
aught save slaying an unfriend, or a friend's unfriend, in fair fight;
and all these kneeled before him, and put their hands in his, and gave
themselves unto him.

When this was done, there came thrusting through the throng of the hall
a tall woman, old, yet comely as for her age; she went right up on to
the dais, and came to where sat Christopher, and without more ado
cast her arms about him and kissed him, and then she held him by the
shoulders and cried out: "O, have I found thee at last, my loveling,
and my dear, and my nurse-chick? and thou grown so lovely and yet so big
that I may never more hold thee aloft in mine arms, as once I was wont;
though high enough belike thou shalt be lifted; and I say praise be to
God and to his Hallows that thou art grown so beauteous and mighty a
man!"

Therewith she turned about toward the hall-throng and said: "Thou, duke
of these woodmen, and all ye in this hall, I have been brought hither
by one of you; and though I have well-nigh died of joy because of the
suddenness of this meeting, yet I thank him therefor. For who is
this goodly and gracious young man save the King's son of Oakenrealm,
Christopher that was; and that to my certain knowledge; for he is my
fosterling and my milk-child, and I took him from the hands of the
midwife in the High House of Oakenham a twenty-one years ago; and they
took him from Oakenham, and me with him to the house of Lord Richard the
Lean, at Longholms, and there we dwelt; but in a little while they took
him away from Longholms to I wot not whither, but would not suffer me
to go along with him, and ever sithence have I been wandering about and
hoping to see this lovely child again, and now I see him, what he is,
and again I thank God and Allhallows therefor."

Once more then was there stir and glad tumult in the hall. But Goldilind
stood wondering, and fear entered into her soul; for she saw before her
a time of turmoil and unpeace, and there seemed too much between her and
the sweetness of her love. Withal it must be said, that for as little
as she knew of courts and war-hosts, she yet seemed to see lands without
that hall, and hosts marching, and mighty walls glittering with spears,
and the banners of a great King displayed; and Jack of the Tofts and his
champions and good fellows seemed but a frail defence against all that,
when once the hidden should be shown, and the scantiness of the woodland
should cry on the abundance of the kingdom to bow down.

Now she came round the board and stood beside Christopher, and he turned
to her, and stood up and took her hand, in such wise that she felt the
caress of it; and joy filled her soul, as if she had been alone with him
in the wild-wood.

But he spake and said: "All ye my friends: I see and wot well that ye
would have me sit in my father's seat and be the King of Oakenrealm,
and that ye will give me help and furtherance therein to the utmost; nor
will I cast back the gift upon you; and I will say this, that when I am
King indeed, it is my meaning and my will now, that then I shall be
no less one of you good fellows and kind friends than ye have known me
hitherto; and even so I deem that ye think of me. But, good friends, it
is not to be hidden that the road ye would have me wend with you is like
to be rough; and it may well be that we shall not come to be kings or
kings' friends but men hunted, and often, maybe, men taken and slain.
Therefore, till one thing or the other come, the kingship, or the
taking, I will try to be no less joyous than now I am, and so meseemeth
shall ye; and if ye be of this mind, then shall the coming days be no
worse than the days which have been; and God wot they have been happy
enough. Now again, ye see this most fair lady, whose hand I hold; she
is my beloved and my wife; and therewithal she is the true Queen of
Meadham, and a traitor sits in her place even as a traitor sits in mine.
But I must tell you that when she took me for her beloved, she knew not,
nor did I, that I was a King's son, but she took me as a woodman and
an outcast, and as a wood-man and outcast I wooed her, trusting in the
might that was in my body, and the love that was in my heart; and now
before all you, my friends, I thank her and worship her that my body and
my love was enough for her; as, God wot, the kingship of the whole earth
should not be overmuch for her, if it lay open to her to take. But,
sweet friends, here am I talking of myself as a King wedded unto a
Queen, whereas meseemeth the chiefest gift our twin kingship hath
brought you to-night is the gift of two most mighty unfriends for you;
to wit, her foeman and mine. See ye to it, then, if the wild-wood yonder
is not a meeter dwelling for us than this your goodly hall; and fear not
to put us to the door as a pair of make-bates and a peril to this goodly
company. Lo you, the sky without has not yet lost all memory of the sun,
and in a little while it will be yellowing again to the dawn. Nought
evil shall be the wild-wood for our summer dwelling; and what! ere the
winter come, we may have won us another house where erst my fathers
feasted. And thereto, my friends, do I bid you all."

But when they heard his friendly words, and saw the beauty of the fair
woman whose hand he held, his face grew so well-beloved to them, that
they cried out with so great a voice of cheer, wordless for their very
joy, that the timbers of the hall quavered because of it, and it went
out into the wild-wood as though it had been the feastful roaring of the
ancient gods of the forest.

But when the tumult sank a little, then cried out Jack of the Tofts:
"Bring now the mickle shield, and let us look upon our King."

So men went and fetched in a huge ancient shield, plated with
berry-brown iron, inlaid with gold, and the four biggest men in the
hall took it on their shoulders and knelt down anigh the dais, before
Christopher, and Jack said aloud: "King! King! Stand up here! for this
war-board of old days is the castle and the burg alone due to thee, and
these four fellows here are the due mountains to upbear it."

Then lightly strode Child Christopher on to the shield, and when he
stood firm thereon, they rose heedfully underneath him till they were
standing upright on their feet, and the King stood on the shield as if
he were grown there, and waved his naked sword to the four orts.

Then cried out an old woman in a shrill voice: "Lo, how the hills rise
up into tall mountains; even so shall arise Child Christopher to the
kingship."

Thereat all the folk laughed for joy and cried out: "Child Christopher!
Child Christopher, our King!" And for that word, when he came to the
crown indeed, and ruled wide lands, was he called Child Christopher; and
that name clave to him after he was dead, and but a name in the tale of
his kindred.

Now the King spake and said: "Friends, now is it time to get to the
board, and the feast which hath been stayed this while; and I pray you
let it be as merry as if there were no striving and unpeace betwixt us
and the winning of peace. But to-morrow we will hallow-in the Mote, and
my earl and my barons and good men shall give counsel, and then shall it
be that the hand shall do what the heart biddeth."

Therewith he leapt down from the shield, and went about the hall talking
to this one and that, till the board was full dight; then he took his
place in the high-seat, beside Jack of the Tofts; and David and Gilbert
and his other foster-brethren sat on either side of him, and their wives
with them; and men fell to feasting in great glee.

But one thing there is yet to tell of this feast. When men had drunk a
cup or two, and drunk memories to good men dead, and healths to good men
living, amidst this arose a grey-head carle from the lower end of the
hall, and said: "Child Christopher, thy grace, that I may crave a boon
of thee on this day of leal service.'

"Ask then," said Christopher, with a pleasant face.

"King," quoth the carle, "here are we all gathered together, and we have
before us the most beautifullest woman of the world, who sitteth by thy
side; now to-night we be all dear friends, and there is no lack between
us; yet who can say how often we may meet and things be so? I do not say
that there shall enmity and dissension arise between us, though that may
betide; but it is not unlike that another time thou, King, and thy mate,
may be prouder than now ye be, since now ye are new to it. And if that
distance grow between us, it will avail nought to ask my boon then."

"Well, well, ask it now, friend," said the King, laughing; "I were fain
of ending the day with a gift."

"This it is then, King," said the carle: "since we are here set down
before the loveliest woman in the world, grant us this, that all we
men-folk may for this once kiss the face of her, if she will have it
so."

Huge laughter and cheers arose at his word; but King Christopher arose
and said: "Friend, thy boon is granted with a good will; or how sayest
thou, Goldilind my beloved?"

For all answer she stood up blushing like a rose, and held out her two
hands to the men in the hall. And straightway the old carle rose up and
went in haste to the high-table, before another man might stir, and took
Goldilind by the chin, and kissed her well-favouredly, and again men
laughed joyously. Then came before her Jack of the Tofts and all his
sons, one after other, and kissed her face, save only David, who knelt
humbly before her, and took her right hand and kissed it, while the
tears were in his eyes. Then came many of the men in the hall, and some
were bold, but many were shy, and when they came before her durst kiss
neither hand nor face of her, but their hearts were full of her when
they went to their places again; and all the assembly was praising her.

So wore the time of that first night of the kingship of Child
Christopher.




CHAPTER XXVII. OF THE HUSTING OF THE TOFTS.


When morning was, there were horns sounding from the tower on the toft,
and all men hastening in their war-gear to the topmost of the other
toft, the bare one, whereon was no building; for thereon was ever the
mote-stead of these woodmen. But men came not only from the stead and
houses of the Tofts, but also from the woodland cots and dwellings
anigh, of which were no few. And they that came there first found King
Christopher sitting on the mound amid the mote-stead, and Jack of the
Tofts and his seven sons sitting by him, and all they well-weaponed
and with green coats over their hauberks; and they that came last found
three hundreds of good men and true gathered there, albeit this was but
the Husting of the Tofts.

So when there were no more to come, then was the Mote hallowed, and the
talk began; but short and sharp was their rede, for well did all men wot
who had been in the hall the night before that there was now no time to
lose. For though nigh all the men that had been in the hall were well
known to each other, yet might there perchance have been some spy
unknown, who had edged him in as a guest to one of the good men. Withal,
as the saw saith: The word flieth, the wight dieth. And it were well if
they might gather a little host ere their foeman might gather a mickle.

First therefore arose Jack of the Tofts, and began shortly to put forth
the sooth, that there was come the son of King Christopher the Old, and
that now he was seeking to his kingdom, not for lust of power and gain,
but that he might be the friend of good men and true, and uphold them
and be by them upholden. And saith he: "Look ye on the face of this man,
and tell me where ye shall find a friend friendlier than he, and more
single-hearted?" And therewith he laid his hand on Christopher's head,
and the young man rose up, blushing like a maid, and thereafter a long
time could no lord be heard for the tumult of gladness and the clashing
of weapons.

But when it was a little hushed, then spake Jack again: "Now need no man
say more to man on this matter, for ye call this curly-headed lad the
King of Oakenrealm, even as some of ye did last night."

Mighty was the shout of yea-say that arose at that word; and when it was
stilled, a grey-head stood up and said: "King Christopher, and thou, our
leader, whom we shall henceforth call Earl, it is now meet that we shear
up the war-arrow, and send it forth to whithersoever we deem our friends
dwell, and that this be done at once here in this Mote, and that the
hosting be after three nights' frist in the plain of Hazeldale, which
all ye know is twelve miles nigher to Oakenrealm than this."

All men yea-said this, no one gainsaid it; and straightway was fire
kindled and the bull slain, for the said elder had brought him thither;
and the arrow was sheared and scorched and reddened, and the runners
were fetched, and the word given them, and they were sped on their
errand.

Up rose then another, a young man, and spake: "Many stout fellows be
here, and some wise and well-ruled, and many also hot-head and wilful:
Child Christopher is King now, and we all know him that when he cometh
into the fray he is like to strike three strokes for two that any other
winneth; but as to his lore of captainship, if he hath any, he was born
with it, as is like enough, seeing who was his father; therefore we need
a captain well-proven, to bid us how to turn hither and thither, and
where to gather thickest, and where to spread thinnest; and when to fall
on fiercely and when to give way, and let the thicket cover us; for wise
in war shall our foemen be. Now therefore if anyone needeth a better
captain than our kin-father and war-father Jack of the Tofts, he must
needs go fetch him from otherwhere! How sayest thou, Christopher lad?"

Great cheer there was at the word, and laughter no little therewith. But
Christopher stood up, and took Jack by the hand, and said: "Now say I,
that if none else follow this man into battle, yet will I; and if none
else obey him to go backward or forward to the right hand or to the left
as he biddeth, yet will I. Thou, Wilfrid Wellhead, look to it that thou
dost no less. But ye folk, what will ye herein?"

So they all yea-said Jack of the Tofts for captain; and forsooth they
might do no less, for he was wary and wise, and had done many deeds, and
seen no little of warfare.

Then again arose a man of some forty winters, strong built and not
ungoodly, but not merry of countenance, and he spake: "King and
war-leader, I have a word to say: We be wending to battle, we carles,
with spear in fist and sword by side; and if we die in the fray, of
the day's work is it; but what do we with our kinswomen, as mothers and
daughters and wives and she-friends, and the little ones they have borne
us? For, see ye! this warfare we are faring, maybe it shall not last
long, and yet maybe it shall; and then may the foeman go about us and
fall on this stead if we leave them behind here with none to guard them;
and if, on the other hand, we leave them men enough for their warding,
then we minish our host overmuch. What do we then?"

Then spake Jack of the Tofts: "This is well thought of by Haward of
Whiteacre, and we must look to it. And, by my rede, we shall have our
women and little ones with us; and why not? For we shall then but be
moving Toftstead as we move; and ever to some of us hath it been as a
camp rather than an house. Moreover, ye know it, that our women be no
useless and soft queans, who durst not lie under the oak boughs for a
night or two, or wade a water over their ankles, but valiant they be,
and kind, and helpful; and many of them are there who can draw a bow
with the best, and, it may be, push a spear if need were. How say ye,
lads?"

Now this also they yea-said gladly; forsooth they had scarce been fain
of leaving the women behind, at least the younger ones, even had they
been safe at the Tofts; for there is no time when a man would gladlier
have a fair woman in his arms than when battle and life-peril are
toward.

Thereafter the Mote sundered, when the Captain had bidden his men this
and that matter that each should look to; and said that he, for his
part, with King Christopher and a chosen band, would set off for
Hazeldale on the morrow morn, whereas some deal of the gathering would
of a certainty be come thither by then; and that there was enough left
of that day to see to matters at the Tofts.

So all men went about their business, which was, for the most part,
seeing to the victualling of the host.




CHAPTER XXVIII. OF THE HOSTING IN HAZELDALE.


On the morrow early was Jack of the Tofts dight for departure, with
Christopher and David and Gilbert and five score of his best men. But
when they went out of the porch into the sweet morning, lo! there was
Goldilind before them, clad in her green gown, and as fresh and dear
as the early day itself. And Jack looked on her and said: "And thou, my
Lady and Queen, thou art dight as thou wouldst wend with us?"

"Yea," she said, "and why not?"

"What sayest thou, King Christopher?" said the Captain.

"Nay," said King Christopher, reddening, "it is for thee to yea-say or
nay-say; though true it is that I have bidden her farewell for two days'
space." And the two stood looking on one another.

But Jack laughed and said: "Well, then, so be it; but let us get to
the way, or else when the sweethearts of these lads know that we have a
woman with us we shall have them all at our backs." Thereat all laughed
who were within earshot, and were merry.

So they wended the woodland ways, some afoot, some a-horseback, of
whom was Jack of the Tofts, but Christopher and David went afoot. And
Goldilind rode a fair white horse which the Captain had gotten her.

As they went, and King Christopher ever by Goldilind's right hand,
and were merry and joyous, they two were alone in the woodland way; so
Christopher took her hand and kissed it, and said: "Sweetling, why
didst thou tell me nought of thy will to come along with us? Never had I
balked thee."

She looked at him, blushing as a rose, and said: "Dear friend, I will
tell thee; I knew that thou wouldst make our parting piteous-sweet this
morning; and of that I would not be balked. See, then, how rich I am,
since I have both parted from thee and have thee." And therewith she
louted down from her saddle, and they kissed together sweetly, and so
thereafter wore the way.

So came they to the plain of Hazeldale, which was a wide valley with a
middling river winding about it, the wild-wood at its back toward the
Tofts, and in front down-land nought wooded, save here and there a tree
nigh a homestead or cot; for that way the land was builded for a space.
Forsooth it was not easy for the folk thereabout to live quietly, but if
they were friends in some wise to Jack of the Tofts.

So when the company of the Tofts came out into the dale about three
hours after noon, it was no wonder to them to see men riding and going
to and fro, and folk pitching tents and raising booths nigh to the cover
of the wood; and when the coming of the Toft-folk was seen, and the
winding of their horns heard, there was many a glad cry raised in
answer, and many an horn blown, and all men there came running together
toward where now was stayed Jack of the Tofts and Christopher and their
men.

Then Goldilind bade Christopher help her light down; so he took her in
his arms, and was not over hasty in setting her down again. But when
she stood by him, she looked over the sunny field darkened by the folk
hastening over the greensward, and her eyes glittered and her cheek
flushed, and she said: "Lord King, be these some others of thy men?"

"Yea, sweetling," said he, "to live and die with me."

She looked on him, and said softly: "Maybe it were an ill wish to wish
that I were thou; yet if it might be for one hour!"

Said he: "Shall it not be for more than one hour? Shall it not be for
evermore, since we twain are become one?"

"Nay," she said, "this is but a word; I am but thine handmaid: and now I
can scarce refrain my body from falling before thy feet."

He laughed in her face for joy, and said: "Abide a while, until these
men have looked on thee, and then shalt thou see how thou wilt be a
flame of war in their hearts that none shall withstand."

Now were the dale-dwellers all come together in their weapons, and they
were glad of their King and his loveling; and stout men were they all,
albeit some were old, and some scarce of man's age. So they were ranked
and told over, and the tale of them was over six score who had obeyed
the war-arrow, and more and more, they said, would come in every hour.
But now the Captains of them bade the Toft-folk eat with them; and they
yea-said the bidding merrily, and word was given, and sacks and
baskets brought forth, and barrels to boot, and all men sat down on the
greensward, and high was the feast and much the merriment on the edge of
Hazeldale.




CHAPTER XXIX. TIDINGS COME TO HAZELDALE.


But they had not done their meat, and had scarce begun upon their drink,
ere they saw three men come riding on the spur over the crown of the
bent before them; these made no stay for aught, but rode straight
through the ford of the river, as men who knew well where it was, and
came on hastily toward the feasters by the wood-edge. Then would some
have run to meet them, but Jack of the Tofts bade them abide till he had
heard the tidings; whereas they needed not to run to their weapons, for,
all of them, they were fully dight for war, save, it might be, the doing
on of their sallets or basnets. But Jack and Christopher alone went
forward to meet those men; and the foremost of them cried out at once:
"I know thee, Jack of the Tofts! I know thee! Up and arm! up and arm!
for the foemen are upon thee; and so choose thee whether thou wilt fight
or flee."

Quoth Jack, laughing: "I know thee also, Wat of Whiteend; and when thou
hast told me how many and who be the foemen, we will look either to
fighting or fleeing."

Said Wat: "Thou knowest the blazon of the banner which we saw, three red
wolves running on a silver field?"

"Yea, forsooth," said Jack; "'tis the Baron of Brimside that beareth
that shield ever; and the now Baron, hight the Lord Gandolf, how many
was he?"

Said Wat: "Ten hundreds or more. But what say fellows?"

Quoth the other twain: "More, more they were."

Said Jack of the Tofts: "And when shall he be here, deem ye?"

"In less than an hour," said Wat, "he will be on thee with great and
small; but his riders, some of them, in lesser space."

Then turned Jack about and cried out for David, and when he came, he
said: "Put thy long legs over a good horse, and ride straight back to
the Tofts and gather whatever may bear spear and draw bow, and hither
with them, lad, by the nighest road; tarry not, speak no word, be gone!"

So David turned, and was presently riding swiftly back through the
woodland paths. But Jack spake to the bearers of tidings: "Good fellows,
go ye yonder and bid them give you a morsel and a cup; and tell all
the tidings, and this, withal, that we have nought to flee from a good
fightstead for Gandolf of Brimside." Therewith he turned to Christopher
and said: "Thy pardon, King, but these matters must be seen to
straightway. Now do thou help me array our folk, for there is heart
enough in them as in thee and me; and mayhappen we may make an end to
this matter now and here. Moreover, the Baron of Brimside is a stout
carle, so fight we must, meseemeth."

Then he called to them one of the captains of the Tofts and they three
spake together heedfully a little, and thereafter they fell to work
arraying the folk; and King Christopher did his part therein deftly and
swiftly, for quick of wit he was, and that the more whenso anything was
to be done.

As to the array, the main of the folk that were spearmen and billmen but
moved forward somewhat from where they had dined to the hanging of the
bent, so that their foemen would have the hill against them or ever
they came on point and edge. But the bowmen, of whom were now some two
hundreds, for many men had come in after the first tally, were spread
abroad on the left hand of the spearmen toward the river, where the
ground was somewhat broken, and bushed with thorn-bushes. And a bight of
the water drew nearer to the Tofters, amidst of which was a flat eyot,
edged with willows and covered with firm and sound greensward, and was
some thirty yards endlong and twenty overthwart. So there they abode the
coming of the foe, and it was now hard on five o'clock.

But Christopher went up to Goldilind where she stood amidst of the
spearmen, hand turning over hand, and her feet wandering to and fro
almost without her will; and when he came to her, she had much ado to
refrain her from falling on his bosom and weeping there. But he cried
to her gaily: "Now, my Lady and Queen, thou shalt see a fair play toward
even sooner than we looked for; and thine eyes shall follow me, if the
battle be thronged, by this token, that amongst all these good men and
true I only wear a forgilded basnet with a crown about it."

"O!" she said, "if it were but over, and thou alive and free! I would
pay for that, I deem, if I might, by a sojourn in Greenharbour again."

"What!" he said, "that I might have to thrust myself into the peril of
snatching thee forth again?" And he laughed merrily. "Nay," said he,
"this play must needs begin before it endeth; and by Saint Nicholas, I
deem that to-day it beginneth well."

But she put her hands before her face, and her shoulders were shaken
with sobs. "Alas! sweetling," said he, "that my joy should be thy
sorrow! But, I pray thee, take not these stout-hearts for runaways. And
Oh! look, look!"

She looked up, wondering and timorous, but all about her the men sprang
up and shouted, and tossed up bill and sword, and the echo of their
cries came back from the bowmen on the left, and Christopher's sword
came rattling out of the scabbard and went gleaming up aloft. Then words
came into the cry of the folk, and Goldilind heard it, that they cried
"Child Christopher! King Christopher!" Then over her head came a sound
of flapping and rending as the evening wind beat about the face of the
wood; and she heard folk cry about her: "The banner, the banner! Ho for
the Wood-wife of Oakenrealm!"

Then her eyes cleared for what was aloof before her, and she saw a dark
mass come spreading down over the bent on the other side of the river,
and glittering points and broad gleams of white light amidst of it, and
noise came from it; and she knew that here were come the foemen. But
she thought to herself that they looked not so many after all; and she
looked at the great and deft bodies of their folk, and their big-headed
spears and wide-bladed glaves and bills, and strove with her heart and
refrained her fear, and thrust back the image which had arisen before
her of Greenharbour come back again, and she lonely and naked in the
Least Guard-chamber: and she stood firm, and waved her hand to greet the
folk.

And lo! there was Christopher kneeling before her and kissing her hand,
and great shouts arising about her of "The Lady of Oakenrealm! The Lady
of Meadham! For the Lady! For the Lady!"




CHAPTER XXX. OF THE FIELD THAT WAS SET IN THE HOLM OF HAZELDALE.


Now thither cometh Jack o' the Tofts, and spake to Christopher: "See
thou, lad--Lord King, I should say; this looketh not like very present
battle, for they be stayed half way down the bent; and lo thou, some
half score are coming forth from the throng with a white shield raised
aloft. Do we in likewise, for they would talk with us."

"Shall we trust them, father?" said Christopher.

"Trust them we may, son," said Jack; "Gandolf is a violent man, and a
lifter of other men's goods, but I deem not so evil of him as that he
would bewray troth."

So then they let do a white cloth over a shield and hoist it on a
long spear, and straightway they gat to horse, Jack of the Tofts, and
Christopher, and Haward of Whiteacre, and Gilbert, and a half score all
told; and they rode straight down to the ford, which was just below the
tail of the eyot aforesaid, and as they went, they saw the going of the
others, who were by now hard on the waterside; and said Jack: "See now,
King Christopher, he who rides first in a surcoat of his arms is
even the Baron, the black bullet-headed one; and the next to him, the
red-head, is his squire and man, Oliver Marson, a stout man, but fierce
and grim-hearted. Lo thou, they are taking the water, but they are
making for the eyot and not our shore: son mine, this will mean a
hazeled field in the long run; but now they will look for us to come
to them therein. Yea, now they are aland and have pitched their white
shield. And hearken, that is their horn; blow we an answer: ho, noise!
set thy lips to the brass."

So then, when one horn had done its song, the other took it up, and
all men of both hosts knew well that the horns blew but for truce and
parley.

Now come the Toft-folk to the ford, and take the water, which was very
shallow on their side, and when they come up on to the eyot, they find
the Baron and his folk off their horses, and lying on the green grass,
so they also lighted down and stood and hailed the new comers. Then
uprose the Lord Gandolf, and greeted the Toft-folk, and said: "Jack of
the Tofts, thou ridest many-manned to-day."

"Yea, Lord," said Jack, "and thou also. What is thine errand?"

"Nay," said the Baron, "what is thine? As for mine host here, there came
a bird to Brimside and did me to wit that I should be like to need a
throng if I came thy way; and sooth was that. Come now, tell us what is
toward, thou rank reiver, though I have an inkling thereof; for if this
were a mere lifting, thou wouldst not sit still here amidst thy friends
of Hazeldale."

"Lord," said Jack o' the Tofts, "thou shalt hear mine errand, and then
give heed to what thou wilt do. Look to the bent under the wood, and
tell me, dost thou see the blazon of the banner under which be my men?"

"That can I not," said the Lord Gandolf; "but I have seen the banner
of Oakenrealm, which beareth the wood-woman with loins garlanded with
oak-leaves, look much like to it at such a distance."

Said Jack: "It is not ill guessed. Yonder banner is the King's banner,
and beareth on it the woman of Oakenrealm."

The Lord bent his brows on him, and said: "Forsooth, rank reiver, I
wotted not that thou hadst King Rolf for thy guest."

Quoth Jack of the Tofts: "Forsooth, Lord, no such guest as the Earl
Marshal Rolf would I have alive in my poor house."

"Well, Jack," said the big Lord, grinning, "arede me the riddle, and
then we shall see what is to be done, as thou sayest."

"Lord," said Jack, "dost thou see this young man standing by me?"

"Yea," said the other, "he is big enough that I may see him better than
thy banner: if he but make old bones, as is scarce like, since he is of
thy flock, he shall one day make a pretty man; he is a gay rider now.
What else is he?"

Quoth Jack of the Tofts: "He is my King and thy King, and the all-folk's
King, and the King of Oakenrealm: and now, hearken mine errand: it is to
make all folk name him King."

Said the Lord: "This minstrel's tale goes with the song the bird sang
to me this morning; and therefore am I here thronging--to win thy head,
rank reiver, and this young man's head, since it may not better be, and
let the others go free for this time. Hah! what sayest thou? and thou,
youngling? 'Tis but the stroke of a sword, since thou hast fallen into
my hands, and not into the hangman's or the King's."

"Thou must win them first, Lord," said Jack of the Tofts. "Therefore,
what sayest thou? Where shall we cast down the white shield and uprear
the red?"

"Hot art thou, head, heart, and hand, rank reiver," said the Lord; "bide
a while." So he sat silent a little; then he said: "Thou seest, Jack
of the Tofts, that now thou hast thrust the torch into the tow; if I go
back to King Rolf without the heads of you twain, I am like to pay for
it with mine own. Therefore hearken. If we buckle together in fight
presently, it is most like that I shall come to my above, but thou art
so wily and stout that it is not unlike that thou, and perchance this
luckless youngling, may slip through my fingers into the wood; and then
it will avail me little with the King that I have slain a few score
nameless wolf-heads. So, look you! here is a fair field hazelled by God;
let us two use it to-day, and fight to the death here; and then if thou
win me, smite off my head, and let my men fight it out afterwards, as
best they may without me, and 'tis like they will be beaten then. But if
I win thee, then I win this youngling withal, and bear back both heads
to my Lord King, after I have scattered thy wolf-heads and slain as many
as I will; which shall surely befall, if thou be slain first."

Then cried out Jack of the Tofts: "Hail to thy word, stout-heart! this
is well offered, and I take it for myself and my Lord King here." And
all that stood by and heard gave a glad sound with their voices, and
their armour rattled and rang as man turned to man to praise their
captains.

But now spake Christopher: "Lord of Brimside, it is nought wondrous
though thou set me aside as of no account, whereas thou deemest me no
king or king's kindred; but thou, Lord Earl, who wert once Jack of the
Tofts, I marvel at thee, that thou hast forgotten thy King so soon. Ye
twain shall now wot that this is my quarrel, and that none but I shall
take this battle upon him.

"Thou servant of Rolf, the traitor and murderer, hearken! I say that I
am King of Oakenrealm, and the very son of King Christopher the Old; and
that will I maintain with my body against every gainsayer. Thou Lord of
Brimside, wilt thou gainsay it? Then I say thou liest, and lo here, my
glove!" And he cast it down before the Lord.

Again was there good rumour, and that from either side of the
bystanders; but Jack of the Tofts stood up silent and stiff, and the
Baron of Brimside laughed, and said: "Well, swain, if thou art weary of
life, so let it be, as for me; but how sayest thou, Jack of the Tofts?
Art thou content to give thine head away in this fashion, whereas thou
wottest that I shall presently slay this king of thine?"

Said Jack: "The King of Oakenrealm must rule me as well as others of
his liege-men: he must fight if he will, and be slain if he will." Then
suddenly he fell a-laughing, and beat his hand on his thigh till
the armour rattled again, and then he cried out: "Lord Gandolf, Lord
Gandolf, have a care, I bid thee! Where wilt thou please to be buried,
Lord?"

Said the other: "I wot not what thou wilt mean by thy fooling, rank
reiver. But here I take up this youngling's glove; and on his head be
his fate! Now as to this battle. My will is, that we two champions be
all alone and afoot on the eyot. How say ye?"

"Even so be it," said Jack; "but I say that half a score on each side
shall be standing on their own bank to see the play, and the rest of the
host come no nigher than now we are."

"I yea-say it," said the Baron; "and now do thou, rank reiver, go back
to thy fellowship and tell them what we have areded, and do thou, Oliver
Marson, do so much for our folk; and bid them wot this, that if any of
them break the troth, he shall lose nought more than his life for that
same."

Therewith all went ashore to either bank, save the Baron of Brimside
and Christopher. And the Baron laid him down on the ground and fell to
whistling the tune of a merry Yule dance; but as for Christopher, he
looked on his foeman, and deemed he had seldom seen so big and stalwarth
a man; and withal he was of ripe age, and had seen some forty winters.
Then he also cast himself down on the grass, and fell into a kind of
dream, as he watched a pair of wagtails that came chirping up from the
sandy spit below the eyot; till suddenly great shouting broke out, first
from his own bent, and then from the foemen's, and Christopher knew that
the folk on either side had just heard of the battle that was to be on
the holm. The Baron arose at the sound and looked to his own men, whence
were now coming that half-score who were to look on the battle from the
bank; but Christopher stirred not, but lay quietly amongst the flowers
of the grass, till he heard the splash of horse-hoofs in the ford, and
there presently was come Jack of the Tofts bearing basnet and shield for
his lord. And he got off his horse and spake to Christopher: "If I may
not fight for thee, my son and King, yet at least it is the right of
thine Earl to play the squire to thee: but a word before thy basnet is
over thine ears; the man yonder is well-nigh a giant for stature and
strength; yet I think thou mayest deal with him, and be none the sorer
when thou liest down to-night. To be short, this is it: when thou hast
got a stroke in upon him, and he falters, then give him no time, but fly
at him in thy wild-cat manner and show what-like thews thou hast under
thy smooth skin; now thine helm, lad. So art thou dight; and something
tells me thou shalt do it off in victory."




CHAPTER XXXI. THE BATTLE ON THE HOLM.


So when Christopher was armed, Jack turned about speedily, and so gat
him back through the ford and stood there on the bank with the nine
other folk of the Tofts. And by this time was Gandolf of Brimside armed
also, and Oliver Marson, who had done his helm on him, was gone to his
side of the river.

Drew the huge man-at-arms then toward Christopher, but his sword was yet
in the sheath: Christopher set his point to the earth and abode him; and
the Baron spake: "Lad, thou art fair and bold both, as I can see it, and
Jack of the Tofts is so much an old foe of mine that he is well-nigh a
friend: so what sayest thou? If thou wilt yield thee straightway, I will
have both thine head and the outlaw's with me to King Rolf, but yet on
your shoulders and ye two alive. Haps will go as haps will; and it
maybe that ye shall both live for another battle, and grow wiser, and
mayhappen abide in the wood with the reiver's men. Hah? What sayest
thou?"

Christopher laughed and said: "Wouldst thou pardon one who is not yet
doomed, Baron? And yet thy word is pleasant to us; for we see that if we
win thee, thou shalt be good liegeman of us. Now, Baron, sword in fist!"

Gandolf drew his sword, muttering: "Ah, hah! he is lordly and kingly
enough, yet may this learn him a lesson." Indeed the blade was huge and
brown and ancient, and sword and man had looked a very terror save to
one great-hearted.

But Christopher said: "What sayest thou now, Baron, shall we cast down
our shields to earth? For why should we chop into wood and leather?"

The Baron cast down his shield, and said: "Bold are thy words, lad; if
thy deeds go with them, it may be better for thee than for me. Now keep
thee."

And therewith he leapt forward and swept his huge sword around; but
Christopher swerved speedily and enough, so that the blade touched him
not, and the huge man had over-reached himself, and ere he had his sword
well under sway again, Christopher had smitten him so sharply on the
shoulder that the mails were sundered & the blood ran; and withal the
Baron staggered with the mere weight of the stroke. Then Christopher
saw his time, and leapt aloft and dealt such a stroke on the side of his
head, that the Baron tottered yet more; but now was he taught by those
two terrible strokes, and he gathered all his heart to him, and all the
might of his thews, and leapt aback and mastered his sword, and came on
fierce but wary, shouting out for Brimside and the King.

Christopher cried never a cry, but swung his sword well within his
sway, and the stroke came on Gandolf's fore-arm and brake the mails and
wounded him, and then as the Baron rushed forward, the wary lad gat his
blade under his foeman's nigh the hilts, and he gave it a wise twist and
forth flew the ancient iron away from its master.

Gandolf seemed to heed not that he was swordless, but gave out a great
roar and rushed at Christopher to close with him, and the well-knit
lad gave back before him and turned from side to side, and kept the
sword-point before Gandolf's eyes ever, till suddenly, as the Baron was
running his fiercest, he made a mighty sweep at his right leg, since
he had no more to fear his sword, and the edge fell so strong and true,
that but for the byrny-hose he had smitten the limb asunder, and even
as it was it made him a grievous wound, so that the Lord of Brimside fell
clattering to the earth, and Christopher bestrode him and cried: "How
sayest thou, champion, is it enough?"

"Yea, enough, and maybe more," said the Baron. "Wilt thou smite off mine
head? Or what wilt thou?"

Said Christopher: "Here hath been enough smiting, meseemeth, save thy
lads and ours have a mind to buckle to; and lo thou! men are running
down from the bents towards us from both sides, yet not in any warlike
manner as yet. Now, Baron, here cometh thy grim squire that I heard
called Oliver, and if thou wilt keep the troth, thou shalt bid him order
thy men so that they fall not upon us till the battle be duly pitched.
Then shalt thou be borne home, since thou canst not go, with no
hindrance from us."

Now was Oliver come indeed, and the other nine with him, and on the
other side was come Jack of the Tofts and four others.

Then spake the Baron of Brimside: "I may do better than thou biddest me;
for now I verily trow herein, that thou art the son of Christopher the
Old; so valiant as thou art, and so sad a smiter, and withal that
thou fearest not to let thy foeman live. So hearken all ye, and thou
specially, Oliver Marson, my captain: I am now become the man of my lord
King Christopher, and will follow him whereso he will; and I deem that
will presently be to Oakenham, and the King's seat there. Now look to it
that thou, Oliver, order my men under King Christopher's banner, till
I be healed; and then if all be not over, I shall come forth myself,
shield on neck and spear in fist, to do battle for my liege lord; so
help me God and St. James of the Water!"

Therewith speech failed him and his wit therewith; so betwixt them they
unarmed him and did him what leechdom they might do there and then; and
he was nowise hurt deadly: as for Child Christopher, he had no scratch
of steel on him. And Oliver knelt before him when he had dight his own
lord, and swore fealty to him then and there; and so departed, to order
the folk of Brimside and tell them the tidings, and swear them liege men
of King Christopher.




CHAPTER XXXII. OF GOLDILIND AND CHRISTOPHER.


Now Jack of the Tofts said a word to one of his men, and he rode
straightway up into the field under the wood, and spake to three of the
captains of the folk, and they ranked a hundred of the men, of those who
were best dight, and upraised amongst them the banner of Oakenrealm,
and led all them down to the river bank; and with these must needs go
Goldilind; and when they came down thither, Christopher and Jack were
there on the bank to hail them, and they raised a great shout when they
saw their King and their Earl standing there, and the shout was given
back from the wood-side; and then the men of Brimside took it up, for
they had heard the bidding of their Lord, and he was now in a pavilion
which they had raised for him on the mead, and the leeches were looking
to his hurts; and they feared him, but rather loved than hated him, and
he was more to them than the King in Oakenrealm and they were all ready
to do his will.

But as to Goldilind, her mind it had been, as she was going down the
meadow, that she would throw herself upon Christopher's bosom and love
him with glad tears of love; but as she came and stood over against him,
she was abashed, and stood still looking on him, and spake no word; and
he also was ashamed before all that folk to say the words whereof his
heart was full, and longed for the night, that they might be alone
together.

But at last he said: "Lady and Queen, thou seest that we be well-beloved
that they rejoice so much in a little deed of mine." And still she spake
nought, and held hand in hand.

But Jack of the Tofts spake and said: "By St. Hubert! the deed may be
little, though there be men who would think no little of overcoming the
biggest man and the fellest fighter of Oakenrealm, but at least great
things shall come thereof. King, thy strokes of this day have won thee
Oakenrealm, or no man I know in field, and many a mother's son have they
saved from death. For look thou yonder over the river, Goldilind, my
Lady, and tell me what thou seest." She turned to him and said: "Lord
Earl, I see warriors a many."

"Yea," said Jack, "and stout fellows be they for the more part; and hard
had been the hand-play had we met, ere they had turned their backs; but
now, see thou, we shall wend side by side toward Oakenrealm, for our
Lord there hath won them to his friends; and doubt thou not that when
they see him and thee anigh, they shall be friends indeed. What! dost
thou weep for this? Or is it because he hath done the deed and not thou?
or rather, because thine heart is full for the love of him?"

She smiled kindly on Jack, but even therewith she felt two hands laid on
her shoulders, and Christopher kissed her without any word.




CHAPTER XXXIII. A COUNCIL OF CAPTAINS: THE HOST COMES TO BROADLEES, AND
MAKES FOR WOODWALL.


That night, though there was some little coming and going between the
Tofters and the Brimsiders, yet either flock slept on their own side of
the river. Moreover, before the midst of the night, cometh David to
the wood-side, and had with him all men defensible of the Tofts and the
houses thereabout, and most of the women also many of whom bore spear or
bow, so that now by the wood-side, what with them of the Tofts and the
folk who joined them thereto from the country-side about Hazeldale,
there were well-nigh ten hundreds of folk under weapons; and yet more
came in the night through; for the tidings of the allegiance of Brimside
was spreading full fast.

Betimes on the morrow was King Christopher afoot, and he and Jack and
David and Gilbert, and they twelve in company, went down to the banner
by the water-side; and to them presently came Oliver Marson and ten
other of the captains of Brimside, and did them to wit that the Baron
were fain if they would come to his pavilion and hold counsel therein,
for that he was not so sick but he might well speak his mind from where
he lay. So thither they went all, with good will, and the Baron greeted
them friendly, and made what reverence he might to Christopher, and bade
him say what was his mind and his will. But Christopher bade them who
were his elders in battle to speak; and the Baron laughed outright and
said: "Meseemeth, Lord King, thou didst grow old yesterday at my costs;
but since thou wilt have me to speak, I will even do so. And to make
matters the shorter, I will say that I wot well what ye have to do; and
that is, to fall upon the Earl Marshal's folk ere they fall upon us. Now
some folk deem we should fare to Brimside and have a hosting there; but
I say nay; whereas it lieth out of the road to Oakenham, and thereby is
our road, meseemeth; and it is but some six days' riding hence, save, as
is most like, two of those days be days of battle But if we go straight
forward with banners displayed, each day's faring shall be a day of
hosting and gathering; for I tell thee, Lord King, the fame of thee has
by now gone far in this country-side. Wherefore I say no more, since
I wax weary, than this: to the road this morning, and get we so far as
Broadlees ere night-fall, for there we shall get both victual and folk."

There was good cheer made at his word, so Christopher spake: "Baron of
Brimside, thou hast spoken my very mind and will; and but if these lords
and captains gainsay it, let us tarry no longer, but array all our folk
in good order and take tale of them, and so for Broadlees. What say ye,
lords?"

None nay-said it, so there was no more talk save as to the ordering of
this or the other company. And it was so areded that the Brimside men
should fare first at the head of the host with the banner of Brimside,
and that then should go the mingled folk of the country-side, and lastly
the folk of the Tofts with the banner of Oakenrealm; so that if the host
came upon foemen, they might be for a cloud to hide the intent of their
battles awhile till they might take their advantage.

So went the captains to their companies, and the Tofters and their mates
crossed the river to the men of Brimside, who gave them good cheer when
they came amongst them; and it was hard to order the host for a while,
so did the upland folk throng about the King and the Queen; and happy
were they who had a full look on Goldilind; and yet were some so lucky
and so bold that they kissed a hand of her; and one there was, a very
tall young man, and a goodly, who stood there and craved to kiss her
cheek, and she did not gainsay him, and thereafter nought was good to
him save an occasion to die for her.

As for Christopher, he spake to many, and said to them that wheresoever
his banner was, he at least should be at the forefront whenso they came
upon unpeace; and so soon as they gat to the road, he went from company
to company, speaking to many, and that so sweetly and friendly that all
praised him, and said that here forsooth was a king who was all good and
nothing bad, whereas hitherto men had deemed them lucky indeed if their
king were half good and half bad.

Merry then was the road to Broadlees, and they came there before
night-fall; and it was a little cheaping town and unwalled, and if the
folk had had any will to ward them, they lacked might. But when they
found they were not to be robbed, and that it was but the proclaiming of
King Christopher in the market-place, and finding victual and house-room
for the host, and the Mayor taking a paper in payment thereof, none
stirred against them, and a many joined the host to fight for the fair
young King. Now nought as yet had they heard at Broadlees of any force
stirring against them.

But in the morning when they went on their ways again, and were
bound for Cheaping Woodwall, which was a fenced town, they sent out
well-horsed riders to espy the road, who came back on the spur two
hours after noon, and did them to wit that there was a host abiding them
beneath the walls of Woodwall under the banner of Walter the White, an
old warrior and fell fighter; but what comfort he might have from them
of Woodwall they wotted not; but they said that the tidings of their
coming had gone abroad, and many folk were abiding the issue of this
battle ere they joined them to either host. Now on these tidings the
captains were of one mind, to wit, to fare on softly till they came to
a defensible place not far from the foemen, since they could scarce come
to Woodwall in good order before nightfall, and if they were unfoughten
before, to push forward to battle in the morning.

Even so did they, and made a halt at sunset on a pleasant hill above a
river some three miles from Woodwall, and there they passed the night
unmeddled with.




CHAPTER XXXIV. BATTLE BEFORE WOODWALL.


When morning was, the captains came to King Christopher to council:
but while they were amidst of their talk came the word that the foe was
anigh and come close to the river-bank; whereat was none abashed; but to
all it seemed wisdom to abide them on the vantage-ground. So then there
was girding of swords and doing on of helms; as for ordering of the
folk, it was already done, for all the host was ranked on the bent-side,
with the banner of Oakenrealm in the midst; on its left hand the banner
of the Tofts, and on the right the banner of Brimside.

Now when Christopher was come to his place, he looked down and saw how
the foemen were pouring over the river, for it was nowhere deep, and
there were four quite shallow fords: many more were they than his folk,
but he deemed that they fared somewhat tumultuously; and when the bowmen
of the Tofts began shooting, the foemen, a many of them, stayed amidst
of the river to bend bow in their turn, and seemed to think that were
nigh enough already; nay, some went back again to the other bank, to
shoot thence the surer and the drier, and some went yet a little further
back on the field. So that when their sergeants and riders were come
on to the hither bank, they lacked about a fifth of all their host;
and they themselves, for all they were so many, had some ado to make up
their minds to go forward.

Forsooth, when they looked up to the bent and saw the three banners of
Oakenrealm and the Tofts and Brimside all waving over the same ranks,
they knew not what to make of it. And Christopher's host, when they saw
them hang back, brake out into mocking whoops and shouts, and words were
heard in them: "Come and dine at Brimside, good fellows! Come up to the
Tofts for supper and bed! A Christopher! A Christopher!" and so forth.
Now all King Christopher's men were afoot, saving a band of the riders
of Brimside, who bestrode strong and tall horses, and bore jack and
sallet and spear, but no heavy armour.

So Christopher heard and saw, and the heart rose high in him, and he
sent messengers to the right and the left, and bade the captains watch
till he waved his sword aloft, and then all down the bent together; and
he bade the Brimside riders edge a little outward and downward, and be
ready for the chase, and suffer not any of the foemen to gather together
when once they fell to running; for he knew in his heart that the folk
before him would never abide their onfall. And the day was yet young,
and it lacked four hours of noon.

King Christopher abode ill he saw the foemen were come off the level
ground, and were mounting the bent slowly, and not in very good order
or in ranks closely serried. Then he strode forth three paces, and
waved his sword high above his head, and cried out: "A Christopher! A
Christopher! Forward, banner of the Realm!" And forth he went, steady
and strong, and a great shout arose behind him, and none shrank or
lagged, but spears and bills, and axes and swords, all came on like a
wall of steel, so that to the foemen the earth seemed alive with death,
and they made no show of abiding the onset, but all turned and ran, save
Walter the White and a score of his knights, who forsooth were borne
down in a trice, and were taken to mercy, those of them who were not
slain at the first crash of weapons.

There then ye might have seen great clumps of men making no defence, but
casting down their weapons and crying mercy; and forsooth so great was
the throng, that no great many were slain; but on the other hand, but
few gat away across the water, and on them presently fell the Brimside
riders, and hewed down and slew and took few to mercy. And some few
besides the first laggards of the bowmen, it might be three hundreds in
all, escaped, and gat to Woodwall, but when they of the town saw them,
they made up their minds speedily, and shut their gates, and the poor
fleers found but the points of shafts and the heads of quarrels before
them.

But on the field of deed those captives were somewhat fearful as to what
should be done with them, and they spake one to the other about it, that
they would be willing to serve the new King, since he was so mighty.
And amidst of their talk came the captains of King Christopher, and they
drew into a ring around them, and the lords bade them look to it whether
they would be the foemen of the King, the son of that King Christopher
the Old. "If so ye be," said they, "ye may escape this time; but ye see
how valiant a man he is, and how lucky withal, and happy shall they be
whom he calleth friends. Now what say ye, will ye take up your weapons
again, and be under the best of kings and a true one, or will ye depart
and take the chance of his wrath in the coming days? We say, how many of
you will serve King Christopher."

Then arose from them a mighty shout: "All! All! One and All!" Albeit
some there were who slunk away and said nought; and none heeded them.

So then all the sergeants and the common folk swore allegiance to King
Christopher; but of the knights who were left alive, some said Yea, and
some Nay; and these last were suffered to depart, but must needs ride
unarmed.

Now by the time all was done, and the new men had dined along with the
rest of the host, and of the new-comers tale had been taken, the day was
wearing; so they set off for Woodwall, and on the way they met the Mayor
and Aldermen thereof, who came before King Christopher and knelt to him,
and gave him the keys of their town; so he was gracious to them, and
thanked them, and bade see to the victual and lodging of the host, and
that all should be paid thereafter. And they said that they had seen to
all this before they came forth of the town, and that if the Lord King
would ride forth, he would find fair lodging in the good town. So King
Christopher was pleased, and bade the burgesses ride beside him, and he
talked merrily with them on the way, so that their hearts rejoiced over
the kindness of their lord.

So they came to the gate, and there the King made stay till Goldilind
was fetched to him, so that they might ride into the good town side
by side. And in the street was much people thronging, and the sun was
scarce set, so that the folk could see their King and Queen what they
were; and they who were nighest unto them, they let their shouts die
out, so were their hearts touched with the sight of them and the love of
their beauty.

Thus rode they in triumph through the street till they were come to
their lodging, which was great and goodly as for a cheaping town; and so
the day was gone and the night was come, and the council and the banquet
were over; then were the King and Goldilind together again, like any
up-country lad and lass. But she stood before him and said: "O thou King
and mighty warrior, surely I ought to fear thee now, but it is not so,
so sore as I desire thee; but yet it maketh both laughter and tears come
to me when I think of the day we rode away from Greenharbour with thee,
and I seemed to myself a great lady, though I were unhappy; and though
I loved thy body, I feared lest the churl's blood in thee might shame me
perchance, and I was proud and unkind to thee, and I hurt thee sorely;
and now I will say it, and confess, that somewhat I joyed to see thine
anguish, for I knew that it meant thy love for me and thy desire to me.
Lo now, wilt thou forgive me this, or wilt thou punish me, O Lord King?"

He laughed. "Sweetling," he said, "meseemeth now all day long I have
been fighting against raiment rather than men; no man withstood me in
the battle, for that they feared the crown on my helm and the banner
over my head; and when those good men of the town brought me the keys,
how should I have known them from borrel folk but for their scarlet
gowns and fur hoods? And meseemed that when they knelt to me, it was the
scarlet gowns kneeling to the kingly armour. Therefore, sweetheart, if
thou fearest that the King should punish thee for so wounding the poor
Christopher of those few days ago, as belike thou deservest it, bid the
King do off his raiment, and do thou in likewise, and then there shall
be no King to punish, and no King's scather to thole the punishment, but
only Christopher and Goldilind, even as they met erewhile on the dewy
grass of Littledale."

She blushed blood-red; but ere his words were done, her hands were busy
with girdle and clasp, and her raiment fell from her to the earth, and
his kingly raiment was cast from him, and he took her by the hand and
led her to the bed of honour, that their love might have increase that
night also.




CHAPTER XXXV. AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE AND AN EVIL DEED.


When morning was, and it was yet early, the town was all astir and the
gates were thrown open, and weaponed men thronged into it crying out for
Christopher the King. Then the King came forth, and Jack o' the Tofts
and his sons, and Oliver Marson, and the captains of Brimside; and the
host was blown together to the market-place, and there was a new tale of
them taken, and they were now hard on seventy hundreds of men. So then
were new captains appointed, and thereafter they tarried not save to eat
a morsel, but went out a-gates faring after the banners to Oakenrealm,
all folk blessing them as they went.

Nought befell them of evil that day, but ever fresh companies joined
them on the road; and they gat harbour in another walled town, hight
Sevenham, and rested there in peace that night, and were now grown to
eighty hundreds.

Again on the morrow they were on the road betimes, and again much folk
joined them, and they heard no tidings of any foeman faring against
them; whereat Jack o' the Tofts marvelled, for he and others had deemed
that now at last would Rolf the traitor come out against them. Forsooth,
when they had gone all day and night was at hand, it seemed most like to
the captains that he would fall upon them that night, whereas they were
now in a somewhat perilous pass; for they must needs rest at a little
thorpe amidst of great and thick woods, which lay all round about the
frank of Oakenham as a garland about a head. So there they kept watch
and ward more heedfully than their wont was; and King Christopher lodged
with Goldilind at the house of a good man of the thorpe.

Now when it lacked but half an hour of midnight, and Jack o' the Tofts
and Oliver Marson and the Captain of Woodwall had just left him, after
they had settled the order of the next day's journey, and Goldilind lay
abed in the inner chamber, there entered one of the men of the watch
and said: "Lord King, here is a man hereby who would see thee; he is
weaponed, and he saith that he hath a gift for thee: what shall we do
with him?"

Said Christopher: "Bring him in hither, good fellow." And the man went
back, and came in again leading a tall man, armed, but with a hood done
over his steel hat, so that his face was hidden, and he had a bag in his
hand with something therein.

Then spake the King and said: "Thou man, since thy face is hidden, this
trusty man-at-arms shall stand by thee while we talk together."

"Lord," said the man, "let there be a dozen to hear our talk I care not;
for I tell thee that I come to give thee a gift, and gift-bearers are
oftenest welcome."

Quoth the King: "Maybe, yet before thou bring it forth I would see thy
face, for meseems I have an inkling of thy voice."

So the man cast back his hood, and lo, it was Simon the squire. "Hah!"
said Christopher, "is it thou then! hast thou another knife to give me?"

"Nay," said Simon, "only the work of the knife." And therewith he set
his hand to the bag and drew out by the hair a man's head, newly hacked
off and bleeding, and said: "Hast thou seen him before, Lord? He was a
great man yesterday, though not so great as thou shalt be to-morrow."

"Once only I have seen him," said Christopher, "and then he gave me this
gift" (and he showed his father's ring on his finger): "thou hast slain
the Earl Marshal, who called himself the King of Oakenrealm: my traitor
and dastard he was but thy friend. Wherefore have I two evil deeds to
reward thee, Simon, the wounding of me and the slaying of him. Dost thou
not deem thee gallows-ripe?"

"King," said Simon, "what wouldst thou have done with him hadst thou
caught him?"

Said Christopher: "I had slain him had I met him with a weapon in his
fist; and if we had taken him I had let the folk judge him."

Said Simon: "That is to say, that either thou hadst slain him thyself,
or bidden others to slay him. Now then I ask thee, King, for which
deed wilt thou slay me, for not slaying thee, or for doing thy work and
slaying thy foe?"

Said Christopher to the guard: "Good fellow, fetch here a good horse
ready saddled and bridled, and be speedy."

So the man went: and Christopher said to Simon: "For the knife in my
side, I forgive it thee; and as to the slaying of thy friend, it is not
for me to take up the feud. But this is no place for thee: if Jack of
the Tofts, or any of his sons, or one of the captains findeth thee, soon
art thou sped; wherefore I rede thee, when yonder lad hath brought thee
the horse, show me the breadth of thy back, and mount the beast, and put
the most miles thou canst betwixt me and my folk; for they love me."

Said Simon: "Sorry payment for making thee a king!"

Said Christopher: "Well, thou art in the right; I may well give gold for
getting rid of such as thou." And he put his hand into a pouch that hung
on his chair, and drew out thence a purse, and gave it unto Simon, who
took it and opened it and looked therein, and then flung it down on the
ground.

Christopher looked on him wrathfully with reddened face, and cried out:
"Thou dog! wouldst thou be an earl and rule the folk? What more dost
thou want?"

"This!" cried out Simon, and leapt upon him, knife aloft. Christopher
was unarmed utterly; but he caught hold of the felon's right arm with
his right hand, and gripped the wrist till he shrieked; then he raised
up his mighty left hand, and drave it down on Simon's head by the ear,
and all gave way before it, and the murderer fell crushed and dead to
earth.

Therewith came in the man-at-arms to tell him that the horse was come;
but stared wild when he saw the dead man on the ground. But Christopher
said: "My lad, here hath been one who would have thrust a knife into
an unarmed man, wherefore I must needs give him his wages. But now thou
hast this to do: take thou this dead man and bind him so fast on the
horse thou hast brought that he will not come off till the bindings be
undone; and bind withal the head of this other, who was once a great man
and an evil, before the slayer of him, so that it also may be fast; then
get thee to horse and lead this beast and its burden till ye are well
on the highway to Oakenham, and then let him go and find his way to the
gate of the city if God will. And hearken, my lad; seest thou this
gold which lieth scattering on the floor here? this was mine, but is no
longer, since I have given it away to the dead man just before he lifted
his hand against me. Wherefore now I will keep it for thee against thou
comest back safe to me in the morning betimes, as I deem thou wilt, if
thou wilt behight to St. Julian the helping of some poor body on the
road. Go therefore, but send hither the guard; for I am weary now, and
would go to sleep without slaying any man else."

So departed the man full of joy, and Christopher gathered his money
together again, and so fared to his bed peacefully.




CHAPTER XXXVI. KING CHRISTOPHER COMES TO OAKENHAM.


But on the morrow the first man who came to the King was the man-at-arms
aforesaid; and he told that he had done the King's errand, and ridden a
five miles on the road to Oakenham before he had left the horse with his
felon load, and that he had found nought stirring all that way when he
had passed through their own out-guards, where folk knew him and let
him go freely. "And," quoth he, "it is like enough that this gift to
Oakenham, Lord King, has by now come to the gate thereof." Then the King
gave that man the gold which he had promised, and he kissed the King's
hand and went his ways a happy man.

Thereafter sent Christopher for Jack of the Tofts, and told him in few
words what had betid, and that Rolf the traitor was dead. Then spake
Jack: "King and fosterling, never hath so mighty a warrior as thou waged
so easy a war for so goodly a kingdom as thou hast done; for surely thy
war was ended last night, wherefore will we straight to Oakenham, if so
thou wilt. But if it be thy pleasure I will send a chosen band of riders
to wend on the spur thereto, and bid them get ready thy kingly house,
and give word to the Barons and the Prelates, and the chiefs of the
Knighthood, and the Mayor and the Aldermen, and the Masters of the
Crafts, to show themselves of what mind they be towards thee. But I
doubt it not that they will deem of thee as thy father come back again
and grown young once more."

Now was Christopher eager well nigh unto weeping to behold his people
that he should live amongst, and gladly he yea-said the word of Jack of
the Tofts. So were those riders sent forward; and the host was ordered,
and Christopher rode amidst it with Goldilind by his side; and the
sun was not yet gone down when they came within sight of the gate of
Oakenham, and there before the gate and in the fields on either side
of it was gathered a very great and goodly throng, and there went forth
from it to meet the King the Bishop of Oakenham, and the Abbot of St.
Mary's and the Priors of the other houses of religion, all fairly clad
in broidered copes, with the clerks and the monks dight full solemnly;
and they came singing to meet him, and the Bishop blessed him and gave
him the hallowed bread, and the King greeted him and craved his prayers.
Then came the Burgreve of Oakenham, and with him the Barons and the
Knights, and they knelt before him, and named him to king, and the
Burgreve gave him the keys of the city. Thereafter came the Mayor and
the Aldermen, and the Masters of the Crafts, and they craved his favour,
and warding of his mighty sword; and all these he greeted kindly and
meekly, rather as a friend than as a great lord.

Thereafter were the gates opened, and King Christopher entered, and
there was no gainsaying, and none spake a word of the Traitor Rolf.

But the bells of the minster and of all the churches rang merrily, and
songs were sung sweetly by fair women gloriously clad; and whereas King
Christopher and Queen Goldilind had lighted down from their horses and
went afoot through the street, roses and all kinds of sweet flowers were
cast down before the feet of them all the way from the city gate to the
King's High House of Oakenham.

There then in the great hall of his father's house stood Christopher the
King on the dais, and Goldilind beside him. And Jack of the Tofts and
the chiefest of the Captains, and the Bishop, and the greatest lords
of the Barons, and the doughtiest of the Knights, and the Mayor and the
Aldermen, and the Masters of the Crafts, sat at the banquet with the
King and his mate; they brake bread together and drank cups of renown,
till the voidee cup was borne in. Then at last were the King & the Queen
brought to their chamber with string-play and songs and all kinds of
triumph; and that first night since he lay in his mother's womb did
Child Christopher fall asleep in the house which the fathers had builded
for him.




CHAPTER XXXVII. OF CHILD CHRISTOPHER'S DEALINGS WITH HIS FRIENDS & HIS
FOLK.


It was in the morning when King Christopher arose, and Goldilind stood
before him in the kingly chamber, that he clipped her and kissed her,
and said: "This is the very chamber whence my father departed when he
went to his last battle, and left my mother sickening with the coming
birth of me. And never came he back hither, nor did mine eyes behold him
ever. Here also lay my mother and gave birth to me, and died of sorrow,
and her also I never saw, save with eyes that noted nought that I might
remember. And my third kinsman was the traitor, that cast me forth of
mine heritage, and looked to it that I should wax up as a churl, and
lose all hope of high deeds; and at the last he strove to slay me.

"Therefore, sweet, have I no kindred, and none that are bound to cherish
me, and it is for thee to take the place of them, and be unto me both
father and mother, and brother and sister, and all kindred."

She said: "My mother I never saw, and I was but little when my father
died; and if I had any kindred thereafter they loved me not well enough
to strike one stroke for me, nay, or to speak a word even, when I was
thrust out of my place and delivered over to the hands of pitiless
people, and my captivity worsened on me as the years grew. Wherefore to
me also art thou in the stead of all kindred and affinity."

Now Christopher took counsel with Jack of the Tofts and the great men
of the kingdom, and that same day, the first day of his kingship in
Oakenham, was summoned a great mote of the whole folk; and in half a
month was it holden, and thereat was Christopher taken to king with none
gainsaying.

Began now fair life for the people of Oakenrealm; for Jack of the Tofts
abode about the King in Oakenham; and wise was his counsel, and there
was no greed in him, and yet he wotted of greed and guile in others,
and warned the King thereof when he saw it, and the tyrants were brought
low, and no poor and simple man had need to thieve. As for Christopher,
he loved better to give than to take; and the grief and sorrow of folk
irked him sorely; it was to him as if he had gotten a wound when he saw
so much as one unhappy face in a day; and all folk loved him, and the
fame of him went abroad through the lands and the roads of travel, so
that many were the wise and valiant folk that left their own land and
came into Oakenrealm to dwell there, because of the good peace and
the kindliness that there did abound; so that Oakenrealm became both
many-peopled and joyous.

Though Jack of the Tofts abode with the King at Oakenham, his sons went
back to the Tofts, and Gilbert was deemed the head man of them; folk
gathered to them there, and the wilderness about them became builded in
many places, and the Tofts grew into a goodly cheaping town, for those
brethren looked to it that all roads in the woodland should be safe and
at peace, so that no chapman need to arm him or his folk; nay, a maiden
might go to and fro on the woodland ways, with a golden girdle about
her, without so much as the crumpling of a lap of her gown unless by her
own will.

As to David, at first Christopher bade him strongly to abide with him
ever, for he loved him much. But David nay-said it, and would go home to
the Tofts; and when the King pressed him sore, at last he said: "Friend
and fellow, I must now tell thee the very sooth, and then shalt thou
suffer me to depart, though the sundering be but sorrow to me. For this
it is, that I love thy Lady and wife more than meet is, and here I find
it hard to thole my desire and my grief; but down in the thicket yonder
amongst my brethren of the woods, and man and maid, and wife and babe,
nay, the very deer of the forest, I shall become a man again, and be no
more a peevish and grudging fool; and as the years wear, shall sorrow
wear, and then, who knows but we may come together again."

Then Christopher smiled kindly on him and embraced him, but they spake
no more of that matter, but sat talking a while, and then bade each
other farewell, and David went his ways to the Tofts. But a few months
thereafter, when a son had been born to Christopher, David came to
Oakenrealm, but stayed there no longer than to greet the King, and do
him to wit that he was boun for over-sea to seek adventure. Many gifts
the King gave him, and they sundered in all loving-kindness, and the
King said: "Farewell, friend, I shall remember thee and thy kindness
for ever." But David said: "By the roof in Littledale and by the hearth
thereof, thou shalt be ever in my mind."

Thus they parted for that time; but five and twenty years afterwards,
when Child Christopher was in his most might and majesty, and Goldilind
was yet alive and lovely, and sons and daughters sat about their board,
it was the Yule feast in the King's Hall at Oakenham, and there came
a man into the hall that none knew, big of stature, grey-eyed and
hollow-cheeked, with red hair grizzled, and worn with the helm; a
weaponed man, chieftain-like and warrior-like. And when the serving-men
asked him of his name, and whence and whither, he said: "I have come
from over-seas to look upon the King, and when he seeth me he will know
my name." Then he put them all aside and would not be gainsaid, but
strode up the hall to the high-seat, and stood before the King and said:
"Hail, little King Christopher! Hail, stout babe of the woodland!"

Then the King looked on him and knew him at once, and stood up at once
with a glad cry, and came round unto him, and took his arms about him
and kissed him, and led him into the high-seat, and set him betwixt him
and Goldilind, and she also greeted him and took him by the hand and
kissed him; and Jack of the Tofts, now a very old man, but yet hale
and stark, who sat on the left hand of the King, leaned toward him and
kissed him and blessed him; for lo! it was David of the Tofts.

Spake he now and said: "Christopher, this is now a happy day!"

Said the King: "David, whither away hence, and what is thine heart set
upon?"

"On the renewal of our youth," said David, "and the abiding with thee.
By my will no further will I go than this thine house. How sayest thou?"

"As thou dost," said Christopher, "that this is indeed a happy day;
drink out of my cup now, to our abiding together, and the end of
sundering till the last cometh."

So they drank together, they two, and were happy amidst the folk of the
hall; and at last the King stood up and spake aloud, and did all to wit
that this was his friend and fellow of the old days; and he told of his
doughty deeds, whereof he had heard many a tale, and treasured them in
his heart while they were apart, and he bade men honour him, all such as
would be his friends. And all men rejoiced at the coming of this doughty
man and the friend of the King.

So there abode David, holden in all honour, and in great love of Child
Christopher and Goldilind; and when his father died, his earldom did the
King give to David his friend, who never sundered from him again, but
was with him in peace and in war, in joy and in sorrow.




CHAPTER XXXVIII. OF MATTERS OF MEADHAM.


GOES the tale back now to the time when the kingship of Child
Christopher was scarce more than one month old; and tells that as
the King sat with his Queen in the cool of his garden on a morning of
August, there came to him a swain of service, who did him to wit that an
outland lord was come, and would see him and give him a message.

So the King bade bring him in to the garden to him straight-way; so the
man went, and came back again leading in a knight somewhat stricken in
years, on whose green surcoat was beaten a golden lion.

He came to those twain and did obeisance to them, but spake, as it
seemed, to Goldilind alone: "Lady, and Queen of Meadham," said he, "it
is unto thee, first of all, that mine errand is."

Then she spoke and said: "Welcome to thee, Sir Castellan of
Greenharbour, we shall hear thy words gladly."

Said the new-comer: "Lady, I am no longer the Burgreve of Greenharbour,
but Sir Guisebert, lord of the Green March, and thy true servant and a
suitor for thy grace and pardon."

"I pardon thee not, but thank thee for what thou didst of good to me,"
said Goldilind, "and I think that now thine errand shall be friendly."

Then turned the Green Knight to the King, and he said: "Have I thy leave
to speak, Lord King?" and he smiled covertly.

But Christopher looked on the face and coat-armour of him, and called
him to mind as the man who had stood betwixt him and present death
that morning in the porch of the Littledale house; so he looked on him
friendly, and said: "My leave thou hast, Sir Knight, to speak fully and
freely, and that the more as meseemeth I saw thee first when thou hadst
weaponed men at thy back, and wert turning their staves away from my
breast."

"Even so it is, Lord King," said the Knight; "and to say sooth, I fear
thee less for thy kingship, than because I wot well that thou mayst
lightly take me up by the small of my back and cast me over thy shoulder
if thou have a mind therefor."

Christopher laughed at his word, and bade him sit down upon the green
grass and tell his errand straightway; and the Knight tarried not, but
spake out: "Queen of Meadham, I am a friend and fellow, and in some sort
a servant, to Earl Geoffrey, Regent of Meadham, whom thou knowest; and
he hath put a word in my mouth which is both short and easy for me to
tell. All goes awry in Meadham now, and men are arming against each
other, and will presently be warring, but if thou look to it; because
all this is for lack of thee. But if thou wilt vouchsafe to come to
Meadhamstead, and sit on thy throne for a little while, commanding and
forbidding; and if thou wilt appoint one of the lords for thine Earl
there, and others for thy captains, and governors and burgreves and so
forth; then if the people see thee and hear thee, the swords will go
into their sheaths, and the spears will hang on the wall again, and we
shall have peace in Meadham, for all will do thy bidding. Wherefore,
Lady and Queen, I beseech thee to come to us, and stave off the riot and
ruin. What sayest thou?"

Goldilind made answer in a while: "Sir Guisebert, true it is that I long
to see my people, and to look once more on my father's house, and the
place where he was born and died. But how know I but this is some wile
of Earl Geoffrey, for he hath not been abounding in trustiness toward
us?"

But Sir Guisebert swore on his salvation that there was no guile
therein, and they were undone save Goldilind came unto them. Then spake
Christopher: "Sir Knight, I am willing to pleasure my Lady, who, as
I can see, longeth to behold her own land and people; and also by thy
voice and thy face I deem that thou art not lying unto me, and that no
harm will befall the Lady; yet will I ask thee right out what thou and
thy lord would think thereof if she come into Meadham accompanied; to
wit, if I rode with her, and had five hundreds of good riders at my
back, would ye have guesting for so many and such stark lads?"

The Knight took up the word eagerly, and said: "Wilt thou but come,
dear lord, and bring a thousand or more, then the surer and the safer it
would be for us."

Said the King, smiling: "Well, it shall be thought on; and meantime be
thou merry with us; for indeed I deem of thee, that but for thy helping
my life had been cast away that morning in Littledale."

So they made much of the Meadham man for three days, and thereafter
they rode into Meadham and to Meadhamstead, Christopher, and Jack of the
Tofts, and Goldilind, in all honour and triumph, they and seven hundreds
of spears, and never were lords received with such joy and kindness
as were they, but it were on the day when Christopher and his entered
Oakenham.

The Earl Geoffrey was not amongst them that met them; but whenas they
sat at the banquet in the hall, and Goldilind was in the high-seat,
gloriously clad and with the kingly crown on her head, there came a
tall man up to the dais, grey-headed and keen-eyed, and he was unarmed,
without so much as a sword by his side, and clad in simple black; and he
knelt before Goldilind, and laid his head on her lap, and spake: "Lady
and Queen, here is my head to do with as thou wilt; for I have been thy
dastard, and I crave thy pardon, if so it may be, for I am Geoffrey."

She looked kindly on him, and raised him up; and then she turned to the
chief of the serving-men, and said: "Fetch me a sword with its sheath
and its girdle, and see that it be a good blade, and all well-adorned,
both sword and sheath and girdle." Even so it was done; and when she had
the sword, she bade Sir Geoffrey kneel again before her, and she girt
him with the said sword and spake: "Sir Geoffrey, all the wrong which
thou didest to me, I forgive it thee and forget it; but wherein thou
hast done well, I will remember it, for thou hast given me a mighty King
to be my man; nay, the mightiest and the loveliest on earth; wherefore I
bless thee, and will make thee my Earl to rule all Meadham under me, if
so be the folk gainsay it not. Wherefore now let these folk fetch thee
seemly garments and array thee, and then come sit amongst us, and eat
and drink on this high day; for a happy day it is when once again I sit
in my father's house, and see the faces of my folk that loveth me."

She spake loud and clear, so that most folk in the hall heard her; and
they rejoiced at her words, for Sir Geoffrey was no ill ruler, but wise
and of great understanding, keen of wit and deft of word, and a mighty
warrior withal; only they might not away with it that their Lady and
Queen had become as alien to them. So when they heard her speak her
will, they shouted for joy of the peace and goodwill that was to be.

There then sat Geoffrey at the banquet; and Christopher smiled on him,
and said: "See now, lord, if I have not done as thou badest when
thou gavest me the treasure of Greenharbour, for I have brought the
wolf-heads to thy helping and not to thy scathing. Do thou as much for
me, and be thou a good earl to thy Lady and mine, and then shalt thou
yet live and die a happy man, and my friend. Or else--"

"There shall be no else, Lord King," quoth Geoffrey; "all men henceforth
shall tell of me as a true man."

So they were blithe and joyous together. But a seven days thence was
the Allmen's Mote gathered to the wood-side without Meadhamstead, and
thronged it was: and there Goldilind stood up before all the folk
and named Sir Geoffrey for Earl to rule the land under her, and none
gainsaid it, for they knew him meet thereto. Then she named from the
baronage and knighthood such men as she had been truly told were meet
thereto to all the offices of the kingdom, and there was none whom
she named but was well-pleasing to the folk; for she had taken counsel
beforehand with all the wisest men of all degrees.

As for herself, all loved and worshipped her; and this alone seemed hard
unto them, that she must needs go back to Oakenrealm in a few days: but
when she heard them murmur thereat, she behight them, that once in every
year she would come into Meadham and spend one whole month therein; and,
were it possible, ever should that be the month of May. So when they
heard that, they all praised her, and were the more content. This custom
she kept ever thereafter, and she lay in with her second son in the city
of Meadhamstead, so that he was born therein; and she named him to be
King after her, to the great joy of that folk; and he grew up strong and
well-liking, and came to the kingship while his mother was yet alive,
and was a good man and well-beloved of his folk.

Before she turned back with her man, she let seek out Aloyse, and when
she came before her, gave her gifts and bade her come back with her to
Oakenham and serve her there if she would: and the damsel was glad, for
there in Meadhamstead was she poor and not well seen to, whereas it was
rumoured of her that she had been one of the jailers of Goldilind.

When they came back to Oakenham, there they met Gandolf, Baron of
Brimside, now whole of his hurts, and the King greeted him kindly, and
did well to him all his life; and found him ever a true man.

Good thenceforward was the life of Child Christopher and Goldilind:
whiles indeed they happed on unpeace or other trouble; but never did
fair love and good worship depart from them, either of each unto each,
or of the whole folk unto them twain.

To no man did Christopher mete out worse than his deserts, nay, to most
far better he meted: no man he feared, nor hated any save the tormentors
of poor folk; and but a little while abided his hatred of those, for
it cut short their lives, so that they were speedily done with and
forgotten. And when he died a very old man but one year after Goldilind
his dear, no king that ever lived was so bewailed by his folk as was
Child Christopher.




﻿

CHAPTER I--THE DWELLINGS OF MID-MARK


The tale tells that in times long past there was a dwelling of men beside
a great wood.  Before it lay a plain, not very great, but which was, as
it were, an isle in the sea of woodland, since even when you stood on the
flat ground, you could see trees everywhere in the offing, though as for
hills, you could scarce say that there were any; only swellings-up of the
earth here and there, like the upheavings of the water that one sees at
whiles going on amidst the eddies of a swift but deep stream.

On either side, to right and left the tree-girdle reached out toward the
blue distance, thick close and unsundered, save where it and the plain
which it begirdled was cleft amidmost by a river about as wide as the
Thames at Sheene when the flood-tide is at its highest, but so swift and
full of eddies, that it gave token of mountains not so far distant,
though they were hidden.  On each side moreover of the stream of this
river was a wide space of stones, great and little, and in most places
above this stony waste were banks of a few feet high, showing where the
yearly winter flood was most commonly stayed.

You must know that this great clearing in the woodland was not a matter
of haphazard; though the river had driven a road whereby men might fare
on each side of its hurrying stream.  It was men who had made that Isle
in the woodland.

For many generations the folk that now dwelt there had learned the craft
of iron-founding, so that they had no lack of wares of iron and steel,
whether they were tools of handicraft or weapons for hunting and for war.
It was the men of the Folk, who coming adown by the river-side had made
that clearing.  The tale tells not whence they came, but belike from the
dales of the distant mountains, and from dales and mountains and plains
further aloof and yet further.

Anyhow they came adown the river; on its waters on rafts, by its shores
in wains or bestriding their horses or their kine, or afoot, till they
had a mind to abide; and there as it fell they stayed their travel, and
spread from each side of the river, and fought with the wood and its wild
things, that they might make to themselves a dwelling-place on the face
of the earth.

So they cut down the trees, and burned their stumps that the grass might
grow sweet for their kine and sheep and horses; and they diked the river
where need was all through the plain, and far up into the wild-wood to
bridle the winter floods: and they made them boats to ferry them over,
and to float down stream and track up-stream: they fished the river's
eddies also with net and with line; and drew drift from out of it of far-
travelled wood and other matters; and the gravel of its shallows they
washed for gold; and it became their friend, and they loved it, and gave
it a name, and called it the Dusky, and the Glassy, and the
Mirkwood-water; for the names of it changed with the generations of man.

There then in the clearing of the wood that for many years grew greater
yearly they drave their beasts to pasture in the new-made meadows, where
year by year the grass grew sweeter as the sun shone on it and the
standing waters went from it; and now in the year whereof the tale
telleth it was a fair and smiling plain, and no folk might have a better
meadow.

But long before that had they learned the craft of tillage and taken heed
to the acres and begun to grow wheat and rye thereon round about their
roofs; the spade came into their hands, and they bethought them of the
plough-share, and the tillage spread and grew, and there was no lack of
bread.

In such wise that Folk had made an island amidst of the Mirkwood, and
established a home there, and upheld it with manifold toil too long to
tell of.  And from the beginning this clearing in the wood they called
the Mid-mark: for you shall know that men might journey up and down the
Mirkwood-water, and half a day's ride up or down they would come on
another clearing or island in the woods, and these were the Upper-mark
and the Nether-mark: and all these three were inhabited by men of one
folk and one kindred, which was called the Mark-men, though of many
branches was that stem of folk, who bore divers signs in battle and at
the council whereby they might be known.

Now in the Mid-mark itself were many Houses of men; for by that word had
they called for generations those who dwelt together under one token of
kinship.  The river ran from South to North, and both on the East side
and on the West were there Houses of the Folk, and their habitations were
shouldered up nigh unto the wood, so that ever betwixt them and the river
was there a space of tillage and pasture.

Tells the tale of one such House, whose habitations were on the west side
of the water, on a gentle slope of land, so that no flood higher than
common might reach them.  It was straight down to the river mostly that
the land fell off, and on its downward-reaching slopes was the tillage,
"the Acres," as the men of that time always called tilled land; and
beyond that was the meadow going fair and smooth, though with here and
there a rising in it, down to the lips of the stony waste of the winter
river.

Now the name of this House was the Wolfings, and they bore a Wolf on
their banners, and their warriors were marked on the breast with the
image of the Wolf, that they might be known for what they were if they
fell in battle, and were stripped.

The house, that is to say the Roof, of the Wolfings of the Mid-mark stood
on the topmost of the slope aforesaid with its back to the wild-wood and
its face to the acres and the water.  But you must know that in those
days the men of one branch of kindred dwelt under one roof together, and
had therein their place and dignity; nor were there many degrees amongst
them as hath befallen afterwards, but all they of one blood were brethren
and of equal dignity.  Howbeit they had servants or thralls, men taken in
battle, men of alien blood, though true it is that from time to time were
some of such men taken into the House, and hailed as brethren of the
blood.

Also (to make an end at once of these matters of kinship and affinity)
the men of one House might not wed the women of their own House: to the
Wolfing men all Wolfing women were as sisters: they must needs wed with
the Hartings or the Elkings or the Bearings, or other such Houses of the
Mark as were not so close akin to the blood of the Wolf; and this was a
law that none dreamed of breaking.  Thus then dwelt this Folk and such
was their Custom.

As to the Roof of the Wolfings, it was a great hall and goodly, after the
fashion of their folk and their day; not built of stone and lime, but
framed of the goodliest trees of the wild-wood squared with the adze, and
betwixt the framing filled with clay wattled with reeds.  Long was that
house, and at one end anigh the gable was the Man's-door, not so high
that a man might stand on the threshold and his helmcrest clear the
lintel; for such was the custom, that a tall man must bow himself as he
came into the hall; which custom maybe was a memory of the days of
onslaught when the foemen were mostly wont to beset the hall; whereas in
the days whereof the tale tells they drew out into the fields and fought
unfenced; unless at whiles when the odds were over great, and then they
drew their wains about them and were fenced by the wain-burg.  At least
it was from no niggardry that the door was made thus low, as might be
seen by the fair and manifold carving of knots and dragons that was
wrought above the lintel of the door for some three foot's space.  But a
like door was there anigh the other gable-end, whereby the women entered,
and it was called the Woman's-door.

Near to the house on all sides except toward the wood were there many
bowers and cots round about the penfolds and the byres: and these were
booths for the stowage of wares, and for crafts and smithying that were
unhandy to do in the house; and withal they were the dwelling-places of
the thralls.  And the lads and young men often abode there many days and
were cherished there of the thralls that loved them, since at whiles they
shunned the Great Roof that they might be the freer to come and go at
their pleasure, and deal as they would.  Thus was there a clustering on
the slopes and bents betwixt the acres of the Wolfings and the wild-wood
wherein dwelt the wolves.

As to the house within, two rows of pillars went down it endlong,
fashioned of the mightiest trees that might be found, and each one fairly
wrought with base and chapiter, and wreaths and knots, and fighting men
and dragons; so that it was like a church of later days that has a nave
and aisles: windows there were above the aisles, and a passage underneath
the said windows in their roofs.  In the aisles were the sleeping-places
of the Folk, and down the nave under the crown of the roof were three
hearths for the fires, and above each hearth a luffer or smoke-bearer to
draw the smoke up when the fires were lighted.  Forsooth on a bright
winter afternoon it was strange to see the three columns of smoke going
wavering up to the dimness of the mighty roof, and one maybe smitten
athwart by the sunbeams.  As for the timber of the roof itself and its
framing, so exceeding great and high it was, that the tale tells how that
none might see the fashion of it from the hall-floor unless he were to
raise aloft a blazing faggot on a long pole: since no lack of timber was
there among the men of the Mark.

At the end of the hall anigh the Man's-door was the dais, and a table
thereon set thwartwise of the hall; and in front of the dais was the
noblest and greatest of the hearths; (but of the others one was in the
very midmost, and another in the Woman's-Chamber) and round about the
dais, along the gable-wall, and hung from pillar to pillar were woven
cloths pictured with images of ancient tales and the deeds of the
Wolfings, and the deeds of the Gods from whence they came.  And this was
the fairest place of all the house and the best-beloved of the Folk, and
especially of the older and the mightier men: and there were tales told,
and songs sung, especially if they were new: and thereto also were
messengers brought if any tidings were abroad: there also would the
elders talk together about matters concerning the House or the Mid-mark
or the whole Folk of the Markmen.

Yet you must not think that their solemn councils were held there, the
folk-motes whereat it must be determined what to do and what to forbear
doing; for according as such councils, (which they called Things) were of
the House or of the Mid-mark or of the whole Folk, were they held each at
the due Thing-steads in the Wood aloof from either acre or meadow, (as
was the custom of our forefathers for long after) and at such Things
would all the men of the House or the Mid-mark or the Folk be present man
by man.  And in each of these steads was there a Doomring wherein Doom
was given by the neighbours chosen, (whom now we call the Jury) in
matters between man and man; and no such doom of neighbours was given,
and no such voice of the Folk proclaimed in any house or under any roof,
nor even as aforesaid on the tilled acres or the depastured meadows.  This
was the custom of our forefathers, in memory, belike, of the days when as
yet there was neither house nor tillage, nor flocks and herds, but the
Earth's face only and what freely grew thereon.

But over the dais there hung by chains and pulleys fastened to a tie-beam
of the roof high aloft a wondrous lamp fashioned of glass; yet of no such
glass as the folk made then and there, but of a fair and clear green like
an emerald, and all done with figures and knots in gold, and strange
beasts, and a warrior slaying a dragon, and the sun rising on the earth:
nor did any tale tell whence this lamp came, but it was held as an
ancient and holy thing by all the Markmen, and the kindred of the Wolf
had it in charge to keep a light burning in it night and day for ever;
and they appointed a maiden of their own kindred to that office; which
damsel must needs be unwedded, since no wedded woman dwelling under that
roof could be a Wolfing woman, but would needs be of the houses wherein
the Wolfings wedded.

This lamp which burned ever was called the Hall-Sun, and the woman who
had charge of it, and who was the fairest that might be found was called
after it the Hall-Sun also.

At the other end of the hall was the Woman's-Chamber, and therein were
the looms and other gear for the carding and spinning of wool and the
weaving of cloth.

Such was the Roof under which dwelt the kindred of the Wolfings; and the
other kindreds of the Mid-mark had roofs like to it; and of these the
chiefest were the Elkings, the Vallings, the Alftings, the Beamings, the
Galtings, and the Bearings; who bore on their banners the Elk, the
Falcon, the Swan, the Tree, the Boar, and the Bear.  But other lesser and
newer kindreds there were than these: as for the Hartings above named,
they were a kindred of the Upper-mark.




CHAPTER II--THE FLITTING OF THE WAR-ARROW


Tells the tale that it was an evening of summer, when the wheat was in
the ear, but yet green; and the neat-herds were done driving the milch-
kine to the byre, and the horseherds and the shepherds had made the night-
shift, and the out-goers were riding two by two and one by one through
the lanes between the wheat and the rye towards the meadow.  Round the
cots of the thralls were gathered knots of men and women both thralls and
freemen, some talking together, some hearkening a song or a tale, some
singing and some dancing together; and the children gambolling about from
group to group with their shrill and tuneless voices, like young
throstles who have not yet learned the song of their race.  With these
were mingled dogs, dun of colour, long of limb, sharp-nosed, gaunt and
great; they took little heed of the children as they pulled them about in
their play, but lay down, or loitered about, as though they had forgotten
the chase and the wild-wood.

Merry was the folk with that fair tide, and the promise of the harvest,
and the joy of life, and there was no weapon among them so close to the
houses, save here and there the boar-spear of some herdman or herd-woman
late come from the meadow.

Tall and for the most part comely were both men and women; the most of
them light-haired and grey-eyed, with cheek-bones somewhat high; white of
skin but for the sun's burning, and the wind's parching, and whereas they
were tanned of a very ruddy and cheerful hue.  But the thralls were some
of them of a shorter and darker breed, black-haired also and dark-eyed,
lighter of limb; sometimes better knit, but sometimes crookeder of leg
and knottier of arm.  But some also were of build and hue not much unlike
to the freemen; and these doubtless came of some other Folk of the Goths
which had given way in battle before the Men of the Mark, either they or
their fathers.

Moreover some of the freemen were unlike their fellows and kindred, being
slenderer and closer-knit, and black-haired, but grey-eyed withal; and
amongst these were one or two who exceeded in beauty all others of the
House.

Now the sun was set and the glooming was at point to begin and the
shadowless twilight lay upon the earth.  The nightingales on the borders
of the wood sang ceaselessly from the scattered hazel-trees above the
greensward where the grass was cropped down close by the nibbling of the
rabbits; but in spite of their song and the divers voices of the men-folk
about the houses, it was an evening on which sounds from aloof can be
well heard, since noises carry far at such tides.

Suddenly they who were on the edges of those throngs and were the less
noisy, held themselves as if to listen; and a group that had gathered
about a minstrel to hear his story fell hearkening also round about the
silenced and hearkening tale-teller: some of the dancers and singers
noted them and in their turn stayed the dance and kept silence to
hearken; and so from group to group spread the change, till all were
straining their ears to hearken the tidings.  Already the men of the
night-shift had heard it, and the shepherds of them had turned about, and
were trotting smartly back through the lanes of the tall wheat: but the
horse-herds were now scarce seen on the darkening meadow, as they
galloped on fast toward their herds to drive home the stallions.  For
what they had heard was the tidings of war.

There was a sound in the air as of a humble-bee close to the ear of one
lying on a grassy bank; or whiles as of a cow afar in the meadow lowing
in the afternoon when milking-time draws nigh: but it was ever shriller
than the one, and fuller than the other; for it changed at whiles, though
after the first sound of it, it did not rise or fall, because the eve was
windless.  You might hear at once that for all it was afar, it was a
great and mighty sound; nor did any that hearkened doubt what it was, but
all knew it for the blast of the great war-horn of the Elkings, whose
Roof lay up Mirkwood-water next to the Roof of the Wolfings.

So those little throngs broke up at once; and all the freemen, and of the
thralls a good many, flocked, both men and women, to the Man's-door of
the hall, and streamed in quietly and with little talk, as men knowing
that they should hear all in due season.

Within under the Hall-Sun, amidst the woven stories of time past, sat the
elders and chief warriors on the dais, and amidst of all a big strong man
of forty winters, his dark beard a little grizzled, his eyes big and
grey.  Before him on the board lay the great War-horn of the Wolfings
carved out of the tusk of a sea-whale of the North and with many devices
on it and the Wolf amidst them all; its golden mouth-piece and rim
wrought finely with flowers.  There it abode the blowing, until the
spoken word of some messenger should set forth the tidings borne on the
air by the horn of the Elkings.

But the name of the dark-haired chief was Thiodolf (to wit Folk-wolf) and
he was deemed the wisest man of the Wolfings, and the best man of his
hands, and of heart most dauntless.  Beside him sat the fair woman called
the Hall-Sun; for she was his foster-daughter before men's eyes; and she
was black-haired and grey-eyed like to her fosterer, and never was woman
fashioned fairer: she was young of years, scarce twenty winters old.

There sat the chiefs and elders on the dais, and round about stood the
kindred intermingled with the thralls, and no man spake, for they were
awaiting sure and certain tidings: and when all were come in who had a
mind to, there was so great a silence in the hall, that the song of the
nightingales on the wood-edge sounded clear and loud therein, and even
the chink of the bats about the upper windows could be heard.  Then
amidst the hush of men-folk, and the sounds of the life of the earth came
another sound that made all turn their eyes toward the door; and this was
the pad-pad of one running on the trodden and summer-dried ground anigh
the hall: it stopped for a moment at the Man's-door, and the door opened,
and the throng parted, making way for the man that entered and came
hastily up to the midst of the table that stood on the dais athwart the
hall, and stood there panting, holding forth in his outstretched hand
something which not all could see in the dimness of the hall-twilight,
but which all knew nevertheless.  The man was young, lithe and slender,
and had no raiment but linen breeches round his middle, and skin shoes on
his feet.  As he stood there gathering his breath for speech, Thiodolf
stood up, and poured mead into a drinking horn and held it out towards
the new-comer, and spake, but in rhyme and measure:

   "Welcome, thou evening-farer, and holy be thine head,
   Since thou hast sought unto us in the heart of the Wolfings' stead;
   Drink now of the horn of the mighty, and call a health if thou wilt
   O'er the eddies of the mead-horn to the washing out of guilt.
   For thou com'st to the peace of the Wolfings, and our very guest thou
   art,
   And meseems as I behold thee, that I look on a child of the Hart."

But the man put the horn from him with a hasty hand, and none said
another word to him until he had gotten his breath again; and then he
said:

   "All hail ye Wood-Wolfs' children! nought may I drink the wine,
   For the mouth and the maw that I carry this eve are nought of mine;
   And my feet are the feet of the people, since the word went forth that
   tide,
   'O Elf here of the Hartings, no longer shalt thou bide
   In any house of the Markmen than to speak the word and wend,
   Till all men know the tidings and thine errand hath an end.'
   Behold, O Wolves, the token and say if it be true!
   I bear the shaft of battle that is four-wise cloven through,
   And its each end dipped in the blood-stream, both the iron and the
   horn,
   And its midmost scathed with the fire; and the word that I have borne
   Along with this war-token is, 'Wolfings of the Mark
   Whenso ye see the war-shaft, by the daylight or the dark,
   Busk ye to battle faring, and leave all work undone
   Save the gathering for the handplay at the rising of the sun.
   Three days hence is the hosting, and thither bear along
   Your wains and your kine for the slaughter lest the journey should be
   long.
   For great is the Folk, saith the tidings, that against the Markmen
   come;
   In a far off land is their dwelling, whenso they sit at home,
   And Welsh {1} is their tongue, and we wot not of the word that is in
   their mouth,
   As they march a many together from the cities of the South.'"

Therewith he held up yet for a minute the token of the war-arrow ragged
and burnt and bloody; and turning about with it in his hand went his ways
through the open door, none hindering; and when he was gone, it was as if
the token were still in the air there against the heads of the living
men, and the heads of the woven warriors, so intently had all gazed at
it; and none doubted the tidings or the token.  Then said Thiodolf:

   "Forth will we Wolfing children, and cast a sound abroad:
   The mouth of the sea-beast's weapon shall speak the battle-word;
   And ye warriors hearken and hasten, and dight the weed of war,
   And then to acre and meadow wend ye adown no more,
   For this work shall be for the women to drive our neat from the mead,
   And to yoke the wains, and to load them as the men of war have need."

Out then they streamed from the hall, and no man was left therein save
the fair Hall-Sun sitting under the lamp whose name she bore.  But to the
highest of the slope they went, where was a mound made higher by man's
handiwork; thereon stood Thiodolf and handled the horn, turning his face
toward the downward course of Mirkwood-water; and he set the horn to his
lips, and blew a long blast, and then again, and yet again the third
time; and all the sounds of the gathering night were hushed under the
sound of the roaring of the war-horn of the Wolfings; and the Kin of the
Beamings heard it as they sat in their hall, and they gat them ready to
hearken to the bearer of the tidings who should follow on the sound of
the war-blast.

But when the last sound of the horn had died away, then said Thiodolf:

   "Now Wolfing children hearken, what the splintered War-shaft saith,
   The fire scathed blood-stained aspen! we shall ride for life or death,
   We warriors, a long journey with the herd and with the wain;
   But unto this our homestead shall we wend us back again,
   All the gleanings of the battle; and here for them that live
   Shall stand the Roof of the Wolfings, and for them shall the meadow
   thrive,
   And the acres give their increase in the harvest of the year;
   Now is no long departing since the Hall-Sun bideth here
   'Neath the holy Roof of the Fathers, and the place of the Wolfing kin,
   And the feast of our glad returning shall yet be held therein.
   Hear the bidding of the War-shaft!  All men, both thralls and free,
   'Twixt twenty winters and sixty, beneath the shield shall be,
   And the hosting is at the Thing-stead, the Upper-mark anigh;
   And we wend away to-morrow ere the Sun is noon-tide high."

Therewith he stepped down from the mound, and went his way back to the
hall; and manifold talk arose among the folk; and of the warriors some
were already dight for the journey, but most not, and a many went their
ways to see to their weapons and horses, and the rest back again into the
hall.

By this time night had fallen, and between then and the dawning would be
no darker hour, for the moon was just rising; a many of the horse-herds
had done their business, and were now making their way back again through
the lanes of the wheat, driving the stallions before them, who played
together kicking, biting and squealing, paying but little heed to the
standing corn on either side.  Lights began to glitter now in the cots of
the thralls, and brighter still in the stithies where already you might
hear the hammers clinking on the anvils, as men fell to looking to their
battle gear.

But the chief men and the women sat under their Roof on the eve of
departure: and the tuns of mead were broached, and the horns filled and
borne round by young maidens, and men ate and drank and were merry; and
from time to time as some one of the warriors had done with giving heed
to his weapons, he entered into the hall and fell into the company of
those whom he loved most and by whom he was best beloved; and whiles they
talked, and whiles they sang to the harp up and down that long house; and
the moon risen high shone in at the windows, and there was much laughter
and merriment, and talk of deeds of arms of the old days on the eve of
that departure: till little by little weariness fell on them, and they
went their ways to slumber, and the hall was fallen silent.




CHAPTER III--THIODOLF TALKETH WITH THE WOOD-SUN


But yet sat Thiodolf under the Hall-Sun for a while as one in deep
thought; till at last as he stirred, his sword clattered on him; and then
he lifted up his eyes and looked down the hall and saw no man stirring,
so he stood up and settled his raiment on him, and went forth, and so
took his ways through the hall-door, as one who hath an errand.

The moonlight lay in a great flood on the grass without, and the dew was
falling in the coldest hour of the night, and the earth smelled sweetly:
the whole habitation was asleep now, and there was no sound to be known
as the sound of any creature, save that from the distant meadow came the
lowing of a cow that had lost her calf, and that a white owl was flitting
about near the eaves of the Roof with her wild cry that sounded like the
mocking of merriment now silent.

Thiodolf turned toward the wood, and walked steadily through the
scattered hazel-trees, and thereby into the thick of the beech-trees,
whose boles grew smooth and silver-grey, high and close-set: and so on
and on he went as one going by a well-known path, though there was no
path, till all the moonlight was quenched under the close roof of the
beech-leaves, though yet for all the darkness, no man could go there and
not feel that the roof was green above him.  Still he went on in despite
of the darkness, till at last there was a glimmer before him, that grew
greater till he came unto a small wood-lawn whereon the turf grew again,
though the grass was but thin, because little sunlight got to it, so
close and thick were the tall trees round about it.  In the heavens above
it by now there was a light that was not all of the moon, though it might
scarce be told whether that light were the memory of yesterday or the
promise of to-morrow, since little of the heavens could be seen thence,
save the crown of them, because of the tall tree-tops.

Nought looked Thiodolf either at the heavens above, or the trees, as he
strode from off the husk-strewn floor of the beech wood on to the scanty
grass of the lawn, but his eyes looked straight before him at that which
was amidmost of the lawn: and little wonder was that; for there on a
stone chair sat a woman exceeding fair, clad in glittering raiment, her
hair lying as pale in the moonlight on the grey stone as the barley acres
in the August night before the reaping-hook goes in amongst them.  She
sat there as though she were awaiting someone, and he made no stop nor
stay, but went straight up to her, and took her in his arms, and kissed
her mouth and her eyes, and she him again; and then he sat himself down
beside her.  But her eyes looked kindly on him as she said:

"O Thiodolf, hardy art thou, that thou hast no fear to take me in thine
arms and to kiss me, as though thou hadst met in the meadow with a maiden
of the Elkings: and I, who am a daughter of the Gods of thy kindred, and
a Chooser of the Slain!  Yea, and that upon the eve of battle and the
dawn of thy departure to the stricken field!"

"O Wood-Sun," he said "thou art the treasure of life that I found when I
was young, and the love of life that I hold, now that my beard is
grizzling.  Since when did I fear thee, Wood-Sun?  Did I fear thee when
first I saw thee, and we stood amidst the hazelled field, we twain living
amongst the slain?  But my sword was red with the blood of the foe, and
my raiment with mine own blood; and I was a-weary with the day's work,
and sick with many strokes, and methought I was fainting into death.  And
there thou wert before me, full of life and ruddy and smiling both lips
and eyes; thy raiment clean and clear, thine hands stained with blood:
then didst thou take me by my bloody and weary hand, and didst kiss my
lips grown ashen pale, and thou saidst 'Come with me.'  And I strove to
go, and might not; so many and sore were my hurts.  Then amidst my
sickness and my weariness was I merry; for I said to myself, This is the
death of the warrior, and it is exceeding sweet.  What meaneth it?  Folk
said of me; he is over young to meet the foeman; yet am I not over young
to die?"

Therewith he laughed out amid the wild-wood, and his speech became song,
and he said:

   "We wrought in the ring of the hazels, and the wine of war we drank:
   From the tide when the sun stood highest to the hour wherein she sank:
   And three kings came against me, the mightiest of the Huns,
   The evil-eyed in battle, the swift-foot wily ones;
   And they gnashed their teeth against me, and they gnawed on the shield-
   rims there,
   On that afternoon of summer, in the high-tide of the year.
   Keen-eyed I gazed about me, and I saw the clouds draw up
   Till the heavens were dark as the hollow of a wine-stained iron cup,
   And the wild-deer lay unfeeding on the grass of the forest glades,
   And all earth was scared with the thunder above our clashing blades.

   "Then sank a King before me, and on fell the other twain,
   And I tossed up the reddened sword-blade in the gathered rush of the
   rain
   And the blood and the water blended, and fragrant grew the earth.

   "There long I turned and twisted within the battle-girth
   Before those bears of onset: while out from the grey world streamed
   The broad red lash of the lightening and in our byrnies gleamed.
   And long I leapt and laboured in that garland of the fight
   'Mid the blue blades and the lightening; but ere the sky grew light
   The second of the Hun-kings on the rain-drenched daisies lay;
   And we twain with the battle blinded a little while made stay,
   And leaning on our sword-hilts each on the other gazed.

   "Then the rain grew less, and one corner of the veil of clouds was
   raised,
   And as from the broidered covering gleams out the shoulder white
   Of the bed-mate of the warrior when on his wedding night
   He layeth his hand to the linen; so, down there in the west
   Gleamed out the naked heaven: but the wrath rose up in my breast,
   And the sword in my hand rose with it, and I leaped and hewed at the
   Hun;
   And from him too flared the war-flame, and the blades danced bright in
   the sun
   Come back to the earth for a little before the ending of day.

   "There then with all that was in him did the Hun play out the play,
   Till he fell, and left me tottering, and I turned my feet to wend
   To the place of the mound of the mighty, the gate of the way without
   end.
   And there thou wert.  How was it, thou Chooser of the Slain,
   Did I die in thine arms, and thereafter did thy mouth-kiss wake me
   again?"

Ere the last sound of his voice was done she turned and kissed him; and
then she said; "Never hadst thou a fear and thine heart is full of
hardihood."

Then he said:

   "'Tis the hardy heart, beloved, that keepeth me alive,
   As the king-leek in the garden by the rain and the sun doth thrive,
   So I thrive by the praise of the people; it is blent with my drink and
   my meat;
   As I slumber in the night-tide it laps me soft and sweet;
   And through the chamber window when I waken in the morn
   With the wind of the sun's arising from the meadow is it borne
   And biddeth me remember that yet I live on earth:
   Then I rise and my might is with me, and fills my heart with mirth,
   As I think of the praise of the people; and all this joy I win
   By the deeds that my heart commandeth and the hope that lieth
   therein."

"Yea," she said, "but day runneth ever on the heels of day, and there are
many and many days; and betwixt them do they carry eld."

"Yet art thou no older than in days bygone," said he.  "Is it so, O
Daughter of the Gods, that thou wert never born, but wert from before the
framing of the mountains, from the beginning of all things?"

But she said:

   "Nay, nay; I began, I was born; although it may be indeed
   That not on the hills of the earth I sprang from the godhead's seed.
   And e'en as my birth and my waxing shall be my waning and end.
   But thou on many an errand, to many a field dost wend
   Where the bow at adventure bended, or the fleeing dastard's spear
   Oft lulleth the mirth of the mighty.  Now me thou dost not fear,
   Yet fear with me, beloved, for the mighty Maid I fear;
   And Doom is her name, and full often she maketh me afraid
   And even now meseemeth on my life her hand is laid."

But he laughed and said:

   "In what land is she abiding?  Is she near or far away?
   Will she draw up close beside me in the press of the battle play?
   And if then I may not smite her 'midst the warriors of the field
   With the pale blade of my fathers, will she bide the shove of my
   shield?"

But sadly she sang in answer:

   "In many a stead Doom dwelleth, nor sleepeth day nor night:
   The rim of the bowl she kisseth, and beareth the chambering light
   When the kings of men wend happy to the bride-bed from the board.
   It is little to say that she wendeth the edge of the grinded sword,
   When about the house half builded she hangeth many a day;
   The ship from the strand she shoveth, and on his wonted way
   By the mountain-hunter fareth where his foot ne'er failed before:
   She is where the high bank crumbles at last on the river's shore:
   The mower's scythe she whetteth; and lulleth the shepherd to sleep
   Where the deadly ling-worm wakeneth in the desert of the sheep.
   Now we that come of the God-kin of her redes for ourselves we wot,
   But her will with the lives of men-folk and their ending know we not.
   So therefore I bid thee not fear for thyself of Doom and her deed,
   But for me: and I bid thee hearken to the helping of my need.
   Or else--Art thou happy in life, or lusteth thou to die
   In the flower of thy days, when thy glory and thy longing bloom on
   high?"

But Thiodolf answered her:

   "I have deemed, and long have I deemed that this is my second life,
   That my first one waned with my wounding when thou cam'st to the ring
   of strife.
   For when in thine arms I wakened on the hazelled field of yore,
   Meseemed I had newly arisen to a world I knew no more,
   So much had all things brightened on that dewy dawn of day.
   It was dark dull death that I looked for when my thought had died
   away.
   It was lovely life that I woke to; and from that day henceforth
   My joy of the life of man-folk was manifolded of worth.
   Far fairer the fields of the morning than I had known them erst,
   And the acres where I wended, and the corn with its half-slaked
   thirst;
   And the noble Roof of the Wolfings, and the hawks that sat thereon;
   And the bodies of my kindred whose deliverance I had won;
   And the glimmering of the Hall-Sun in the dusky house of old;
   And my name in the mouth of the maidens, and the praises of the bold,
   As I sat in my battle-raiment, and the ruddy spear well steeled
   Leaned 'gainst my side war-battered, and the wounds thine hand had
   healed.
   Yea, from that morn thenceforward has my life been good indeed,
   The gain of to-day was goodly, and good to-morrow's need,
   And good the whirl of the battle, and the broil I wielded there,
   Till I fashioned the ordered onset, and the unhoped victory fair.
   And good were the days thereafter of utter deedless rest
   And the prattle of thy daughter, and her hands on my unmailed breast.
   Ah good is the life thou hast given, the life that mine hands have
   won.
   And where shall be the ending till the world is all undone?
   Here sit we twain together, and both we in Godhead clad,
   We twain of the Wolfing kindred, and each of the other glad."

But she answered, and her face grew darker withal:

   "O mighty man and joyous, art thou of the Wolfing kin?
   'Twas no evil deed when we mingled, nor lieth doom therein.
   Thou lovely man, thou black-haired, thou shalt die and have done no
   ill.
   Fame-crowned are the deeds of thy doing, and the mouths of men they
   fill.
   Thou betterer of the Godfolk, enduring is thy fame:
   Yet as a painted image of a dream is thy dreaded name.
   Of an alien folk thou comest, that we twain might be one indeed.
   Thou shalt die one day.  So hearken, to help me at my need."

His face grew troubled and he said: "What is this word that I am no chief
of the Wolfings?"

"Nay," she said, "but better than they.  Look thou on the face of our
daughter the Hall-Sun, thy daughter and mine: favoureth she at all of
me?"

He laughed: "Yea, whereas she is fair, but not otherwise.  This is a hard
saying, that I dwell among an alien kindred, and it wotteth not thereof.
Why hast thou not told me hereof before?"

She said: "It needed not to tell thee because thy day was waxing, as now
it waneth.  Once more I bid thee hearken and do my bidding though it be
hard to thee."

He answered: "Even so will I as much as I may; and thus wise must thou
look upon it, that I love life, and fear not death."

Then she spake, and again her words fell into rhyme:

   "In forty fights hast thou foughten, and been worsted but in four;
   And I looked on and was merry; and ever more and more
   Wert thou dear to the heart of the Wood-Sun, and the Chooser of the
   Slain.
   But now whereas ye are wending with slaughter-herd and wain
   To meet a folk that ye know not, a wonder, a peerless foe,
   I fear for thy glory's waning, and I see thee lying alow."

Then he brake in: "Herein is little shame to be worsted by the might of
the mightiest: if this so mighty folk sheareth a limb off the tree of my
fame, yet shall it wax again."

But she sang:

   "In forty fights hast thou foughten, and beside thee who but I
   Beheld the wind-tossed banners, and saw the aspen fly?
   But to-day to thy war I wend not, for Weird withholdeth me
   And sore my heart forebodeth for the battle that shall be.
   To-day with thee I wend not; so I feared, and lo my feet,
   That are wont to the woodland girdle of the acres of the wheat,
   For thee among strange people and the foeman's throng have trod,
   And I tell thee their banner of battle is a wise and a mighty God.
   For these are the folk of the cities, and in wondrous wise they dwell
   'Mid confusion of heaped houses, dim and black as the face of hell;
   Though therefrom rise roofs most goodly, where their captains and
   their kings
   Dwell amidst the walls of marble in abundance of fair things;
   And 'mid these, nor worser nor better, but builded otherwise
   Stand the Houses of the Fathers, and the hidden mysteries.
   And as close as are the tree-trunks that within the beech-wood thrive
   E'en so many are their pillars; and therein like men alive
   Stand the images of god-folk in such raiment as they wore
   In the years before the cities and the hidden days of yore.
   Ah for the gold that I gazed on! and their store of battle gear,
   And strange engines that I knew not, or the end for which they were.
   Ah for the ordered wisdom of the war-array of these,
   And the folks that are sitting about them in dumb down-trodden peace!
   So I thought now fareth war-ward my well-beloved friend,
   And the weird of the Gods hath doomed it that no more with him may I
   wend!
   Woe's me for the war of the Wolfings wherefrom I am sundered apart,
   And the fruitless death of the war-wise, and the doom of the hardy
   heart!"

Then he answered, and his eyes grew kind as he looked on her:

   "For thy fair love I thank thee, and thy faithful word, O friend!
   But how might it otherwise happen but we twain must meet in the end,
   The God of this mighty people and the Markmen and their kin?
   Lo, this is the weird of the world, and what may we do herein?"

Then mirth came into her face again as she said:

"Who wotteth of Weird, and what she is till the weird is accomplished?
Long hath it been my weird to love thee and to fashion deeds for thee as
I may; nor will I depart from it now."  And she sang:

   "Keen-edged is the sword of the city, and bitter is its spear,
   But thy breast in the battle, beloved, hath a wall of the stithy's
   gear.
   What now is thy wont in the handplay with the helm and the hauberk of
   rings?
   Farest thou as the thrall and the cot-carle, or clad in the raiment of
   kings?"

He started, and his face reddened as he answered:

   "O Wood-Sun thou wottest our battle and the way wherein we fare:
   That oft at the battle's beginning the helm and the hauberk we bear;
   Lest the shaft of the fleeing coward or the bow at adventure bent
   Should slay us ere the need be, ere our might be given and spent.
   Yet oft ere the fight is over, and Doom hath scattered the foe,
   No leader of the people by his war-gear shall ye know,
   But by his hurts the rather, from the cot-carle and the thrall:
   For when all is done that a man may, 'tis the hour for a man to fall."

She yet smiled as she said in answer:

   "O Folk-wolf, heed and hearken; for when shall thy life be spent
   And the Folk wherein thou dwellest with thy death be well content?
   Whenso folk need the fire, do they hew the apple-tree,
   And burn the Mother of Blossom and the fruit that is to be?
   Or me wilt thou bid to thy grave-mound because thy battle-wrath
   May nothing more be bridled than the whirl wind on his path?
   So hearken and do my bidding, for the hauberk shalt thou bear
   E'en when the other warriors cast off their battle-gear.
   So come thou, come unwounded from the war-field of the south,
   And sit with me in the beech-wood, and kiss me, eyes and mouth."

And she kissed him in very deed, and made much of him, and fawned on him,
and laid her hand on his breast, and he was soft and blithe with her, but
at last he laughed and said:

   "God's Daughter, long hast thou lived, and many a matter seen,
   And men full often grieving for the deed that might have been;
   But here my heart thou wheedlest as a maid of tender years
   When first in the arms of her darling the horn of war she hears.
   Thou knowest the axe to be heavy, and the sword, how keen it is;
   But that Doom of which thou hast spoken, wilt thou not tell of this,
   God's Daughter, how it sheareth, and how it breaketh through
   Each wall that the warrior buildeth, yea all deeds that he may do?
   What might in the hammer's leavings, in the fire's thrall shall abide
   To turn that Folks' o'erwhelmer from the fated warrior's side?"

Then she laughed in her turn, and loudly; but so sweetly that the sound
of her voice mingled with the first song of a newly awakened wood-thrush
sitting on a rowan twig on the edge of the Wood-lawn.  But she said:

   "Yea, I that am God's Daughter may tell thee never a whit
   From what land cometh the hauberk nor what smith smithied it,
   That thou shalt wear in the handplay from the first stroke to the
   last;
   But this thereof I tell thee, that it holdeth firm and fast
   The life of the body it lappeth, if the gift of the Godfolk it be.
   Lo this is the yoke-mate of doom, and the gift of me unto thee."

Then she leaned down from the stone whereon they sat, and her hand was in
the dewy grass for a little, and then it lifted up a dark grey rippling
coat of rings; and she straightened herself in the seat again, and laid
that hauberk on the knees of Thiodolf, and he put his hand to it, and
turned it about, while he pondered long: then at last he said:

   "What evil thing abideth with this warder of the strife,
   This burg and treasure chamber for the hoarding of my life?
   For this is the work of the dwarfs, and no kindly kin of the earth;
   And all we fear the dwarf-kin and their anger and sorrow and mirth."

She cast her arms about him and fondled him, and her voice grew sweeter
than the voice of any mortal thing as she answered:

   "No ill for thee, beloved, or for me in the hauberk lies;
   No sundering grief is in it, no lonely miseries.
   But we shall abide together, and that new life I gave,
   For a long while yet henceforward we twain its joy shall have.
   Yea, if thou dost my bidding to wear my gift in the fight
   No hunter of the wild-wood at the changing of the night
   Shall see my shape on thy grave-mound or my tears in the morning find
   With the dew of the morning mingled; nor with the evening wind
   Shall my body pass the shepherd as he wandereth in the mead
   And fill him with forebodings on the eve of the Wolfings' need.
   Nor the horse-herd wake in the midnight and hear my fateful cry;
   Nor yet shall the Wolfing women hear words on the wind go by
   As they weave and spin the night down when the House is gone to the
   war,
   And weep for the swains they wedded and the children that they bore.
   Yea do my bidding, O Folk-wolf, lest a grief of the Gods should weigh
   On the ancient House of the Wolfings and my death o'ercloud its day."

And still she clung about him, while he spake no word of yea or nay: but
at the last he let himself glide wholly into her arms, and the
dwarf-wrought hauberk fell from his knees and lay on the grass.

So they abode together in that wood-lawn till the twilight was long gone,
and the sun arisen for some while.  And when Thiodolf stepped out of the
beech-wood into the broad sunshine dappled with the shadow of the leaves
of the hazels moving gently in the fresh morning air, he was covered from
the neck to the knee by a hauberk of rings dark and grey and gleaming,
fashioned by the dwarfs of ancient days.




CHAPTER IV--THE HOUSE FARETH TO THE WAR


Now when Thiodolf came back to the habitations of the kindred the whole
House was astir, both thrall-men and women, and free women hurrying from
cot to stithy, and from stithy to hall bearing the last of the war-gear
or raiment for the fighting-men.  But they for their part were some
standing about anigh the Man's-door, some sitting gravely within the
hall, some watching the hurry of the thralls and women from the midmost
of the open space amidst of the habitations, whereon there stood yet
certain wains which were belated: for the most of the wains were now
standing with the oxen already yoked to them down in the meadow past the
acres, encircled by a confused throng of kine and horses and thrall-folk,
for thither had all the beasts for the slaughter, and the horses for the
warriors been brought; and there were the horses tethered or held by the
thralls; some indeed were already saddled and bridled, and on others were
the thralls doing the harness.

But as for the wains of the Markmen, they were stoutly framed of ash-tree
with panels of aspen, and they were broad-wheeled so that they might go
over rough and smooth.  They had high tilts over them well framed of
willow-poles covered over with squares of black felt over-lapping like
shingles; which felt they made of the rough of their fleeces, for they
had many sheep.  And these wains were to them for houses upon the way if
need were, and therein as now were stored their meal and their war-store
and after fight they would flit their wounded men in them, such as were
too sorely hurt to back a horse: nor must it be hidden that whiles they
looked to bring back with them the treasure of the south.  Moreover the
folk if they were worsted in any battle, instead of fleeing without more
done, would often draw back fighting into a garth made by these wains,
and guarded by some of their thralls; and there would abide the onset of
those who had thrust them back in the field.  And this garth they called
the Wain-burg.

So now stood three of these wains aforesaid belated amidst of the
habitations of the House, their yoke-beasts standing or lying down
unharnessed as yet to them: but in the very midst of that place was a
wain unlike to them; smaller than they but higher; square of shape as to
the floor of it; built lighter than they, yet far stronger; as the
warrior is stronger than the big carle and trencher-licker that loiters
about the hall; and from the midst of this wain arose a mast made of a
tall straight fir-tree, and thereon hung the banner of the Wolfings,
wherein was wrought the image of the Wolf, but red of hue as a token of
war, and with his mouth open and gaping upon the foemen.  Also whereas
the other wains were drawn by mere oxen, and those of divers colours, as
chance would have it, the wain of the banner was drawn by ten black bulls
of the mightiest of the herd, deep-dewlapped, high-crested and
curly-browed; and their harness was decked with gold, and so was the wain
itself, and the woodwork of it painted red with vermilion.  There then
stood the Banner of the House of the Wolfings awaiting the departure of
the warriors to the hosting.

So Thiodolf stood on the top of the bent beside that same mound wherefrom
he had blown the War-horn yester-eve, and which was called the Hill of
Speech, and he shaded his eyes with his hand and looked around him; and
even therewith the carles fell to yoking the beasts to the belated wains,
and the warriors gathered together from out of the mixed throngs, and
came from the Roof and the Man's-door and all set their faces toward the
Hill of Speech.

So Thiodolf knew that all was ready for departure, and it wanted but an
hour of high-noon; so he turned about and went into the Hall, and there
found his shield and his spear hanging in his sleeping place beside the
hauberk he was wont to wear; then he looked, as one striving with
thought, at his empty hauberk and his own body covered with the dwarf-
wrought rings; nor did his face change as he took his shield and his
spear and turned away.  Then he went to the dais and there sat his foster-
daughter (as men deemed her) sitting amidst of it as yester-eve, and now
arrayed in a garment of fine white wool, on the breast whereof were
wrought in gold two beasts ramping up against a fire-altar whereon a
flame flickered; and on the skirts and the hems were other devices, of
wolves chasing deer, and men shooting with the bow; and that garment was
an ancient treasure; but she had a broad girdle of gold and gems about
her middle, and on her arms and neck she wore great gold rings wrought
delicately.  By then there were few save the Hall-Sun under the Roof, and
they but the oldest of the women, or a few very old men, and some who
were ailing and might not go abroad.  But before her on the thwart table
lay the Great War-horn awaiting the coming of Thiodolf to give signal of
departure.

Then went Thiodolf to the Hall-Sun and kissed and embraced her fondly,
and she gave the horn into his hands, and he went forth and up on to the
Hill of Speech, and blew thence a short blast on the horn, and then came
all the Warriors flocking to the Hill of Speech, each man stark in his
harness, alert and joyous.

Then presently through the Man's-door came the Hall-Sun in that ancient
garment, which fell straight and stiff down to her ancles as she stepped
lightly and slowly along, her head crowned with a garland of eglantine.
In her right hand also she held a great torch of wax lighted, whose flame
amidst the bright sunlight looked like a wavering leaf of vermilion.

The warriors saw her, and made a lane for her, and she made her way
through it up to the Hill of Speech, and she went up to the top of it and
stood there holding the lighted candle in her hand, so that all might see
it.  Then suddenly was there as great a silence as there may be on a
forenoon of summer; for even the thralls down in the meadow had noted
what was toward, and ceased their talking and shouting, for as far off as
they were, since they could see that the Hall-Sun stood on the Hill of
Speech, for the wood was dark behind her; so they knew the Farewell Flame
was lighted, and that the maiden would speak; and to all men her speech
was a boding of good or of ill.

So she began in a sweet voice yet clear and far-reaching:

   "O Warriors of the Wolfings by the token of the flame
   That here in my right hand flickers, come aback to the House of the
   Name!
   For there yet burneth the Hall-Sun beneath the Wolfing roof,
   And this flame is litten from it, nor as now shall it fare aloof
   Till again it seeth the mighty and the men to be gleaned from the
   fight.
   So wend ye as weird willeth and let your hearts be light;
   For through your days of battle all the deeds of our days shall be
   fair.
   To-morrow beginneth the haysel, as if every carle were here;
   And who knoweth ere your returning but the hook shall smite the corn?
   But the kine shall go down to the meadow as their wont is every morn,
   And each eve shall come back to the byre; and the mares and foals
   afield
   Shall ever be heeded duly; and all things shall their increase yield.
   And if it shall befal us that hither cometh a foe
   Here have we swains of the shepherds good players with the bow,
   And old men battle-crafty whose might is nowise spent,
   And women fell and fearless well wont to tread the bent
   Amid the sheep and the oxen; and their hands are hard with the spear
   And their arms are strong and stalwart the battle shield to bear;
   And store of weapons have we and the mighty walls of the stead;
   And the Roof shall abide you steadfast with the Hall-Sun overhead.
   Lo here I quench this candle that is lit from the Hall-Sun's flame
   Which unto the Wild-wood clearing with the kin of the Wolfings came
   And shall wend with their departure to the limits of the earth;
   Nor again shall the torch be lighted till in sorrow or in mirth,
   Overthrown or overthrowing, ye come aback once more,
   And bid me bear the candle before the Wolf of War."

As she spake the word she turned the candle downward, and thrust it
against the grass and quenched it indeed; but the whole throng of
warriors turned about, for the bulls of the banner-wain lowered their
heads in the yokes and began to draw, lowing mightily; and the wain
creaked and moved on, and all the men-at-arms followed after, and down
they went through the lanes of the corn, and a many women and children
and old men went down into the mead with them.

In their hearts they all wondered what the Hall-Sun's words might
signify; for she had told them nought about the battles to be, saving
that some should come back to the Mid-mark; whereas aforetime somewhat
would she foretell to them concerning the fortune of the fight, and now
had she said to them nothing but what their own hearts told them.
Nevertheless they bore their crests high as they followed the Wolf down
into the meadow, where all was now ready for departure.  There they
arrayed themselves and went down to the lip of Mirkwood-water; and such
was their array that the banner went first, save that a band of fully
armed men went before it; and behind it and about were the others as well
arrayed as they.  Then went the wains that bore their munition, with
armed carles of the thrall-folk about them, who were ever the guard of
the wains, and should never leave them night or day; and lastly went the
great band of the warriors and the rest of the thralls with them.

As to their war-gear, all the freemen had helms of some kind, but not all
of iron or steel; for some bore helms fashioned of horse-hide and bull-
hide covered over with the similitude of a Wolf's muzzle; nor were these
ill-defence against a sword-stroke.  Shields they all had, and all these
had the image of the Wolf marked on them, but for many their thralls bore
them on the journey.  As to their body-armour some carried long byrnies
of ring-mail, some coats of leather covered with splinters of horn laid
like the shingles of a roof, and some skin-coats only: whereof indeed
there were some of which tales went that they were better than the
smith's hammer-work, because they had had spells sung over them to keep
out steel or iron.

But for their weapons, they bore spears with shafts not very long, some
eight feet of our measure; and axes heavy and long-shafted; and bills
with great and broad heads; and some few, but not many of the kindred
were bowmen, and every freeman was girt with a sword; but of the swords
some were long and two-edged, some short and heavy, cutting on one edge,
and these were of the kind which they and our forefathers long after
called 'sax.'  Thus were the freemen arrayed.

But for the thralls, there were many bows among them, especially among
those who were of blood alien from the Goths; the others bore short
spears, and feathered broad arrows, and clubs bound with iron, and knives
and axes, but not every man of them had a sword.  Few iron helms they had
and no ringed byrnies, but most had a buckler at their backs with no sign
or symbol on it.

Thus then set forth the fighting men of the House of the Wolf toward the
Thing-stead of the Upper-mark where the hosting was to be, and by then
they were moving up along the side of Mirkwood-water it was somewhat past
high-noon.

But the stay-at-home people who had come down with them to the meadow
lingered long in that place; and much foreboding there was among them of
evil to come; and of the old folk, some remembered tales of the past days
of the Markmen, and how they had come from the ends of the earth, and the
mountains where none dwell now but the Gods of their kindreds; and many
of these tales told of their woes and their wars as they went from river
to river and from wild-wood to wild-wood before they had established
their Houses in the Mark, and fallen to dwelling there season by season
and year by year whether the days were good or ill.  And it fell into
their hearts that now at last mayhappen was their abiding wearing out to
an end, and that the day should soon be when they should have to bear the
Hall-Sun through the wild-wood, and seek a new dwelling-place afar from
the troubling of these newly arisen Welsh foemen.

And so those of them who could not rid themselves of this foreboding were
somewhat heavier of heart than their wont was when the House went to the
War.  For long had they abided there in the Mark, and the life was sweet
to them which they knew, and the life which they knew not was bitter to
them: and Mirkwood-water was become as a God to them no less than to
their fathers of old time; nor lesser was the mead where fed the horses
that they loved and the kine that they had reared, and the sheep that
they guarded from the Wolf of the Wild-wood: and they worshipped the kind
acres which they themselves and their fathers had made fruitful, wedding
them to the seasons of seed-time and harvest, that the birth that came
from them might become a part of the kindred of the Wolf, and the joy and
might of past springs and summers might run in the blood of the Wolfing
children.  And a dear God indeed to them was the Roof of the Kindred,
that their fathers had built and that they yet warded against the fire
and the lightening and the wind and the snow, and the passing of the days
that devour and the years that heap the dust over the work of men.  They
thought of how it had stood, and seen so many generations of men come and
go; how often it had welcomed the new-born babe, and given farewell to
the old man: how many secrets of the past it knew; how many tales which
men of the present had forgotten, but which yet mayhap men of times to
come should learn of it; for to them yet living it had spoken time and
again, and had told them what their fathers had not told them, and it
held the memories of the generations and the very life of the Wolfings
and their hopes for the days to be.

Thus these poor people thought of the Gods whom they worshipped, and the
friends whom they loved, and could not choose but be heavy-hearted when
they thought that the wild-wood was awaiting them to swallow all up, and
take away from them their Gods and their friends and the mirth of their
life, and burden them with hunger and thirst and weariness, that their
children might begin once more to build the House and establish the
dwelling, and call new places by old names, and worship new Gods with the
ancient worship.

Such imaginations of trouble then were in the hearts of the stay-at-homes
of the Wolfings; the tale tells not indeed that all had such forebodings,
but chiefly the old folk who were nursing the end of their life-days
amidst the cherishing Kindred of the House.

But now they were beginning to turn them back again to the habitations,
and a thin stream was flowing through the acres, when they heard a
confused sound drawing near blended of horns and the lowing of beasts and
the shouting of men; and they looked and saw a throng of brightly clad
men coming up stream alongside of Mirkwood-water; and they were not
afraid, for they knew that it must be some other company of the Markmen
journeying to the hosting of the Folk: and presently they saw that it was
the House of the Beamings following their banner on the way to the Thing-
stead.  But when the new-comers saw the throng out in the meads, some of
their young men pricked on their horses and galloped on past the women
and old men, to whom they threw a greeting, as they ran past to catch up
with the bands of the Wolfings; for between the two houses was there
affinity, and much good liking lay between them; and the stay-at-homes,
many of them, lingered yet till the main body of the Beamings came with
their banner: and their array was much like to that of the Wolfings, but
gayer; for whereas it pleased the latter to darken all their war-gear to
the colour of the grey Wolf, the Beamings polished all their gear as
bright as might be, and their raiment also was mostly bright green of hue
and much beflowered; and the sign on their banner was a green leafy tree,
and the wain was drawn by great white bulls.

So when their company drew anear to the throng of the stay-at-homes they
went to meet and greet each other, and tell tidings to each other; but
their banner held steadily onward amidst their converse, and in a little
while they followed it, for the way was long to the Thing-stead of the
Upper-mark.

So passed away the fighting men by the side of Mirkwood-water, and the
throng of the stay-at-homes melted slowly from the meadow and trickled
along through the acres to the habitations of the Wolfings, and there
they fell to doing whatso of work or play came to their hands.




CHAPTER V--CONCERNING THE HALL-SUN


When the warriors and the others had gone down to the mead, the Hall-Sun
was left standing on the Hill of Speech, and she stood there till she saw
the host in due array going on its ways dark and bright and beautiful;
then she made as if to turn aback to the Great Roof; but all at once it
seemed to her as if something held her back, as if her will to move had
departed from her, and that she could not put one foot before the other.
So she lingered on the Hill, and the quenched candle fell from her hand,
and presently she sank adown on the grass and sat there with the face of
one thinking intently.  Yet was it with her that a thousand thoughts were
in her mind at once and no one of them uppermost, and images of what had
been and what then was flickered about in her brain, and betwixt them
were engendered images of things to be, but unstable and not to be trowed
in.  So sat the Hall-Sun on the Hill of Speech lost in a dream of the
day, whose stories were as little clear as those of a night-dream.

But as she sat musing thus, came to her a woman exceeding old to look on,
whom she knew not as one of the kindred or a thrall; and this carline
greeted her by the name of Hall-Sun and said:

   "Hail, Hall-Sun of the Markmen! how fares it now with thee
   When the whelps of the Woodbeast wander with the Leafage of the Tree
   All up the Mirkwood-water to seek what they shall find,
   The oak-boles of the battle and the war-wood stark and blind?"

Then answered the maiden:

   "It fares with me, O mother, that my soul would fain go forth
   To behold the ways of the battle, and the praise of the warriors'
   worth.
   But yet is it held entangled in a maze of many a thing,
   As the low-grown bramble holdeth the brake-shoots of the Spring.
   I think of the thing that hath been, but no shape is in my thought;
   I think of the day that passeth, and its story comes to nought.
   I think of the days that shall be, nor shape I any tale.
   I will hearken thee, O mother, if hearkening may avail."

The Carline gazed at her with dark eyes that shone brightly from amidst
her brown wrinkled face: then she sat herself down beside her and spake:

   "From a far folk have I wandered and I come of an alien blood,
   But I know all tales of the Wolfings and their evil and their good;
   And when I heard of thy fairness, thereof I heard it said,
   That for thee should be never a bridal nor a place in the warrior's
   bed."

The maiden neither reddened nor paled, but looking with calm steady eyes
into the Carline's face she answered:

   "Yea true it is, I am wedded to the mighty ones of old,
   And the fathers of the Wolfings ere the days of field and fold."

Then a smile came into the eyes of the old woman and she said.

   "How glad shall be thy mother of thy worship and thy worth,
   And the father that begat thee if yet they dwell on earth!"

But the Hall-Sun answered in the same steady manner as before:

   "None knoweth who is my mother, nor my very father's name;
   But when to the House of the Wolfings a wild-wood waif I came,
   They gave me a foster-mother an ancient dame and good,
   And a glorious foster-father the best of all the blood."

Spake the Carline.

   "Yea, I have heard the story, but scarce therein might I trow
   That thou with all thy beauty wert born 'neath the oaken bough,
   And hast crawled a naked baby o'er the rain-drenched autumn-grass;
   Wilt thou tell the wandering woman what wise it cometh to pass
   That thou art the Mid-mark's Hall-Sun, and the sign of the Wolfings'
   gain?
   Thou shalt pleasure me much by the telling, and there of shalt thou be
   fain."

Then answered the Hall-Sun.

   "Yea; thus much I remember for the first of my memories;
   That I lay on the grass in the morning and above were the boughs of
   the trees.
   But nought naked was I as the wood-whelp, but clad in linen white,
   And adown the glades of the oakwood the morning sun lay bright.
   Then a hind came out of the thicket and stood on the sunlit glade,
   And turned her head toward the oak tree and a step on toward me made.
   Then stopped, and bounded aback, and away as if in fear,
   That I saw her no more; then I wondered, though sitting close anear
   Was a she-wolf great and grisly.  But with her was I wont to play,
   And pull her ears, and belabour her rugged sides and grey,
   And hold her jaws together, while she whimpered, slobbering
   For the love of my love; and nowise I deemed her a fearsome thing.
   There she sat as though she were watching, and o'er head a blue-winged
   jay
   Shrieked out from the topmost oak-twigs, and a squirrel ran his way
   Two tree-trunks off.  But the she-wolf arose up suddenly
   And growled with her neck-fell bristling, as if danger drew anigh;
   And therewith I heard a footstep, for nice was my ear to catch
   All the noises of the wild-wood; so there did we sit at watch
   While the sound of feet grew nigher: then I clapped hand on hand
   And crowed for joy and gladness, for there out in the sun did stand
   A man, a glorious creature with a gleaming helm on his head,
   And gold rings on his arms, in raiment gold-broidered crimson-red.
   Straightway he strode up toward us nor heeded the wolf of the wood
   But sang as he went in the oak-glade, as a man whose thought is good,
   And nought she heeded the warrior, but tame as a sheep was grown,
   And trotted away through the wild-wood with her crest all laid adown.
   Then came the man and sat down by the oak-bole close unto me
   And took me up nought fearful and set me on his knee.
   And his face was kind and lovely, so my cheek to his cheek I laid
   And touched his cold bright war-helm and with his gold rings played,
   And hearkened his words, though I knew not what tale they had to tell,
   Yet fain was my heart of their music, and meseemed I loved him well.
   So we fared for a while and were fain, till he set down my feet on the
   grass,
   And kissed me and stood up himself, and away through the wood did he
   pass.
   And then came back the she-wolf and with her I played and was fain.
   Lo the first thing I remember: wilt thou have me babble again?"

Spake the Carline and her face was soft and kind:

   "Nay damsel, long would I hearken to thy voice this summer day.
   But how didst thou leave the wild-wood, what people brought thee
   away?"

Then said the Hall-Sun:

   "I awoke on a time in the even, and voices I heard as I woke;
   And there was I in the wild-wood by the bole of the ancient oak,
   And a ring of men was around me, and glad was I indeed
   As I looked upon their faces and the fashion of their weed.
   For I gazed on the red and the scarlet and the beaten silver and gold,
   And blithe were their noble faces and kindly to behold,
   And nought had I seen of such-like since that hour of the other day
   When that warrior came to the oak glade with the little child to play.
   And forth now he came, with the face that my hands had fondled before,
   And a battle shield wrought fairly upon his arm he bore,
   And thereon the wood-wolf's image in ruddy gold was done.
   Then I stretched out my little arms towards the glorious shining one
   And he took me up and set me on his shoulder for a while
   And turned about to his fellows with a blithe and joyous smile;
   And they shouted aloud about me and drew forth gleaming swords
   And clashed them on their bucklers; but nought I knew of the words
   Of their shouting and rejoicing.  So thereafter was I laid
   And borne forth on the warrior's warshield, and our way through the
   wood we made
   'Midst the mirth and great contentment of those fair-clad shielded
   men.

   "But no tale of the wolf and the wild-wood abides with me since then,
   And the next thing I remember is a huge and dusky hall,
   A world for my little body from ancient wall to wall;
   A world of many doings, and nought for me to do,
   A world of many noises, and known to me were few.

   "Time wore, and I spoke with the Wolfings and knew the speech of the
   kin,
   And was strange 'neath the roof no longer, as a lonely waif therein;
   And I wrought as a child with my playmates and every hour looked on
   Unto the next hour's joyance till the happy day was done.
   And going and coming amidst us was a woman tall and thin
   With hair like the hoary barley and silver streaks therein.
   And kind and sad of visage, as now I remember me,
   And she sat and told us stories when we were aweary with glee,
   And many of us she fondled, but me the most of all.
   And once from my sleep she waked me and bore me down the hall,
   In the hush of the very midnight, and I was feared thereat.
   But she brought me unto the dais, and there the warrior sat,
   Who took me up and kissed me, as erst within the wood;
   And meseems in his arms I slumbered: but I wakened again and stood
   Alone with the kindly woman, and gone was the goodly man,
   And athwart the hush of the Folk-hall the moon shone bright and wan,
   And the woman dealt with a lamp hung up by a chain aloft,
   And she trimmed it and fed it with oil, while she chanted sweet and
   soft
   A song whose words I knew not: then she ran it up again,
   And up in the darkness above us died the length of its wavering
   chain."

"Yea," said the carline, "this woman will have been the Hall-Sun that
came before thee.  What next dost thou remember?"

Said the maiden:

   "Next I mind me of the hazels behind the People's Roof,
   And the children running thither and the magpie flitting aloof,
   And my hand in the hand of the Hall-Sun, as after the others we went,
   And she soberly hearkening my prattle and the words of my intent.
   And now would I call her 'Mother,' and indeed I loved her well.

   "So I waxed; and now of my memories the tale were long to tell;
   But as the days passed over, and I fared to field and wood,
   Alone or with my playmates, still the days were fair and good.
   But the sad and kindly Hall-Sun for my fosterer now I knew,
   And the great and glorious warrior that my heart clung sorely to
   Was but my foster-father; and I knew that I had no kin
   In the ancient House of the Wolfings, though love was warm therein."

Then smiled the carline and said: "Yea, he is thy foster-father, and yet
a fond one."

"Sooth is that," said the Hall-Sun.  "But wise art thou by seeming.  Hast
thou come to tell me of what kindred I am, and who is my father and who
is my mother?"

Said the carline: "Art thou not also wise?  Is it not so that the Hall-
Sun of the Wolfings seeth things that are to come?"

"Yea," she said, "yet have I seen waking or sleeping no other father save
my foster-father; yet my very mother I have seen, as one who should meet
her in the flesh one day."

"And good is that," said the carline; and as she spoke her face waxed
kinder, and she said:

"Tell us more of thy days in the House of the Wolfings and how thou
faredst there."

Said the Hall-Sun:

   "I waxed 'neath the Roof of the Wolfings, till now to look upon
   I was of sixteen winters, and the love of the Folk I won,
   And in lovely weed they clad me like the image of a God:
   And lonely now full often the wild-wood ways I trod,
   And I feared no wild-wood creature, and my presence scared them
   nought;
   And I fell to know of wisdom, and within me stirred my thought,
   So that oft anights would I wander through the mead and far away,
   And swim the Mirkwood-water, and amidst his eddies play
   When earth was dark in the dawn-tide; and over all the folk
   I knew of the beasts' desires, as though in words they spoke.

   "So I saw of things that should be, were they mighty things or small,
   And upon a day as it happened came the war-word to the hall,
   And the House must wend to the warfield, and as they sang, and played
   With the strings of the harp that even, and the mirth of the war-eve
   made,
   Came the sight of the field to my eyes, and the words waxed hot in me,
   And I needs must show the picture of the end of the fight to be.
   Then I showed them the Red Wolf bristling o'er the broken fleeing foe;
   And the war-gear of the fleers, and their banner did I show,
   To wit the Ling-worm's image with the maiden in his mouth;
   There I saw my foster-father 'mid the pale blades of the South,
   Till aloof swept all the handplay and the hurry of the chase,
   And he lay along by an ash-tree, no helm about his face,
   No byrny on his body; and an arrow in his thigh,
   And a broken spear in his shoulder.  Then I saw myself draw nigh
   To sing the song blood-staying.  Then saw I how we twain
   Went 'midst of the host triumphant in the Wolfings' banner-wain,
   The black bulls lowing before us athwart the warriors' song,
   As up from Mirkwood-water we went our ways along
   To the Great Roof of the Wolfings, whence streamed the women out
   And the sound of their rejoicing blent with the warriors' shout.

   "They heard me and saw the picture, and they wotted how wise I was
   grown,
   And they loved me, and glad were their hearts at the tale my lips had
   shown;
   And my body clad as an image of a God to the field they bore,
   And I held by the mast of the banner as I looked upon their war,
   And endured to see unblenching on the wind-swept sunny plain
   All the picture of my vision by the men-folk done again.
   And over my Foster-father I sang the staunching-song,
   Till the life-blood that was ebbing flowed back to his heart the
   strong,
   And we wended back in the war-wain 'midst the gleanings of the fight
   Unto the ancient dwelling and the Hall-Sun's glimmering light.

   "So from that day henceforward folk hung upon my words,
   For the battle of the autumn, and the harvest of the swords;
   And e'en more was I loved than aforetime.  So wore a year away,
   And heavy was the burden of the lore that on me lay.

   "But my fosterer the Hall-Sun took sick at the birth of the year,
   And changed her life as the year changed, as summer drew anear.
   But she knew that her life was waning, and lying in her bed
   She taught me the lore of the Hall-Sun, and every word to be said
   At the trimming in the midnight and the feeding in the morn,
   And she laid her hands upon me ere unto the howe she was borne
   With the kindred gathered about us; and they wotted her weird and her
   will,
   And hailed me for the Hall-Sun when at last she lay there still.
   And they did on me the garment, the holy cloth of old,
   And the neck-chain wrought for the goddess, and the rings of the
   hallowed gold.
   So here am I abiding, and of things to be I tell,
   Yet know not what shall befall me nor why with the Wolfings I dwell."

Then said the carline:

   "What seest thou, O daughter, of the journey of to-day?
   And why wendest thou not with the war-host on the battle-echoing way?"

Said the Hall-Sun.

   "O mother, here dwelleth the Hall-Sun while the kin hath a dwelling-
   place,
   Nor ever again shall I look on the onset or the chase,
   Till the day when the Roof of the Wolfings looketh down on the girdle
   of foes,
   And the arrow singeth over the grass of the kindred's close;
   Till the pillars shake with the shouting and quivers the roof-tree
   dear,
   When the Hall of the Wolfings garners the harvest of the spear."

Therewith she stood on her feet and turned her face to the Great Roof,
and gazed long at it, not heeding the crone by her side; and she muttered
words of whose signification the other knew not, though she listened
intently, and gazed ever at her as closely as might be.

Then fell the Hall-Sun utterly silent, and the lids closed over her eyes,
and her hands were clenched, and her feet pressed hard on the daisies:
her bosom heaved with sore sighs, and great tear-drops oozed from under
her eyelids and fell on to her raiment and her feet and on to the flowery
summer grass; and at the last her mouth opened and she spake, but in a
voice that was marvellously changed from that she spake in before:

   "Why went ye forth, O Wolfings, from the garth your fathers built,
   And the House where sorrow dieth, and all unloosed is guilt?
   Turn back, turn back, and behold it! lest your feet be over slow
   When your shields are heavy-burdened with the arrows of the foe;
   How ye totter, how ye stumble on the rough and corpse-strewn way!
   And lo, how the eve is eating the afternoon of day!
   O why are ye abiding till the sun is sunk in night
   And the forest trees are ruddy with the battle-kindled light?
   O rest not yet, ye Wolfings, lest void be your resting-place,
   And into lands that ye know not the Wolf must turn his face,
   And ye wander and ye wander till the land in the ocean cease,
   And your battle bring no safety and your labour no increase."

Then was she silent for a while, and her tears ceased to flow; but
presently her eyes opened once more, and she lifted up her voice and
cried aloud--

   "I see, I see!  O Godfolk behold it from aloof,
   How the little flames steal flickering along the ridge of the Roof!
   They are small and red 'gainst the heavens in the summer afternoon;
   But when the day is dusking, white, high shall they wave to the moon.
   Lo, the fire plays now on the windows like strips of scarlet cloth
   Wind-waved! but look in the night-tide on the onset of its wrath,
   How it wraps round the ancient timbers and hides the mighty roof
   But lighteth little crannies, so lost and far aloof,
   That no man yet of the kindred hath seen them ere to-night,
   Since first the builder builded in loving and delight!"

Then again she stayed her speech with weeping and sobbing, but after a
while was still again, and then she spoke pointing toward the roof with
her right hand.

   "I see the fire-raisers and iron-helmed they are,
   Brown-faced about the banners that their hands have borne afar.
   And who in the garth of the kindred shall bear adown their shield
   Since the onrush of the Wolfings they caught in the open field,
   As the might of the mountain lion falls dead in the hempen net?
   O Wolfings, long have ye tarried, but the hour abideth yet.
   What life for the life of the people shall be given once for all,
   What sorrow shall stay sorrow in the half-burnt Wolfing Hall?
   There is nought shall quench the fire save the tears of the Godfolk's
   kin,
   And the heart of the life-delighter, and the life-blood cast therein."

Then once again she fell silent, and her eyes closed again, and the slow
tears gushed out from them, and she sank down sobbing on the grass, and
little by little the storm of grief sank and her head fell back, and she
was as one quietly asleep.  Then the carline hung over her and kissed her
and embraced her; and then through her closed eyes and her slumber did
the Hall-Sun see a marvel; for she who was kissing her was young in
semblance and unwrinkled, and lovely to look on, with plenteous long hair
of the hue of ripe barley, and clad in glistening raiment such as has
been woven in no loom on earth.

And indeed it was the Wood-Sun in the semblance of a crone, who had come
to gather wisdom of the coming time from the foreseeing of the Hall-Sun;
since now at last she herself foresaw nothing of it, though she was of
the kindred of the Gods and the Fathers of the Goths.  So when she had
heard the Hall-Sun she deemed that she knew but too well what her words
meant, and what for love, what for sorrow, she grew sick at heart as she
heard them.

So at last she arose and turned to look at the Great Roof; and strong and
straight, and cool and dark grey showed its ridge against the pale sky of
the summer afternoon all quivering with the heat of many hours' sun: dark
showed its windows as she gazed on it, and stark and stiff she knew were
its pillars within.

Then she said aloud, but to herself: "What then if a merry and mighty
life be given for it, and the sorrow of the people be redeemed; yet will
not I give the life which is his; nay rather let him give the bliss which
is mine.  But oh! how may it be that he shall die joyous and I shall live
unhappy!"

Then she went slowly down from the Hill of Speech, and whoso saw her
deemed her but a gangrel carline.  So she went her ways and let the wood
cover her.

But in a little while the Hall-Sun awoke alone, and sat up with a sigh,
and she remembered nothing concerning her sight of the flickering flame
along the hall-roof, and the fire-tongues like strips of scarlet cloth
blown by the wind, nor had she any memory of her words concerning the
coming day.  But the rest of her talk with the carline she remembered,
and also the vision of the beautiful woman who had kissed and embraced
her; and she knew that it was her very mother.  Also she perceived that
she had been weeping, therefore she knew that she had uttered words of
wisdom.  For so it fared with her at whiles, that she knew not her own
words of foretelling, but spoke them out as if in a dream.

So now she went down from the Hill of Speech soberly, and turned toward
the Woman's door of the hall, and on her way she met the women and old
men and youths coming back from the meadow with little mirth: and there
were many of them who looked shyly at her as though they would gladly
have asked her somewhat, and yet durst not.  But for her, her sadness
passed away when she came among them, and she looked kindly on this and
that one of them, and entered with them into the Woman's Chamber, and did
what came to her hand to do.




CHAPTER VI--THEY TALK ON THE WAY TO THE FOLK-THING


All day long one standing on the Speech-hill of the Wolfings might have
seen men in their war-array streaming along the side of Mirkwood-water,
on both sides thereof; and the last comers from the Nether-mark came
hastening all they might; for they would not be late at the
trysting-place.  But these were of a kindred called the Laxings, who bore
a salmon on their banner; and they were somewhat few in number, for they
had but of late years become a House of the Markmen.  Their banner-wain
was drawn by white horses, fleet and strong, and they were no great band,
for they had but few thralls with them, and all, free men and thralls,
were a-horseback; so they rode by hastily with their banner-wain, their
few munition-wains following as they might.

Now tells the tale of the men-at-arms of the Wolfings and the Beamings,
that soon they fell in with the Elking host, which was journeying but
leisurely, so that the Wolfings might catch up with them: they were a
very great kindred, the most numerous of all Mid-mark, and at this time
they had affinity with the Wolfings.  But old men of the House remembered
how they had heard their grandsires and very old men tell that there had
been a time when the Elking House had been established by men from out of
the Wolfing kindred, and how they had wandered away from the Mark in the
days when it had been first settled, and had abided aloof for many
generations of men; and so at last had come back again to the Mark, and
had taken up their habitation at a place in Mid-mark where was dwelling
but a remnant of a House called the Thyrings, who had once been exceeding
mighty, but had by that time almost utterly perished in a great sickness
which befel in those days.  So then these two Houses, the wanderers come
back and the remnant left by the sickness of the Gods, made one House
together, and increased and throve after their coming together, and
wedded with the Wolfings, and became a very great House.

Gallant and glorious was their array now, as they marched along with
their banner of the Elk, which was drawn by the very beasts themselves
tamed to draught to that end through many generations; they were fatter
and sleeker than their wild-wood brethren, but not so mighty.

So were the men of the three kindreds somewhat mingled together on the
way.  The Wolfings were the tallest and the biggest made; but of those
dark-haired men aforesaid, were there fewest amongst the Beamings, and
most among the Elkings, as though they had drawn to them more men of
alien blood during their wanderings aforesaid.  So they talked together
and made each other good cheer, as is the wont of companions in arms on
the eve of battle; and the talk ran, as may be deemed, on that journey
and what was likely to come of it: and spake an Elking warrior to a
Wolfing by whom he rode:

"O Wolfkettle, hath the Hall-Sun had any foresight of the day of battle?"

"Nay," said the other, "when she lighted the farewell candle, she bade us
come back again, and spoke of the day of our return; but that methinks,
as thou and I would talk of it, thinking what would be likely to befal.
Since we are a great host of valiant men, and these Welshmen {2} most
valiant, and as the rumour runneth bigger-bodied men than the Hun-folk,
and so well ordered as never folk have been.  So then if we overthrow
them we shall come back again; and if they overthrow us, the remnant of
us shall fall back before them till we come to our habitations; for it is
not to be looked for that they will fall in upon our rear and prevent us,
since we have the thicket of the wild-wood on our flanks."

"Sooth is that," said the Elking; "and as to the mightiness of this folk
and their customs, ye may gather somewhat from the songs which our House
yet singeth, and which ye have heard wide about in the Mark; for this is
the same folk of which a many of them tell, making up that story-lay
which is called the South-Welsh Lay; which telleth how we have met this
folk in times past when we were in fellowship with a folk of the Welsh of
like customs to ourselves: for we of the Elkings were then but a feeble
folk.  So we marched with this folk of the Kymry and met the men of the
cities, and whiles we overthrew and whiles were overthrown, but at last
in a great battle were overthrown with so great a slaughter, that the red
blood rose over the wheels of the wains, and the city-folk fainted with
the work of the slaughter, as men who mow a match in the meadows when the
swathes are dry and heavy and the afternoon of midsummer is hot; and
there they stood and stared on the field of the slain, and knew not
whether they were in Home or Hell, so fierce the fight had been."

Therewith a man of the Beamings, who was riding on the other side of the
Elking, reached out over his horse's neck and said:

"Yea friend, but is there not some telling of a tale concerning how ye
and your fellowship took the great city of the Welshmen of the South, and
dwelt there long."

"Yea," said the Elking, "Hearken how it is told in the South-Welsh Lay:

      "'Have ye not heard
      Of the ways of Weird?
      How the folk fared forth
      Far away from the North?
      And as light as one wendeth
      Whereas the wood endeth,
      When of nought is our need,
      And none telleth our deed,
   So Rodgeir unwearied and Reidfari wan
   The town where none tarried the shield-shaking man.
   All lonely the street there, and void was the way
   And nought hindered our feet but the dead men that lay
   Under shield in the lanes of the houses heavens-high,
   All the ring-bearing swains that abode there to die.'

"Tells the Lay, that none abode the Goths and their fellowship, but such
as were mighty enough to fall before them, and the rest, both man and
woman, fled away before our folk and before the folk of the Kymry, and
left their town for us to dwell in; as saith the Lay:

      "'Glistening of gold
      Did men's eyen behold;
      Shook the pale sword
      O'er the unspoken word,
      No man drew nigh us
      With weapon to try us,
      For the Welsh-wrought shield
      Lay low on the field.
   By man's hand unbuilded all seemed there to be,
   The walls ruddy gilded, the pearls of the sea:
   Yea all things were dead there save pillar and wall,
   But _they_ lived and _they_ said us the song of the hall;
   The dear hall left to perish by men of the land,
   For the Goth-folk to cherish with gold gaining hand.'

"See ye how the Lay tells that the hall was bolder than the men, who fled
from it, and left all for our fellowship to deal with in the days gone
by?"

Said the Wolfing man:

"And as it was once, so shall it be again.  Maybe we shall go far on this
journey, and see at least one of the garths of the Southlands, even those
which they call cities.  For I have heard it said that they have more
cities than one only, and that so great are their kindreds, that each
liveth in a garth full of mighty houses, with a wall of stone and lime
around it; and that in every one of these garths lieth wealth untold
heaped up.  And wherefore should not all this fall to the Markmen and
their valiancy?"

Said the Elking:

"As to their many cities and the wealth of them, that is sooth; but as to
each city being the habitation of each kindred, it is otherwise: for
rather it may be said of them that they have forgotten kindred, and have
none, nor do they heed whom they wed, and great is the confusion amongst
them.  And mighty men among them ordain where they shall dwell, and what
shall be their meat, and how long they shall labour after they are weary,
and in all wise what manner of life shall be amongst them; and though
they be called free men who suffer this, yet may no house or kindred
gainsay this rule and order.  In sooth they are a people mighty, but
unhappy."

Said Wolfkettle:

"And hast thou learned all this from the ancient story lays, O Hiarandi?
For some of them I know, though not all, and therein have I noted nothing
of all this.  Is there some new minstrel arisen in thine House of a
memory excelling all those that have gone before?  If that be so, I bid
him to the Roof of the Wolfings as soon as may be; for we lack new
tales."

"Nay," said Hiarandi, "This that I tell thee is not a tale of past days,
but a tale of to-day.  For there came to us a man from out of the wild-
wood, and prayed us peace, and we gave it him; and he told us that he was
of a House of the Gael, and that his House had been in a great battle
against these Welshmen, whom he calleth the Romans; and that he was taken
in the battle, and sold as a thrall in one of their garths; and howbeit,
it was not their master-garth, yet there he learned of their customs: and
sore was the lesson!  Hard was his life amongst them, for their thralls
be not so well entreated as their draught-beasts, so many do they take in
battle; for they are a mighty folk; and these thralls and those aforesaid
unhappy freemen do all tilling and herding and all deeds of
craftsmanship: and above these are men whom they call masters and lords
who do nought, nay not so much as smithy their own edge-weapons, but
linger out their days in their dwellings and out of their dwellings,
lying about in the sun or the hall-cinders, like cur-dogs who have fallen
away from kind.

"So this man made a shift to flee away from out of that garth, since it
was not far from the great river; and being a valiant man, and young and
mighty of body, he escaped all perils and came to us through the
Mirkwood.  But we saw that he was no liar, and had been very evilly
handled, for upon his body was the mark of many a stripe, and of the
shackles that had been soldered on to his limbs; also it was more than
one of these accursed people whom he had slain when he fled.  So he
became our guest and we loved him, and he dwelt among us and yet
dwelleth, for we have taken him into our House.  But yesterday he was
sick and might not ride with us; but may be he will follow on and catch
up with us in a day or two.  And if he come not, then will I bring him
over to the Wolfings when the battle is done."

Then laughed the Beaming man, and spake:

"How then if ye come not back, nor Wolfkettle, nor the Welsh Guest, nor I
myself?  Meseemeth no one of these Southland Cities shall we behold, and
no more of the Southlanders than their war-array."

"These are evil words," said Wolfkettle, "though such an outcome must be
thought on.  But why deemest thou this?"

Said the Beaming: "There is no Hall-Sun sitting under our Roof at home to
tell true tales concerning the Kindred every day.  Yet forsooth from time
to time is a word said in our Folk-hall for good or for evil; and who can
choose but hearken thereto?  And yestereve was a woeful word spoken, and
that by a man-child of ten winters."

Said the Elking: "Now that thou hast told us thus much, thou must tell us
more, yea, all the word which was spoken; else belike we shall deem of it
as worse than it was."

Said the Beaming: "Thus it was; this little lad brake out weeping
yestereve, when the Hall was full and feasting; and he wailed, and roared
out, as children do, and would not be pacified, and when he was asked why
he made that to do, he said: 'Well away!  Raven hath promised to make me
a clay horse and to bake it in the kiln with the pots next week; and now
he goeth to the war, and he shall never come back, and never shall my
horse be made.'  Thereat we all laughed as ye may well deem.  But the lad
made a sour countenance on us and said, 'why do ye laugh? look yonder,
what see ye?'  'Nay,' said one, 'nought but the Feast-hall wall and the
hangings of the High-tide thereon.'  Then said the lad sobbing: 'Ye see
ill: further afield see I: I see a little plain, on a hill top, and fells
beyond it far bigger than our speech-hill: and there on the plain lieth
Raven as white as parchment; and none hath such hue save the dead.'  Then
said Raven, (and he was a young man, and was standing thereby).  'And
well is that, swain, to die in harness!  Yet hold up thine heart; here is
Gunbert who shall come back and bake thine horse for thee.'  'Nay never
more,' quoth the child, 'For I see his pale head lying at Raven's feet;
but his body with the green gold-broidered kirtle I see not.'  Then was
the laughter stilled, and man after man drew near to the child, and
questioned him, and asked, 'dost thou see me?' 'dost thou see me?'  And
he failed to see but few of those that asked him.  Therefore now
meseemeth that not many of us shall see the cities of the South, and
those few belike shall look on their own shackles therewithal."

"Nay," said Hiarandi, "What is all this? heard ye ever of a company of
fighting men that fared afield, and found the foe, and came back home
leaving none behind them?"

Said the Beaming: "Yet seldom have I heard a child foretell the death of
warriors.  I tell thee that hadst thou been there, thou wouldst have
thought of it as if the world were coming to an end."

"Well," said Wolfkettle, "let it be as it may!  Yet at least I will not
be led away from the field by the foemen.  Oft may a man be hindered of
victory, but never of death if he willeth it."

Therewith he handled a knife that hung about his neck, and went on to
say: "But indeed, I do much marvel that no word came into the mouth of
the Hall-Sun yestereven or this morning, but such as any woman of the
kindred might say."

Therewith fell their talk awhile, and as they rode they came to where the
wood drew nigher to the river, and thus the Mid-mark had an end; for
there was no House had a dwelling in the Mid-mark higher up the water
than the Elkings, save one only, not right great, who mostly fared to war
along with the Elkings: and this was the Oselings, whose banner bore the
image of the Wood-ousel, the black bird with the yellow neb; and they had
just fallen into the company of the greater House.

So now Mid-mark was over and past, and the serried trees of the wood came
down like a wall but a little way from the lip of the water; and
scattered trees, mostly quicken-trees grew here and there on the very
water side.  But Mirkwood-water ran deep swift and narrow between high
clean-cloven banks, so that none could dream of fording, and not so many
of swimming its dark green dangerous waters.  And the day wore on towards
evening and the glory of the western sky was unseen because of the wall
of high trees.  And still the host made on, and because of the narrowness
of the space between river and wood it was strung out longer and looked a
very great company of men.  And moreover the men of the eastern-lying
part of Mid-mark, were now marching thick and close on the other side of
the river but a little way from the Wolfings and their fellows; for
nothing but the narrow river sundered them.

So night fell, and the stars shone, and the moon rose, and yet the
Wolfings and their fellows stayed not, since they wotted that behind them
followed a many of the men of the Mark, both the Mid and the Nether, and
they would by no means hinder their march.

So wended the Markmen between wood and stream on either side of Mirkwood-
water, till now at last the night grew deep and the moon set, and it was
hard on midnight, and they had kindled many torches to light them on
either side of the water.  So whereas they had come to a place where the
trees gave back somewhat from the river, which was well-grassed for their
horses and neat, and was called Baitmead, the companies on the western
side made stay there till morning.  And they drew the wains right up to
the thick of the wood, and all men turned aside into the mead from the
beaten road, so that those who were following after might hold on their
way if so they would.  There then they appointed watchers of the night,
while the rest of them lay upon the sward by the side of the trees, and
slept through the short summer night.

The tale tells not that any man dreamed of the fight to come in such wise
that there was much to tell of his dream on the morrow; many dreamed of
no fight or faring to war, but of matters little, and often laughable,
mere mingled memories of bygone time that had no waking wits to marshal
them.

But that man of the Beamings dreamed that he was at home watching a
potter, a man of the thralls of the House working at his wheel, and
fashioning bowls and ewers: and he had a mind to take of his clay and
fashion a horse for the lad that had bemoaned the promise of his toy.  And
he tried long and failed to fashion anything; for the clay fell to pieces
in his hands; till at last it held together and grew suddenly, not into
an image of a horse, but of the Great Yule Boar, the similitude of the
Holy Beast of Frey.  So he laughed in his sleep and was glad, and leaped
up and drew his sword with his clay-stained hands that he might wave it
over the Earth Boar, and swear a great oath of a doughty deed.  And
therewith he found himself standing on his feet indeed, just awakened in
the cold dawn, and holding by his right hand to an ash-sapling that grew
beside him.  So he laughed again, and laid him down, and leaned back and
slept his sleep out till the sun and the voices of his fellows stirring
awakened him.




CHAPTER VII--THEY GATHER TO THE FOLK-MOTE


When it was the morning, all the host of the Markmen was astir on either
side of the water, and when they had broken their fast, they got speedily
into array, and were presently on the road again; and the host was now
strung out longer yet, for the space between water and wood once more
diminished till at last it was no wider than ten men might go abreast,
and looking ahead it was as if the wild-wood swallowed up both river and
road.

But the fighting-men hastened on merrily with their hearts raised high,
since they knew that they would soon be falling in with more of their
people, and the coming fight was growing a clearer picture to their eyes;
so from side to side of the river they shouted out the cries of their
Houses, or friend called to friend across the eddies of Mirkwood-water,
and there was game and glee enough.

So they fared till the wood gave way before them, and lo, the beginning
of another plain, somewhat like the Mid-mark.  There also the water
widened out before them, and there were eyots in it with stony shores
crowned with willow or with alder, and aspens rising from the midst of
them.

But as for the plain, it was thus much different from Mid-mark, that the
wood which begirt it rose on the south into low hills, and away beyond
them were other hills blue in the distance, for the most bare of wood,
and not right high, the pastures of the wild-bull and the bison, whereas
now dwelt a folk somewhat scattered and feeble; hunters and herdsmen,
with little tillage about their abodes, a folk akin to the Markmen and
allied to them.  They had come into those parts later than the Markmen,
as the old tales told; which said moreover that in days gone by a folk
dwelt among those hills who were alien from the Goths, and great foes to
the Markmen; and how that on a time they came down from their hills with
a great host, together with new-comers of their own blood, and made their
way through the wild-wood, and fell upon the Upper-mark; and how that
there befel a fearful battle that endured for three days; and the first
day the Aliens worsted the Markmen, who were but a few, since they were
they of the Upper-mark only.  So the Aliens burned their houses and slew
their old men, and drave off many of their women and children; and the
remnant of the men of the Upper-mark with all that they had, which was
now but little, took refuge in an island of Mirkwood-water, where they
fenced themselves as well as they could for that night; for they expected
the succour of their kindred of the Mid-mark and the Nether-mark, unto
whom they had sped the war-arrow when they first had tidings of the onset
of the Aliens.

So at the sun-rising they sacrificed to the Gods twenty chieftains of the
Aliens whom they had taken, and therewithal a maiden of their own
kindred, the daughter of their war-duke, that she might lead that mighty
company to the House of the Gods; and thereto was she nothing loth, but
went right willingly.

There then they awaited the onset.  But the men of Mid-mark came up in
the morning, when the battle was but just joined, and fell on so fiercely
that the aliens gave back, and then they of the Upper-mark stormed out of
their eyot, and fell on over the ford, and fought till the water ran red
with their blood, and the blood of the foemen.  So the Aliens gave back
before the onset of the Markmen all over the meads; but when they came to
the hillocks and the tofts of the half-burned habitations, and the wood
was on their flank, they made a stand again, and once more the battle
waxed hot, for they were very many, and had many bowmen: there fell the
War-duke of the Markmen, whose daughter had been offered up for victory,
and his name was Agni, so that the tofts where he fell have since been
called Agni's Tofts.  So that day they fought all over the plain, and a
great many died, both of the Aliens and the Markmen, and though these
last were victorious, yet when the sun went down there still were the
Aliens abiding in the Upper-mark, fenced by their wain-burg, beaten, and
much diminished in number, but still a host of men: while of the Markmen
many had fallen, and many more were hurt, because the Aliens were good
bowmen.

But on the morrow again, as the old tale told, came up the men of the
Nether-mark fresh and unwounded; and so the battle began again on the
southern limit of the Upper-mark where the Aliens had made their wain-
burg.  But not long did it endure; for the Markmen fell on so fiercely,
that they stormed over the wain-burg, and slew all before them, and there
was a very great slaughter of the Aliens; so great, tells the old tale,
that never again durst they meet the Markmen in war.

Thus went forth the host of the Markmen, faring along both sides of the
water into the Upper-mark; and on the west side, where went the Wolfings,
the ground now rose by a long slope into a low hill, and when they came
unto the brow thereof, they beheld before them the whole plain of the
Upper-mark, and the dwellings of the kindred therein all girdled about by
the wild-wood; and beyond, the blue hills of the herdsmen, and beyond
them still, a long way aloof, lying like a white cloud on the verge of
the heavens, the snowy tops of the great mountains.  And as they looked
down on to the plain they saw it embroidered, as it were, round about the
habitations which lay within ken by crowds of many people, and the
banners of the kindreds and the arms of men; and many a place they saw
named after the ancient battle and that great slaughter of the Aliens.

On their left hand lay the river, and as it now fairly entered with them
into the Upper-mark, it spread out into wide rippling shallows beset with
yet more sandy eyots, amongst which was one much greater, rising amidmost
into a low hill, grassy and bare of tree or bush; and this was the island
whereon the Markmen stood on the first day of the Great Battle, and it
was now called the Island of the Gods.

Thereby was the ford, which was firm and good and changed little from
year to year, so that all Markmen knew it well and it was called
Battleford: thereover now crossed all the eastern companies, footmen and
horsemen, freemen and thralls, wains and banners, with shouting and
laughter, and the noise of horns and the lowing of neat, till all that
plain's end was flooded with the host of the Markmen.

But when the eastern-abiders had crossed, they made no stay, but went
duly ordered about their banners, winding on toward the first of the
abodes on the western side of the water; because it was but a little way
southwest of this that the Thing-stead of the Upper-mark lay; and the
whole Folk was summoned thither when war threatened from the South, just
as it was called to the Thing-stead of the Nether-mark, when the threat
of war came from the North.  But the western companies stayed on the brow
of that low hill till all the eastern men were over the river, and on
their way to the Thing-stead, and then they moved on.

So came the Wolfings and their fellows up to the dwellings of the
northernmost kindred, who were called the Daylings, and bore on their
banner the image of the rising sun.  Thereabout was the Mark somewhat
more hilly and broken than in the Mid-mark, so that the Great Roof of the
Daylings, which was a very big house, stood on a hillock whose sides had
been cleft down sheer on all sides save one (which was left as a bridge)
by the labour of men, and it was a very defensible place.

Thereon were now gathered round about the Roof all the stay-at-homes of
the kindred, who greeted with joyous cries the men-at-arms as they
passed.  Albeit one very old man, who sat in a chair near to the edge of
the sheer hill looking on the war array, when he saw the Wolfing banner
draw near, stood up to gaze on it, and then shook his head sadly, and
sank back again into his chair, and covered his face with his hands: and
when the folk saw that, a silence bred of the coldness of fear fell on
them, for that elder was deemed a foreseeing man.

But as those three fellows, of whose talk of yesterday the tale has told,
drew near and beheld what the old carle did (for they were riding
together this day also) the Beaming man laid his hand on Wolfkettle's
rein and said:

"Lo you, neighbour, if thy Vala hath seen nought, yet hath this old man
seen somewhat, and that somewhat even as the little lad saw it.  Many a
mother's son shall fall before the Welshmen."

But Wolfkettle shook his rein free, and his face reddened as of one who
is angry, yet he kept silence, while the Elking said:

"Let be, Toti! for he that lives shall tell the tale to the foreseers,
and shall make them wiser than they are to-day."

Then laughed Toti, as one who would not be thought to be too heedful of
the morrow.  But Wolfkettle brake out into speech and rhyme, and said:

   "O warriors, the Wolfing kindred shall live or it shall die;
   And alive it shall be as the oak-tree when the summer storm goes by;
   But dead it shall be as its bole, that they hew for the corner-post
   Of some fair and mighty folk-hall, and the roof of a war-fain host."

So therewith they rode their ways past the abode of the Daylings.

Straight to the wood went all the host, and so into it by a wide way
cleft through the thicket, and in some thirty minutes they came thereby
into a great wood-lawn cleared amidst of it by the work of men's hands.
There already was much of the host gathered, sitting or standing in a
great ring round about a space bare of men, where amidmost rose a great
mound raised by men's hands and wrought into steps to be the
sitting-places of the chosen elders and chief men of the kindred; and
atop the mound was flat and smooth save for a turf bench or seat that
went athwart it whereon ten men might sit.

All the wains save the banner-wains had been left behind at the Dayling
abode, nor was any beast there save the holy beasts who drew the banner-
wains and twenty white horses, that stood wreathed about with flowers
within the ring of warriors, and these were for the burnt offering to be
given to the Gods for a happy day of battle.  Even the war-horses of the
host they must leave in the wood without the wood-lawn, and all men were
afoot who were there.

For this was the Thing-stead of the Upper-mark, and the holiest place of
the Markmen, and no beast, either neat, sheep, or horse might pasture
there, but was straightway slain and burned if he wandered there; nor
might any man eat therein save at the holy feasts when offerings were
made to the Gods.

So the Wolfings took their place there in the ring of men with the
Elkings on their right hand and the Beamings on their left.  And in the
midst of the Wolfing array stood Thiodolf clad in the dwarf-wrought
hauberk: but his head was bare; for he had sworn over the Cup of Renown
that he would fight unhelmed throughout all that trouble, and would bear
no shield in any battle thereof however fierce the onset might be.

Short, and curling close to his head was his black hair, a little
grizzled, so that it looked like rings of hard dark iron: his forehead
was high and smooth, his lips full and red, his eyes steady and
wide-open, and all his face joyous with the thought of the fame of his
deeds, and the coming battle with a foeman whom the Markmen knew not yet.

He was tall and wide-shouldered, but so exceeding well fashioned of all
his limbs and body that he looked no huge man.  He was a man well beloved
of women, and children would mostly run to him gladly and play with him.
A most fell warrior was he, whose deeds no man of the Mark could equal,
but blithe of speech even when he was sorrowful of mood, a man that knew
not bitterness of heart: and for all his exceeding might and valiancy, he
was proud and high to no man; so that the very thralls loved him.

He was not abounding in words in the field; nor did he use much the
custom of those days in reviling and defying with words the foe that was
to be smitten with swords.

There were those who had seen him in the field for the first time who
deemed him slack at the work: for he would not always press on with the
foremost, but would hold him a little aback, and while the battle was
young he forbore to smite, and would do nothing but help a kinsman who
was hard pressed, or succour the wounded.  So that if men were dealing
with no very hard matter, and their hearts were high and overweening, he
would come home at whiles with unbloodied blade.  But no man blamed him
save those who knew him not: for his intent was that the younger men
should win themselves fame, and so raise their courage, and become high-
hearted and stout.

But when the stour was hard, and the battle was broken, and the hearts of
men began to fail them, and doubt fell upon the Markmen, then was he
another man to see: wise, but swift and dangerous, rushing on as if shot
out by some mighty engine: heedful of all, on either side and in front;
running hither and thither as the fight failed and the fire of battle
faltered; his sword so swift and deadly that it was as if he wielded the
very lightening of the heavens: for with the sword it was ever his wont
to fight.

But it must be said that when the foemen turned their backs, and the
chase began, then Thiodolf would nowise withhold his might as in the
early battle, but ever led the chase, and smote on the right hand and on
the left, sparing none, and crying out to the men of the kindred not to
weary in their work, but to fulfil all the hours of their day.

For thuswise would he say and this was a word of his:

   "Let us rest to-morrow, fellows, since to-day we have fought amain!
   Let not these men we have smitten come aback on our hands again,
   And say 'Ye Wolfing warriors, ye have done your work but ill,
   Fall to now and do it again, like the craftsman who learneth his
   skill.'"

Such then was Thiodolf, and ever was he the chosen leader of the Wolfings
and often the War-duke of the whole Folk.

By his side stood the other chosen leader, whose name was Heriulf; a man
well stricken in years, but very mighty and valiant; wise in war and well
renowned; of few words save in battle, and therein a singer of songs, a
laugher, a joyous man, a merry companion.  He was a much bigger man than
Thiodolf; and indeed so huge was his stature, that he seemed to be of the
kindred of the Mountain Giants; and his bodily might went with his
stature, so that no one man might deal with him body to body.  His face
was big; his cheek-bones high; his nose like an eagle's neb, his mouth
wide, his chin square and big; his eyes light-grey and fierce under
shaggy eyebrows: his hair white and long.

Such were his raiment and weapons, that he wore a coat of fence of dark
iron scales sewn on to horse-hide, and a dark iron helm fashioned above
his brow into the similitude of the Wolf's head with gaping jaws; and
this he had wrought for himself with his own hands, for he was a good
smith.  A round buckler he bore and a huge twibill, which no man of the
kindred could well wield save himself; and it was done both blade and
shaft with knots and runes in gold; and he loved that twibill well, and
called it the Wolf's Sister.

There then stood Heriulf, looking no less than one of the forefathers of
the kindred come back again to the battle of the Wolfings.

He was well-beloved for his wondrous might, and he was no hard man,
though so fell a warrior, and though of few words, as aforesaid, was a
blithe companion to old and young.  In numberless battles had he fought,
and men deemed it a wonder that Odin had not taken to him a man so much
after his own heart; and they said it was neighbourly done of the Father
of the Slain to forbear his company so long, and showed how well he loved
the Wolfing House.

For a good while yet came other bands of Markmen into the Thing-stead;
but at last there was an end of their coming.  Then the ring of men
opened, and ten warriors of the Daylings made their way through it, and
one of them, the oldest, bore in his hand the War-horn of the Daylings;
for this kindred had charge of the Thing-stead, and of all appertaining
to it.  So while his nine fellows stood round about the Speech-Hill, the
old warrior clomb up to the topmost of it, and blew a blast on the horn.
Thereon they who were sitting rose up, and they who were talking each to
each held their peace, and the whole ring drew nigher to the hill, so
that there was a clear space behind them 'twixt them and the wood, and a
space before them between them and the hill, wherein were those nine
warriors, and the horses for the burnt-offering, and the altar of the
Gods; and now were all well within ear-shot of a man speaking amidst the
silence in a clear voice.

But there were gathered of the Markmen to that place some four thousand
men, all chosen warriors and doughty men; and of the thralls and aliens
dwelling with them they were leading two thousand.  But not all of the
freemen of the Upper-mark could be at the Thing; for needs must there be
some guard to the passes of the wood toward the south and the hills of
the herdsmen, whereas it was no wise impassable to a wisely led host: so
five hundred men, what of freemen, what of thralls, abode there to guard
the wild-wood; and these looked to have some helping from the hill-men.

Now came an ancient warrior into the space between the men and the wild-
wood holding in his hand a kindled torch; and first he faced due south by
the sun, then, turning, he slowly paced the whole circle going from east
to west, and so on till he had reached the place he started from: then he
dashed the torch to the ground and quenched the fire, and so went his
ways to his own company again.

Then the old Dayling warrior on the mound-top drew his sword, and waved
it flashing in the sun toward the four quarters of the heavens; and
thereafter blew again a blast on the War-horn.  Then fell utter silence
on the whole assembly, and the wood was still around them, save here and
there the stamping of a war-horse or the sound of his tugging at the
woodland grass; for there was little resort of birds to the depths of the
thicket, and the summer morning was windless.




CHAPTER VIII--THE FOLK-MOTE OF THE MARKMEN


So the Dayling warrior lifted up his voice and said:

   "O kindreds of the Markmen, hearken the words I say;
   For no chancehap assembly is gathered here to-day.
   The fire hath gone around us in the hands of our very kin,
   And twice the horn hath sounded, and the Thing is hallowed in.
   Will ye hear or forbear to hearken the tale there is to tell?
   There are many mouths to tell it, and a many know it well.
   And the tale is this, that the foemen against our kindreds fare
   Who eat the meadows desert, and burn the desert bare."

Then sat he down on the turf seat; but there arose a murmur in the
assembly as of men eager to hearken; and without more ado came a man out
of a company of the Upper-mark, and clomb up to the top of the Speech-
Hill, and spoke in a loud voice:

"I am Bork, a man of the Geirings of the Upper-mark: two days ago I and
five others were in the wild-wood a-hunting, and we wended through the
thicket, and came into the land of the hill-folk; and after we had gone a
while we came to a long dale with a brook running through it, and yew-
trees scattered about it and a hazel copse at one end; and by the copse
was a band of men who had women and children with them, and a few neat,
and fewer horses; but sheep were feeding up and down the dale; and they
had made them booths of turf and boughs, and were making ready their
cooking fires, for it was evening.  So when they saw us, they ran to
their arms, but we cried out to them in the tongue of the Goths and bade
them peace.  Then they came up the bent to us and spake to us in the
Gothic tongue, albeit a little diversely from us; and when we had told
them what and whence we were, they were glad of us, and bade us to them,
and we went, and they entreated us kindly, and made us such cheer as they
might, and gave us mutton to eat, and we gave them venison of the wild-
wood which we had taken, and we abode with them there that night.

"But they told us that they were a house of the folk of the herdsmen, and
that there was war in the land, and that the people thereof were fleeing
before the cruelty of a host of warriors, men of a mighty folk, such as
the earth hath not heard of, who dwell in great cities far to the south;
and how that this host had crossed the mountains, and the Great Water
that runneth from them, and had fallen upon their kindred, and overcome
their fighting-men, and burned their dwellings, slain their elders, and
driven their neat and their sheep, yea, and their women and children in
no better wise than their neat and sheep.

"And they said that they had fled away thus far from their old
habitations, which were a long way to the south, and were now at point to
build them dwellings there in that Dale of the Hazels, and to trust to it
that these Welshmen, whom they called Romans, would not follow so far,
and that if they did, they might betake them to the wild-wood, and let
the thicket cover them, they being so nigh to it.

"Thus they told us; wherefore we sent back one of our fellowship, Birsti
of the Geirings, to tell the tale; and one of the herdsmen folk went with
him, but we ourselves went onward to hear more of these Romans; for the
folk when we asked them, said that they had been in battle against them,
but had fled away for fear of their rumour only.  Therefore we went on,
and a young man of this kindred, who named themselves the Hrutings of the
Fell-folk, went along with us.  But the others were sore afeard, for all
they had weapons.

"So as we went up the land we found they had told us the very sooth, and
we met divers Houses, and bands, and broken men, who were fleeing from
this trouble, and many of them poor and in misery, having lost their
flocks and herds as well as their roofs; and this last be but little loss
to them, as their dwellings are but poor, and for the most part they have
no tillage.  Now of these men, we met not a few who had been in battle
with the Roman host, and much they told us of their might not to be dealt
with, and their mishandling of those whom they took, both men and women;
and at the last we heard true tidings how they had raised them a garth,
and made a stronghold in the midst of the land, as men who meant abiding
there, so that neither might the winter drive them aback, and that they
might be succoured by their people on the other side of the Great River;
to which end they have made other garths, though not so great, on the
road to that water, and all these well and wisely warded by tried men.
For as to the Folks on the other side of the Water, all these lie under
their hand already, what by fraud what by force, and their warriors go
with them to the battle and help them; of whom we met bands now and
again, and fought with them, and took men of them, who told us all this
and much more, over long to tell of here."

He paused and turned about to look on the mighty assembly, and his ears
drank in the long murmur that followed his speaking, and when it had died
out he spake again, but in rhyme:

   "Lo thus much of my tidings!  But this too it behoveth to tell,
   That these masterful men of the cities of the Markmen know full well:
   And they wot of the well-grassed meadows, and the acres of the Mark,
   And our life amidst of the wild-wood like a candle in the dark;
   And they know of our young men's valour and our women's loveliness,
   And our tree would they spoil with destruction if its fruit they may
   never possess.
   For their lust is without a limit, and nought may satiate
   Their ravening maw; and their hunger if ye check it turneth to hate,
   And the blood-fever burns in their bosoms, and torment and anguish and
   woe
   O'er the wide field ploughed by the sword-blade for the coming years
   they sow;
   And ruth is a thing forgotten and all hopes they trample down;
   And whatso thing is steadfast, whatso of good renown,
   Whatso is fair and lovely, whatso is ancient sooth
   In the bloody marl shall they mingle as they laugh for lack of ruth.
   Lo the curse of the world cometh hither; for the men that we took in
   the land
   Said thus, that their host is gathering with many an ordered band
   To fall on the wild-wood passes and flood the lovely Mark,
   As the river over the meadows upriseth in the dark.
   Look to it, O ye kindred! availeth now no word
   But the voice of the clashing of iron, and the sword-blade on the
   sword."

Therewith he made an end, and deeper and longer was the murmur of the
host of freemen, amidst which Bork gat him down from the Speech-Hill, his
weapons clattering about him, and mingled with the men of his kindred.

Then came forth a man of the kin of the Shieldings of the Upper-mark, and
clomb the mound; and he spake in rhyme from beginning to end; for he was
a minstrel of renown:

   "Lo I am a man of the Shieldings and Geirmund is my name;
   A half-moon back from the wild-wood out into the hills I came,
   And I went alone in my war-gear; for we have affinity
   With the Hundings of the Fell-folk, and with them I fain would be;
   For I loved a maid of their kindred.  Now their dwelling was not far
   From the outermost bounds of the Fell-folk, and bold in the battle
   they are,
   And have met a many people, and held their own abode.
   Gay then was the heart within me, as over the hills I rode
   And thought of the mirth of to-morrow and the sweet-mouthed Hunding
   maid
   And their old men wise and merry and their young men unafraid,
   And the hall-glee of the Hundings and the healths o'er the guesting
   cup.
   But as I rode the valley, I saw a smoke go up
   O'er the crest of the last of the grass-hills 'twixt me and the
   Hunding roof,
   And that smoke was black and heavy: so a while I bided aloof,
   And drew my girths the tighter, and looked to the arms I bore
   And handled my spear for the casting; for my heart misgave me sore,
   For nought was that pillar of smoke like the guest-fain cooking-fire.
   I lingered in thought for a minute, then turned me to ride up higher,
   And as a man most wary up over the bent I rode,
   And nigh hid peered o'er the hill-crest adown on the Hunding abode;
   And forsooth 'twas the fire wavering all o'er the roof of old,
   And all in the garth and about it lay the bodies of the bold;
   And bound to a rope amidmost were the women fair and young,
   And youths and little children, like the fish on a withy strung
   As they lie on the grass for the angler before the beginning of night.
   Then the rush of the wrath within me for a while nigh blinded my
   sight;
   Yet about the cowering war-thralls, short dark-faced men I saw,
   Men clad in iron armour, this way and that way draw,
   As warriors after the battle are ever wont to do.
   Then I knew them for the foemen and their deeds to be I knew,
   And I gathered the reins together to ride down the hill amain,
   To die with a good stroke stricken and slay ere I was slain.
   When lo, on the bent before me rose the head of a brown-faced man,
   Well helmed and iron-shielded, who some Welsh speech began
   And a short sword brandished against me; then my sight cleared and I
   saw
   Five others armed in likewise up hill and toward me draw,
   And I shook the spear and sped it and clattering on his shield
   He fell and rolled o'er smitten toward the garth and the Fell-folk's
   field.

   "But my heart changed with his falling and the speeding of my stroke,
   And I turned my horse; for within me the love of life awoke,
   And I spurred, nor heeded the hill-side, but o'er rough and smooth I
   rode
   Till I heard no chase behind me; then I drew rein and abode.
   And down in a dell was I gotten with a thorn-brake in its throat,
   And heard but the plover's whistle and the blackbird's broken note
   'Mid the thorns; when lo! from a thorn-twig away the blackbird swept,
   And out from the brake and towards me a naked man there crept,
   And straight I rode up towards him, and knew his face for one
   I had seen in the hall of the Hundings ere its happy days were done.
   I asked him his tale, but he bade me forthright to bear him away;
   So I took him up behind me, and we rode till late in the day,
   Toward the cover of the wild-wood, and as swiftly as we might.
   But when yet aloof was the thicket and it now was moonless night,
   We stayed perforce for a little, and he told me all the tale:
   How the aliens came against them, and they fought without avail
   Till the Roof o'er their heads was burning and they burst forth on the
   foe,
   And were hewn down there together; nor yet was the slaughter slow.
   But some they saved for thralldom, yea, e'en of the fighting men,
   Or to quell them with pains; so they stripped them; and this man
   espying just then
   Some chance, I mind not whatwise, from the garth fled out and away.

   "Now many a thing noteworthy of these aliens did he say,
   But this I bid you hearken, lest I wear the time for nought,
   That still upon the Markmen and the Mark they set their thought;
   For they questioned this man and others through a go-between in words
   Of us, and our lands and our chattels, and the number of our swords;
   Of the way and the wild-wood passes and the winter and his ways.
   Now look to see them shortly; for worn are fifteen days
   Since in the garth of the Hundings I saw them dight for war,
   And a hardy folk and ready and a swift-foot host they are."

Therewith Geirmund went down clattering from the Hill and stood with his
company.  But a man came forth from the other side of the ring, and clomb
the Hill: he was a red-haired man, rather big, clad in a skin coat, and
bearing a bow in his hand and a quiver of arrows at his back, and a
little axe hung by his side.  He said:

"I dwell in the House of the Hrossings of the Mid-mark, and I am now made
a man of the kindred: howbeit I was not born into it; for I am the son of
a fair and mighty woman of a folk of the Kymry, who was taken in war
while she went big with me; I am called Fox the Red.

"These Romans have I seen, and have not died: so hearken! for my tale
shall be short for what there is in it.

"I am, as many know, a hunter of Mirkwood, and I know all its ways and
the passes through the thicket somewhat better than most.

"A moon ago I fared afoot from Mid-mark through Upper-mark into the
thicket of the south, and through it into the heath country; and I went
over a neck and came in the early dawn into a little dale when somewhat
of mist still hung over it.  At the dale's end I saw a man lying asleep
on the grass under a quicken tree, and his shield and sword hanging over
his head to a bough thereof, and his horse feeding hoppled higher up the
dale.

"I crept up softly to him with a shaft nocked on the string, but when I
drew near I saw him to be of the sons of the Goths.  So I doubted
nothing, but laid down my bow, and stood upright, and went to him and
roused him, and he leapt up, and was wroth.

"I said to him, 'Wilt thou be wroth with a brother of the kindred meeting
him in unpeopled parts?'

"But he reached out for his weapons; but ere he could handle them I ran
in on him so that he gat not his sword, and had scant time to smite at me
with a knife which he drew from his waist.

"I gave way before him for he was a very big man, and he rushed past me,
and I dealt him a blow on the side of the head with my little axe which
is called the War-babe, and gave him a great wound: and he fell on the
grass, and as it happened that was his bane.

"I was sorry that I had slain him, since he was a man of the Goths:
albeit otherwise he had slain me, for he was very wroth and dazed with
slumber.

"He died not for a while; and he bade me fetch him water; and there was a
well hard by on the other side of the tree; so I fetched it him in a
great shell that I carry, and he drank.  I would have sung the
blood-staunching song over him, for I know it well.  But he said, 'It
availeth nought: I have enough: what man art thou?'

"I said, 'I am a fosterling of the Hrossings, and my mother was taken in
war: my name is Fox.'

"Said he; 'O Fox, I have my due at thy hands, for I am a Markman of the
Elkings, but a guest of the Burgundians beyond the Great River; and the
Romans are their masters and they do their bidding: even so did I who was
but their guest: and I a Markman to fight against the Markmen, and all
for fear and for gold!  And thou an alien-born hast slain their traitor
and their dastard!  This is my due.  Give me to drink again.'

"So did I; and he said; 'Wilt thou do an errand for me to thine own
house?'  'Yea,' said I.

"Said he, 'I am a messenger to the garth of the Romans, that I may tell
the road to the Mark, and lead them through the thicket; and other guides
are coming after me: but not yet for three days or four.  So till they
come there will be no man in the Roman garth to know thee that thou art
not even I myself.  If thou art doughty, strip me when I am dead and do
my raiment on thee, and take this ring from my neck, for that is my
token, and when they ask thee for a word say, "_No limit_"; for that is
the token-word.  Go south-east over the dales keeping Broadshield-fell
square with thy right hand, and let thy wisdom, O Fox, lead thee to the
Garth of the Romans, and so back to thy kindred with all tidings thou
hast gathered--for indeed they come--a many of them.  Give me to drink.'

"So he drank again, and said, 'The bearer of this token is called
Hrosstyr of the River Goths.  He hath that name among dastards.  Thou
shalt lay a turf upon my head.  Let my death pay for my life.'

"Therewith he fell back and died.  So I did as he bade me and took his
gear, worth six kine, and did it on me; I laid turf upon him in that
dale, and hid my bow and my gear in a blackthorn brake hard by, and then
took his horse and rode away.

"Day and night I rode till I came to the garth of the Romans; there I
gave myself up to their watchers, and they brought me to their Duke, a
grim man and hard.  He said in a terrible voice, 'Thy name?'  I said,
'Hrosstyr of the River Goths.'  He said, 'What limit?'  I answered, '_No
limit_.'  'The token!' said he, and held out his hand.  I gave him the
ring.  'Thou art the man,' said he.

"I thought in my heart, 'thou liest, lord,' and my heart danced for joy.

"Then he fell to asking me questions a many, and I answered every one
glibly enough, and told him what I would, but no word of truth save for
his hurt, and my soul laughed within me at my lies; thought I, the
others, the traitors, shall come, and they shall tell him the truth, and
he will not trow it, or at the worst he will doubt them.  But me he
doubted nothing, else had he called in the tormentors to have the truth
of me by pains; as I well saw afterwards, when they questioned with
torments a man and a woman of the hill-folk whom they had brought in
captive.

"I went from him and went all about that garth espying everything,
fearing nothing; albeit there were divers woful captives of the Goths,
who cursed me for a dastard, when they saw by my attire that I was of
their blood.

"I abode there three days, and learned all that I might of the garth and
the host of them, and the fourth day in the morning I went out as if to
hunt, and none hindered me, for they doubted me not.

"So I came my ways home to the Upper-mark, and was guested with the
Geirings.  Will ye that I tell you somewhat of the ways of these Romans
of the garth?  The time presses, and my tale runneth longer than I would.
What will ye?"

Then there arose a murmur, "Tell all, tell all."  "Nay," said the Fox,
"All I may not tell; so much did I behold there during the three days'
stay; but this much it behoveth you to know: that these men have no other
thought save to win the Mark and waste it, and slay the fighting men and
the old carles, and enthrall such as they will, that is, all that be fair
and young, and they long sorely for our women either to have or to sell.

"As for their garth, it is strongly walled about with a dyke newly dug;
on the top thereof are they building a wall made of clay, and burned like
pots into ashlar stones hard and red, and these are laid in lime.

"It is now the toil of the thralls of our blood whom they have taken,
both men and women, to dig that clay and to work it, and bear it to
kilns, and to have for reward scant meat and many stripes.  For it is a
grim folk, that laugheth to see others weep.

"Their men-at-arms are well dight and for the most part in one way: they
are helmed with iron, and have iron on their breasts and reins, and bear
long shields that cover them to the knees.  They are girt with a sax and
have a heavy casting-spear.  They are dark-skinned and ugly of aspect,
surly and of few words: they drink little, and eat not much.

"They have captains of tens and of hundreds over them, and that war-duke
over all; he goeth to and fro with gold on his head and his breast, and
commonly hath a cloak cast over him of the colour of the crane's-bill
blossom.

"They have an altar in the midst of their burg, and thereon they
sacrifice to their God, who is none other than their banner of war, which
is an image of the ravening eagle with outspread wings; but yet another
God they have, and look you! it is a wolf, as if they were of the kin of
our brethren; a she-wolf and two man-children at her dugs; wonderful is
this.

"I tell you that they are grim; and know it by this token: those captains
of tens, and of hundreds, spare not to smite the warriors with staves
even before all men, when all goeth not as they would; and yet, though
they be free men, and mighty warriors, they endure it and smite not in
turn.  They are a most evil folk.

"As to their numbers, they of the burg are hard on three thousand footmen
of the best; and of horsemen five hundred, nowise good; and of bowmen and
slingers six hundred or more: their bows weak; their slingers cunning
beyond measure.  And the talk is that when they come upon us they shall
have with them some five hundred warriors of the Over River Goths, and
others of their own folk."

Then he said:

   "O men of the Mark, will ye meet them in the meadows and the field,
   Or will ye flee before them and have the wood for a shield?
   Or will ye wend to their war-burg with weapons cast away,
   With your women and your children, a peace of them to pray?
   So doing, not all shall perish; but most shall long to die
   Ere in the garths of the Southland two moons have loitered by."

Then rose the rumour loud and angry mingled with the rattle of swords and
the clash of spears on shields; but Fox said:

"Needs must ye follow one of these three ways.  Nay, what say I? there
are but two ways and not three; for if ye flee they shall follow you to
the confines of the earth.  Either these Welsh shall take all, and our
lives to boot, or we shall hold to all that is ours, and live merrily.
The sword doometh; and in three days it may be the courts shall be
hallowed: small is the space between us."

Therewith he also got him down from the Hill, and joined his own house:
and men said that he had spoken well and wisely.  But there arose a noise
of men talking together on these tidings; and amidst it an old warrior of
the Nether-mark strode forth and up to the Hill-top.  Gaunt and stark he
was to look on; and all men knew him and he was well-beloved, so all held
their peace as he said:

"I am Otter of the Laxings: now needeth but few words till the War-duke
is chosen, and we get ready to wend our ways in arms.  Here have ye heard
three good men and true tell of our foes, and this last, Fox the Red,
hath seen them and hath more to tell when we are on the way; nor is the
way hard to find.  It were scarce well to fall upon these men in their
garth and war-burg; for hard is a wall to slay.  Better it were to meet
them in the Wild-wood, which may well be a friend to us and a wall, but
to them a net.  O Agni of the Daylings, thou warder of the Thing-stead,
bid men choose a War-duke if none gainsay it."

And without more words he clattered down the Hill, and went and stood
with the Laxing band.  But the old Dayling arose and blew the horn, and
there was at once a great silence, amidst which he said:

"Children of Slains-father, doth the Folk go to the war?"

There was no voice but shouted "yea," and the white swords sprang aloft,
and the westering sun swept along a half of them as they tossed to and
fro, and the others showed dead-white and fireless against the dark wood.

Then again spake Agni:

"Will ye choose the War-duke now and once, or shall it be in a while,
after others have spoken?"

And the voice of the Folk went up, "Choose!  Choose!"

Said Agni: "Sayeth any aught against it?"  But no voice of a gainsayer
was heard, and Agni said:

"Children of Tyr, what man will ye have for a leader and a duke of war?"

Then a great shout sprang up from amidst the swords: "We will have
Thiodolf; Thiodolf the Wolfing!"

Said Agni: "I hear no other name; are ye of one mind? hath any aught to
say against it?  If that be so, let him speak now, and not forbear to
follow in the wheatfield of the spears.  Speak, ye that will not follow
Thiodolf!"

No voice gainsaid him: then said the Dayling: "Come forth thou War-duke
of the Markmen! take up the gold ring from the horns of the altar, set it
on thine arm and come up hither!"

Then came forth Thiodolf into the sun, and took up the gold ring from
where it lay, and did it on his arm.  And this was the ring of the leader
of the folk whenso one should be chosen: it was ancient and daintily
wrought, but not very heavy: so ancient it was that men said it had been
wrought by the dwarfs.

So Thiodolf went up on to the hill, and all men cried out on him for joy,
for they knew his wisdom in war.  Many wondered to see him unhelmed, but
they had a deeming that he must have made oath to the Gods thereof and
their hearts were glad of it.  They took note of the dwarf-wrought
hauberk, and even from a good way off they could see what a treasure of
smith's work it was, and they deemed it like enough that spells had been
sung over it to make it sure against point and edge: for they knew that
Thiodolf was well beloved of the Gods.

But when Thiodolf was on the Hill of Speech, he said:

"Men of the kindreds, I am your War-duke to-day; but it is oftenest the
custom when ye go to war to choose you two dukes, and I would it were so
now.  No child's play is the work that lies before us; and if one leader
chance to fall let there be another to take his place without stop or
stay.  Thou Agni of the Daylings, bid the Folk choose them another duke
if so they will."

Said Agni: "Good is this which our War-duke hath spoken; say then, men of
the Mark, who shall stand with Thiodolf to lead you against the aliens?"

Then was there a noise and a crying of names, and more than two names
seemed to be cried out; but by far the greater part named either Otter of
the Laxings, or Heriulf of the Wolfings.  True it is that Otter was a
very wise warrior, and well known to all the men of the Mark; yet so dear
was Heriulf to them, that none would have named Otter had it not been
mostly their custom not to choose both War-dukes from one House.

Now spake Agni: "Children of Tyr, I hear you name more than one name: now
let each man cry out clearly the name he nameth."

So the Folk cried the names once more, but this time it was clear that
none was named save Otter and Heriulf; so the Dayling was at point to
speak again, but or ever a word left his lips, Heriulf the mighty, the
ancient of days, stood forth: and when men saw that he would take up the
word there was a great silence.  So he spake:

"Hearken, children!  I am old and war-wise; but my wisdom is the wisdom
of the sword of the mighty warrior, that knoweth which way it should
wend, and hath no thought of turning back till it lieth broken in the
field.  Such wisdom is good against Folks that we have met heretofore; as
when we have fought with the Huns, who would sweep us away from the face
of the earth, or with the Franks or the Burgundians, who would quell us
into being something worser than they be.  But here is a new foe, and new
wisdom, and that right shifty, do we need to meet them.  One wise duke
have ye gotten, Thiodolf to wit; and he is young beside me and beside
Otter of the Laxings.  And now if ye must needs have an older man to
stand beside him, (and that is not ill) take ye Otter; for old though his
body be, the thought within him is keen and supple like the best of Welsh-
wrought blades, and it liveth in the days that now are: whereas for me,
meseemeth, my thoughts are in the days bygone.  Yet look to it, that I
shall not fail to lead as the sword of the valiant leadeth, or the shaft
shot by the cunning archer.  Choose ye Otter; I have spoken over long."

Then spoke Agni the Dayling, and laughed withal: "One man of the Folk
hath spoken for Otter and against Heriulf--now let others speak if they
will!"

So the cry came forth, "Otter let it be, we will have Otter!"

"Speaketh any against Otter?" said Agni.  But there was no voice raised
against him.

Then Agni said: "Come forth, Otter of the Laxings, and hold the ring with
Thiodolf."

Then Otter went up on to the hill and stood by Thiodolf, and they held
the ring together; and then each thrust his hand and arm through the ring
and clasped hands together, and stood thus awhile, and all the Folk
shouted together.

Then spake Agni: "Now shall we hew the horses and give the gifts to the
Gods."

Therewith he and the two War-dukes came down from the hill; and stood
before the altar; and the nine warriors of the Daylings stood forth with
axes to hew the horses and with copper bowls wherein to catch the blood
of them, and each hewed down his horse to the Gods, but the two War-dukes
slew the tenth and fairest: and the blood was caught in the bowls, and
Agni took a sprinkler and went round about the ring of men, and cast the
blood of the Gods'-gifts over the Folk, as was the custom of those days.

Then they cut up the carcases and burned on the altar the share of the
Gods, and Agni and the War-dukes tasted thereof, and the rest they bore
off to the Daylings' abode for the feast to be holden that night.

Then Otter and Thiodolf spake apart together for awhile, and presently
went up again on to the Speech-Hill, and Thiodolf said:

   "O kindreds of the Markmen; to-morrow with the day
   We shall wend up Mirkwood-water to bar our foes the way;
   And there shall we make our wain-burg on the edges of the wood,
   Where in the days past over at last the aliens stood,
   The Slaughter Tofts ye call it.  There tidings shall we get
   If the curse of the world is awakened, and the serpent crawleth yet
   Amidst the Mirkwood thicket; and when the sooth we know,
   Then bearing battle with us through the thicket shall we go,
   The ancient Wood-wolf's children, and the People of the Shield,
   And the Spear-kin and the Horse-kin, while the others keep the field
   About the warded wain-burg; for not many need we there
   Where amidst of the thickets' tangle and the woodland net they fare,
   And the hearts of the aliens falter and they curse the fight ne'er
   done,
   And wonder who is fighting and which way is the sun."

Thus he spoke; then Agni took up the war-horn again, and blew a blast,
and then he cried out:

   "Now sunder we the Folk-mote! and the feast is for to-night,
   And to-morrow the Wayfaring; But unnamed is the day of the fight;
   O warriors, look ye to it that not long we need abide
   'Twixt the hour of the word we have spoken, and our fair-fame's
   blooming tide!
   For then 'midst the toil and the turmoil shall we sow the seeds of
   peace,
   And the Kindreds' long endurance, and the Goth-folk's great increase."

Then arose the last great shout, and soberly and in due order, kindred by
kindred, they turned and departed from the Thing-stead and went their way
through the wood to the abode of the Daylings.




CHAPTER IX--THE ANCIENT MAN OF THE DAYLINGS


There still hung the more part of the stay-at-homes round about the Roof.
But on the plain beneath the tofts were all the wains of the host drawn
up round about a square like the streets about a market-place; all these
now had their tilts rigged over them, some white, some black, some red,
some tawny of hue; and some, which were of the Beamings, green like the
leafy tree.

The warriors of the host went down into this wain-town, which they had
not fenced in any way, since they in no wise looked for any onset there;
and there were their thralls dighting the feast for them, and a many of
the Dayling kindred, both men and women, went with them; but some men did
the Daylings bring into their Roof, for there was room for a good many
besides their own folk.  So they went over the Bridge of turf into the
garth and into the Great Roof of the Daylings; and amongst these were the
two War-dukes.

So when they came to the dais it was as fair all round about there as
might well be; and there sat elders and ancient warriors to welcome the
guests; and among them was the old carle who had sat on the edge of the
burg to watch the faring of the host, and had shuddered back at the sight
of the Wolfing Banner.

And when the old carle saw the guests, he fixed his eyes on Thiodolf, and
presently came up and stood before him; and Thiodolf looked on the old
man, and greeted him kindly and smiled on him; but the carle spake not
till he had looked on him a while; and at last he fell a-trembling, and
reached his hands out to Thiodolf's bare head, and handled his curls and
caressed them, as a mother does with her son, even if he be a grizzled-
haired man, when there is none by: and at last he said:

   "How dear is the head of the mighty, and the apple of the tree
   That blooms with the life of the people which is and yet shall be!
   It is helmed with ancient wisdom, and the long remembered thought,
   That liveth when dead is the iron, and its very rust but nought.
   Ah! were I but young as aforetime, I would fare to the battle-stead
   And stand amidst of the spear-hail for the praise of the hand and the
   head!"

Then his hands left Thiodolf's head, and strayed down to his shoulders
and his breast, and he felt the cold rings of the hauberk, and let his
hands fall down to his side again; and the tears gushed out of his old
eyes and again he spake:

   "O house of the heart of the mighty, O breast of the battle-lord
   Why art thou coldly hidden from the flickering flame of the sword?
   I know thee not, nor see thee; thou art as the fells afar
   Where the Fathers have their dwelling, and the halls of Godhome are:
   The wind blows wild betwixt us, and the cloud-rack flies along,
   And high aloft enfoldeth the dwelling of the strong;
   They are, as of old they have been, but their hearths flame not for
   me;
   And the kindness of their feast-halls mine eyes shall never see."

Thiodolf's lips still smiled on the old man, but a shadow had come over
his eyes and his brow; and the chief of the Daylings and their mighty
guests stood by listening intently with the knit brows of anxious men;
nor did any speak till the ancient man again betook him to words:

   "I came to the house of the foeman when hunger made me a fool;
   And the foeman said, 'Thou art weary, lo, set thy foot on the stool;'
   And I stretched out my feet,--and was shackled: and he spake with a
   dastard's smile,
   'O guest, thine hands are heavy; now rest them for a while!'
   So I stretched out my hands, and the hand-gyves lay cold on either
   wrist:
   And the wood of the wolf had been better than that feast-hall, had I
   wist
   That this was the ancient pit-fall, and the long expected trap,
   And that now for my heart's desire I had sold the world's goodhap."

Therewith the ancient man turned slowly away from Thiodolf, and departed
sadly to his own place.  Thiodolf changed countenance but little, albeit
those about him looked strangely on him, as though if they durst they
would ask him what these words might be, and if he from his hidden
knowledge might fit a meaning to them.  For to many there was a word of
warning in them, and to some an evil omen of the days soon to be; and
scarce anyone heard those words but he had a misgiving in his heart, for
the ancient man was known to be foreseeing, and wild and strange his
words seemed to them.

But Agni would make light of it, and he said: "Asmund the Old is of good
will, and wise he is; but he hath great longings for the deeds of men,
when he hath tidings of battle; for a great warrior and a red-hand hewer
he hath been in times past; he loves the Kindred, and deems it ill if he
may not fare afield with them; for the thought of dying in the straw is
hateful to him."

"Yea," said another, "and moreover he hath seen sons whom he loved slain
in battle; and when he seeth a warrior in his prime he becometh dear to
him, and he feareth for him."

"Yet," said a third, "Asmund is foreseeing; and may be, Thiodolf, thou
wilt wot of the drift of these words, and tell us thereof."

But Thiodolf spake nought of the matter, though in his heart he pondered
it.

So the guests were led to table, and the feast began, within the hall and
without it, and wide about the plain; and the Dayling maidens went in
bands trimly decked out throughout all the host and served the warriors
with meat and drink, and sang the overword to their lays, and smote the
harp, and drew the bow over the fiddle till it laughed and wailed and
chuckled, and were blithe and merry with all, and great was the glee on
the eve of battle.  And if Thiodolf's heart were overcast, his face
showed it not, but he passed from hall to wain-burg and from wain-burg to
hall again blithe and joyous with all men.  And thereby he raised the
hearts of men, and they deemed it good that they had gotten such a War-
duke, meet to uphold all hearts of men both at the feast and in the fray.




CHAPTER X--THAT CARLINE COMETH TO THE ROOF OF THE WOLFINGS


Now it was three days after this that the women were gathering to the
Women's-Chamber of the Roof of the Wolfings a little before the afternoon
changes into evening.  The hearts of most were somewhat heavy, for the
doubt wherewith they had watched the departure of the fighting-men still
hung about them; nor had they any tidings from the host (nor was it like
that they should have).  And as they were somewhat down-hearted, so it
seemed by the aspect of all things that afternoon.  It was not yet the
evening, as is aforesaid, but the day was worn and worsened, and all
things looked weary.  The sky was a little clouded, but not much; yet was
it murky down in the south-east, and there was a threat of storm in it,
and in the air close round each man's head, and in the very waving of the
leafy boughs.  There was by this time little doing in field and fold (for
the kine were milked), and the women were coming up from the acres and
the meadow and over the open ground anigh the Roof; there was the grass
worn and dusty, and the women that trod it, their feet were tanned and
worn, and dusty also; skin-dry and weary they looked, with the sweat
dried upon them; their girt-up gowns grey and lightless, their
half-unbound hair blowing about them in the dry wind, which had in it no
morning freshness, and no evening coolness.

It was a time when toil was well-nigh done, but had left its aching
behind it; a time for folk to sleep and forget for a little while, till
the low sun should make it evening, and make all things fair with his
level rays; no time for anxious thoughts concerning deeds doing, wherein
the anxious ones could do nought to help.  Yet such thoughts those stay-
at-homes needs must have in the hour of their toil scarce over, their
rest and mirth not begun.

Slowly one by one the women went in by the Women's-door, and the Hall-Sun
sat on a stone hard by, and watched them as they passed; and she looked
keenly at all persons and all things.  She had been working in the acres,
and her hand was yet on the hoe she had been using, and but for her face
her body was as of one resting after toil: her dark blue gown was
ungirded, her dark hair loose and floating, the flowers that had wreathed
it, now faded, lying strewn upon the grass before her: her feet bare for
coolness' sake, her left hand lying loose and open upon her knee.

Yet though her body otherwise looked thus listless, in her face was no
listlessness, nor rest: her eyes were alert and clear, shining like two
stars in the heavens of dawn-tide; her lips were set close, her brow
knit, as of one striving to shape thoughts hard to understand into words
that all might understand.

So she sat noting all things, as woman by woman went past her into the
hall, till at last she slowly rose to her feet; for there came two young
women leading between them that same old carline with whom she had talked
on the Hill-of-Speech.  She looked on the carline steadfastly, but gave
no token of knowing her; but the ancient woman spoke when she came near
to the Hall-Sun, and old as her semblance was, yet did her speech sound
sweet to the Hall-Sun, and indeed to all those that heard it and she
said:

"May we be here to-night, O Hall-Sun, thou lovely Seeress of the mighty
Wolfings? may a wandering woman sit amongst you and eat the meat of the
Wolfings?"

Then spake the Hall-Sun in a sweet measured voice: "Surely mother: all
men who bring peace with them are welcome guests to the Wolfings: nor
will any ask thine errand, but we will let thy tidings flow from thee as
thou wilt.  This is the custom of the kindred, and no word of mine own; I
speak to thee because thou hast spoken to me, but I have no authority
here, being myself but an alien.  Albeit I serve the House of the
Wolfings, and I love it as the hound loveth his master who feedeth him,
and his master's children who play with him.  Enter, mother, and be glad
of heart, and put away care from thee."

Then the old woman drew nigher to her and sat down in the dust at her
feet, for she was now sitting down again, and took her hand and kissed it
and fondled it, and seemed loth to leave handling the beauty of the Hall-
Sun; but she looked kindly on the carline, and smiled on her, and leaned
down to her, and kissed her mouth, and said:

"Damsels, take care of this poor woman, and make her good cheer; for she
is wise of wit, and a friend of the Wolfings; and I have seen her before,
and spoken with her; and she loveth us.  But as for me I must needs be
alone in the meads for a while; and it may be that when I come to you
again, I shall have a word to tell you."

Now indeed it was in a manner true that the Hall-Sun had no authority in
the Wolfing House; yet was she so well beloved for her wisdom and beauty
and her sweet speech, that all hastened to do her will in small matters
and in great, and now as they looked at her after the old woman had
caressed her, it seemed to them that her fairness grew under their eyes,
and that they had never seen her so fair; and the sight of her seemed so
good to them, that the outworn day and its weariness changed to them, and
it grew as pleasant as the first hours of the sunlight, when men arise
happy from their rest, and look on the day that lieth hopeful before them
with all its deeds to be.

So they grew merry, and they led the carline into the Hall with them, and
set her down in the Women's-Chamber, and washed her feet, and gave her
meat and drink, and bade her rest and think of nothing troublous, and in
all wise made her good cheer; and she was merry with them, and praised
their fairness and their deftness, and asked them many questions about
their weaving and spinning and carding; (howbeit the looms were idle as
then because it was midsummer, and the men gone to the war).  And this
they deemed strange, as it seemed to them that all women should know of
such things; but they thought it was a token that she came from far away.

But afterwards she sat among them, and told them pleasant tales of past
times and far countries, and was blithe to them and they to her and the
time wore on toward nightfall in the Women's-Chamber.




CHAPTER XI--THE HALL-SUN SPEAKETH


But for the Hall-Sun; she sat long on that stone by the Women's-door; but
when the evening was now come, she arose and went down through the
cornfields and into the meadow, and wandered away as her feet took her.

Night was falling by then she reached that pool of Mirkwood-water, whose
eddies she knew so well.  There she let the water cover her in the deep
stream, and she floated down and sported with the ripples where the river
left that deep to race over the shallows; and the moon was casting
shadows by then she came up the bank again by the shallow end bearing in
her arms a bundle of the blue-flowering mouse-ear.  Then she clad herself
at once, and went straight as one with a set purpose toward the Great
Roof, and entered by the Man's-door; and there were few men within and
they but old and heavy with the burden of years and the coming of night-
tide; but they wondered and looked to each other and nodded their heads
as she passed them by, as men who would say, There is something toward.

So she went to her sleeping-place, and did on fresh raiment, and came
forth presently clad in white and shod with gold and having her hair
wreathed about with the herb of wonder, the blue-flowering mouse-ear of
Mirkwood-water.  Thus she passed through the Hall, and those elders were
stirred in their hearts when they beheld her beauty.  But she opened the
door of the Women's-Chamber, and stood on the threshold; and lo, there
sat the carline amidst a ring of the Wolfing women, and she telling them
tales of old time such as they had not yet heard; and her eyes were
glittering, and the sweet words were flowing from her mouth; but she sat
straight up like a young woman; and at whiles it seemed to those who
hearkened, that she was no old and outworn woman, but fair and strong,
and of much avail.  But when she heard the Hall-Sun she turned and saw
her on the threshold, and her speech fell suddenly, and all that might
and briskness faded from her, and she fixed her eyes on the Hall-Sun and
looked wistfully and anxiously on her.

Then spake the Hall-Sun standing in the doorway:

   "Hear ye a matter, maidens, and ye Wolfing women all,
   And thou alien guest of the Wolfings!  But come ye up the hall,
   That the ancient men may hearken: for methinks I have a word
   Of the battle of the Kindreds, and the harvest of the sword."

Then all arose up with great joy, for they knew that the tidings were
good, when they looked on the face of the Hall-Sun and beheld the pride
of her beauty unmarred by doubt or pain.

She led them forth to the dais, and there were the sick and the elders
gathered and some ancient men of the thralls: so she stepped lightly up
to her place, and stood under her namesake, the wondrous lamp of ancient
days.  And thus she spake:

   "On my soul there lies no burden, and no tangle of the fight
   In plain or dale or wild-wood enmeshes now my sight.
   I see the Markmen's wain-burg, and I see their warriors go
   As men who wait for battle and the coming of the foe.
   And they pass 'twixt the wood and the wain-burg within earshot of the
   horn,
   But over the windy meadows no sound thereof is borne,
   And all is well amongst them.  To the burg I draw anigh
   And I see all battle-banners in the breeze of morning fly,
   But no Wolfings round their banner and no warrior of the Shield,
   No Geiring and no Hrossing in the burg or on the field."

She held her peace for a little while, and no one dared to speak; then
she lifted up her head and spake:

   "Now I go by the lip of the wild-wood and a sound withal I hear,
   As of men in the paths of the thicket, and a many drawing anear.
   Then, muffled yet by the tree-boles, I hear the Shielding song,
   And warriors blithe and merry with the battle of the strong.
   Give back a little, Markmen, make way for men to pass
   To your ordered battle-dwelling o'er the trodden meadow-grass,
   For alive with men is the wild-wood and shineth with the steel,
   And hath a voice most merry to tell of the Kindreds' weal,
   'Twixt each tree a warrior standeth come back from the spear-strewn
   way,
   And forth they come from the wild-wood and a little band are they."

Then again was she silent; but her head sank not, as of one thinking, as
before it did, but she looked straight forward with bright eyes and
smiling, as she said:

   "Lo, now the guests they are bringing that ye have not seen before;
   Yet guests but ill-entreated; for they lack their shields of war,
   No spear in the hand they carry and with no sax are girt.
   Lo, these are the dreaded foemen, these once so strong to hurt;
   The men that all folk fled from, the swift to drive the spoil,
   The men that fashioned nothing but the trap to make men toil.
   They drew the sword in the cities, they came and struck the stroke
   And smote the shield of the Markmen, and point and edge they broke.
   They drew the sword in the war-garth, they swore to bring aback
   God's gifts from the Markmen houses where the tables never lack.
   O Markmen, take the God-gifts that came on their own feet
   O'er the hills through the Mirkwood thicket the Stone of Tyr to meet!"

Again she stayed her song, which had been loud and joyous, and they who
heard her knew that the Kindreds had gained the day, and whilst the Hall-
Sun was silent they fell to talking of this fair day of battle and the
taking of captives.  But presently she spread out her hands again and
they held their peace, and she said:

   "I see, O Wolfing women, and many a thing I see,
   But not all things, O elders, this eve shall ye learn of me,
   For another mouth there cometh: the thicket I behold
   And the Sons of Tyr amidst it, and I see the oak-trees old,
   And the war-shout ringing round them; and I see the battle-lord
   Unhelmed amidst of the mighty; and I see his leaping sword;
   Strokes struck and warriors falling, and the streaks of spears I see,
   But hereof shall the other tell you who speaketh after me.
   For none other than the Shieldings from out the wood have come,
   And they shift the turn with the Daylings to drive the folk-spear
   home,
   And to follow with the Wolfings and thrust the war-beast forth.
   And so good men deem the tidings that they bid them journey north
   On the feet of a Shielding runner, that Gisli hath to name;
   And west of the water he wendeth by the way that the Wolfings came;
   Now for sleep he tarries never, and no meat is in his mouth
   Till the first of the Houses hearkeneth the tidings of the south;
   Lo, he speaks, and the mead-sea sippeth, and the bread by the way doth
   eat,
   And over the Geiring threshold and outward pass his feet;
   And he breasts the Burg of the Daylings and saith his happy word,
   And stayeth to drink for a minute of the waves of Battleford.
   Lone then by the stream he runneth, and wendeth the wild-wood road,
   And dasheth through the hazels of the Oselings' fair abode,
   And the Elking women know it, and their hearts are glad once more,
   And ye--yea, hearken, Wolfings, for his feet are at the door."




CHAPTER XII--TIDINGS OF THE BATTLE IN MIRKWOOD


As the Hall-Sun made an end they heard in good sooth the feet of the
runner on the hard ground without the hall, and presently the door opened
and he came leaping over the threshold, and up to the table, and stood
leaning on it with one hand, his breast heaving with his last swift run.
Then he spake presently:

"I am Gisli of the Shieldings: Otter sendeth me to the Hall-Sun; but on
the way I was to tell tidings to the Houses west of the Water: so have I
done.  Now is my journey ended; for Otter saith: 'Let the Hall-Sun note
the tidings and send word of them by four of the lightest limbed of the
women, or by lads a-horseback, both west and east of the Water; let her
send the word as it seemeth to her, whether she hath seen it or not.  I
will drink a short draught since my running is over."

Then a damsel brought him a horn of mead and let it come into his hand,
and he drank sighing with pleasure, while the damsel for pleasure of him
and his tidings laid her hand on his shoulder.  Then he set down the horn
and spake:

"We, the Shieldings, with the Geirings, the Hrossings, and the Wolfings,
three hundred warriors and more, were led into the Wood by Thiodolf the
War-duke, beside whom went Fox, who hath seen the Romans.  We were all
afoot; for there is no wide way through the Wood, nor would we have it
otherwise, lest the foe find the thicket easy.  But many of us know the
thicket and its ways; so we made not the easy hard.  I was near the War-
duke, for I know the thicket and am light-foot: I am a bowman.  I saw
Thiodolf that he was unhelmed and bore no shield, nor had he any coat of
fence; nought but a deer-skin frock."

As he said that word, the carline, who had drawn very near to him and was
looking hard at his face, turned and looked on the Hall-Sun and stared at
her till she reddened under those keen eyes: for in her heart began to
gather some knowledge of the tale of her mother and what her will was.

But Gisli went on: "Yet by his side was his mighty sword, and we all knew
it for Throng-plough, and were glad of it and of him and the unfenced
breast of the dauntless.  Six hours we went spreading wide through the
thicket, not always seeing one another, but knowing one another to be
nigh; those that knew the thicket best led, the others followed on.  So
we went till it was high noon on the plain and glimmering dusk in the
thicket, and we saw nought, save here and there a roe, and here and there
a sounder of swine, and coneys where it was opener, and the sun shone and
the grass grew for a little space.  So came we unto where the thicket
ended suddenly, and there was a long glade of the wild-wood, all set
about with great oak-trees and grass thereunder, which I knew well; and
thereof the tale tells that it was a holy place of the folk who abided in
these parts before the Sons of the Goths.  Now will I drink."

So he drank of the horn and said: "It seemeth that Fox had a deeming of
the way the Romans should come; so now we abided in the thicket without
that glade and lay quiet and hidden, spreading ourselves as much about
that lawn of the oak-trees as we might, the while Fox and three others
crept through the wood to espy what might be toward: not long had they
been gone ere we heard a war-horn blow, and it was none of our horns: it
was a long way off, but we looked to our weapons: for men are eager for
the foe and the death that cometh, when they lie hidden in the thicket.  A
while passed, and again we heard the horn, and it was nigher and had a
marvellous voice; then in a while was a little noise of men, not their
voices, but footsteps going warily through the brake to the south, and
twelve men came slowly and warily into that oak-lawn, and lo, one of them
was Fox; but he was clad in the raiment of the dastard of the Goths whom
he had slain.  I tell you my heart beat, for I saw that the others were
Roman men, and one of them seemed to be a man of authority, and he held
Fox by the shoulder, and pointed to the thicket where we lay, and
something he said to him, as we saw by his gesture and face, but his
voice we heard not, for he spake soft.

"Then of those ten men of his he sent back two, and Fox going between
them, as though he should be slain if he misled them; and he and the
eight abided there wisely and warily, standing silently some six feet
from each other, moving scarce at all, but looking like images fashioned
of brown copper and iron; holding their casting-spears (which be
marvellous heavy weapons) and girt with the sax.

"As they stood there, not out of earshot of a man speaking in his wonted
voice, our War-duke made a sign to those about him, and we spread very
quietly to the right hand and the left of him once more, and we drew as
close as might be to the thicket's edge, and those who had bows the
nighest thereto.  Thus then we abided a while again; and again came the
horn's voice; for belike they had no mind to come their ways covertly
because of their pride.

"Soon therewithal comes Fox creeping back to us, and I saw him whisper
into the ear of the War-duke, but heard not the word he said.  I saw that
he had hanging to him two Roman saxes, so I deemed he had slain those
two, and so escaped the Romans.  Maidens, it were well that ye gave me to
drink again, for I am weary and my journey is done."

So again they brought him the horn, and made much of him; and he drank,
and then spake on.

"Now heard we the horn's voice again quite close, and it was sharp and
shrill, and nothing like to the roar of our battle-horns: still was the
wood and no wind abroad, not even down the oak-lawn; and we heard now the
tramp of many men as they thrashed through the small wood and bracken of
the thicket-way; and those eight men and their leader came forward,
moving like one, close up to the thicket where I lay, just where the path
passed into the thicket beset by the Sons of the Goths: so near they were
that I could see the dints upon their armour, and the strands of the wire
on their sax-handles.  Down then bowed the tall bracken on the further
side of the wood-lawn, the thicket crashed before the march of men, and
on they strode into the lawn, a goodly band, wary, alert, and silent of
cries.

"But when they came into the lawn they spread out somewhat to their left
hands, that is to say on the west side, for that way was the clear glade;
but on the east the thicket came close up to them and edged them away.
Therein lay the Goths.

"There they stayed awhile, and spread out but a little, as men marching,
not as men fighting.  A while we let them be; and we saw their captain,
no big man, but dight with very fair armour and weapons; and there drew
up to him certain Goths armed, the dastards of the folk, and another
unarmed, an old man bound and bleeding.  With these Goths had the captain
some converse, and presently he cried out two or three words of Welsh in
a loud voice, and the nine men who were ahead shifted them somewhat away
from us to lead down the glade westward.

"The prey had come into the net, but they had turned their faces toward
the mouth of it.

"Then turned Thiodolf swiftly to the man behind him who carried the war-
horn, and every man handled his weapons: but that man understood, and set
the little end to his mouth, and loud roared the horn of the Markmen, and
neither friend nor foe misdoubted the tale thereof.  Then leaped every
man to his feet, all bow-strings twanged and the cast-spears flew; no man
forebore to shout; each as he might leapt out of the thicket and fell on
with sword and axe and spear, for it was from the bowmen but one shaft
and no more.

"Then might you have seen Thiodolf as he bounded forward like the wild-
cat on the hare, how he had no eyes for any save the Roman captain.
Foemen enough he had round about him after the two first bounds from the
thicket; for the Romans were doing their best to spread, that they might
handle those heavy cast-spears, though they might scarce do it, just come
out of the thicket as they were, and thrust together by that onslaught of
the kindreds falling on from two sides and even somewhat from behind.  To
right and left flashed Throng-plough, while Thiodolf himself scarce
seemed to guide it: men fell before him at once, and close at his heels
poured the Wolfing kindred into the gap, and in a minute of time was he
amidst of the throng and face to face with the gold-dight captain.

"What with the sweep of Throng-plough and the Wolfing onrush, there was
space about him for a great stroke; he gave a side-long stroke to his
right and hewed down a tall Burgundian, and then up sprang the white
blade, but ere its edge fell he turned his wrist, and drove the point
through that Captain's throat just above the ending of his hauberk, so
that he fell dead amidst of his folk.

"All the four kindreds were on them now, and amidst them, and needs must
they give way: but stoutly they fought; for surely no other warriors
might have withstood that onslaught of the Markmen for the twinkling of
an eye: but had the Romans had but the space to have spread themselves
out there, so as to handle their shot-weapons, many a woman's son of us
had fallen; for no man shielded himself in his eagerness, but let the
swiftness of the Onset of point-and-edge shield him; which, sooth to say,
is often a good shield, as here was found.

"So those that were unslain and unhurt fled west along the glade, but not
as dastards, and had not Thiodolf followed hard in the chase according to
his wont, they might even yet have made a fresh stand and spread from oak-
tree to oak-tree across the glade: but as it befel, they might not get a
fair offing so as to disentangle themselves and array themselves in good
order side by side; and whereas the Markmen were fleet of foot, and in
the woods they knew, there were a many aliens slain in the chase or taken
alive unhurt or little hurt: but the rest fled this way and that way into
the thicket, with whom were some of the Burgundians; so there they abide
now as outcasts and men unholy, to be slain as wild-beasts one by one as
we meet them.

"Such then was the battle in Mirkwood.  Give me the mead-horn that I may
drink to the living and the dead, and the memory of the dead, and the
deeds of the living that are to be."

So they brought him the horn, and he waved it over his head and drank
again and spake:

"Sixty and three dead men of the Romans we counted there up and down that
oak-glade; and we cast earth over them; and three dead dastards of the
Goths, and we left them for the wolves to deal with.  And twenty-five men
of the Romans we took alive to be for hostages if need should be, and
these did we Shielding men, who are not very many, bring aback to the
wain-burg; and the Daylings, who are a great company, were appointed to
enter the wood and be with Thiodolf; and me did Otter bid to bear the
tidings, even as I have told you.  And I have not loitered by the way."

Great then was the joy in the Hall; and they took Gisli, and made much of
him, and led him to the bath, and clad him in fine raiment taken from the
coffer which was but seldom opened, because the cloths it held were
precious; and they set a garland of green wheat-ears on his head.  Then
they fell to and spread the feast in the hall; and they ate and drank and
were merry.

But as for speeding the tidings, the Hall-Sun sent two women and two
lads, all a-horseback, to bear the words: the women to remember the words
which she taught them carefully, the lads to be handy with the horses, or
in the ford, or the swimming of the deeps, or in the thicket.  So they
went their ways, down the water: one pair went on the western side, and
the other crossed Mirkwood-water at the shallows (for being Midsummer the
water was but small), and went along the east side, so that all the
kindred might know of the tidings and rejoice.

Great was the glee in the Hall, though the warriors of the House were
away, and many a song and lay they sang: but amidst the first of the
singing they bethought them of the old woman, and would have bidden her
tell them some tale of times past, since she was so wise in the ancient
lore.  But when they sought for her on all sides she was not to be found,
nor could anyone remember seeing her depart from the Hall.  But this had
they no call to heed, and the feast ended, as it began, in great glee.

Albeit the Hall-Sun was troubled about the carline, both that she had
come, and that she had gone: and she determined that the next time she
met her she would strive to have of her a true tale of what she was, and
of all that was toward.




CHAPTER XIII--THE HALL-SUN SAITH ANOTHER WORD


It was no later than the next night, and a many of what thralls were not
with the host were about in the feast-hall with the elders and lads and
weaklings of the House; for last night's tidings had drawn them thither.
Gisli had gone back to his kindred and the wain-burg in the Upper-mark,
and the women were sitting, most of them, in the Women's-Chamber, some of
them doing what little summer work needed doing about the looms, but more
resting from their work in field and acre.

Then came the Hall-Sun forth from her room clad in glittering raiment,
and summoned no one, but went straight to her place on the dais under her
namesake the Lamp, and stood there a little without speaking.  Her face
was pale now, her lips a little open, her eyes set and staring as if they
saw nothing of all that was round about her.

Now went the word through the Hall and the Women's-Chamber that the Hall-
Sun would speak again, and that great tidings were toward; so all folk
came flock-meal to the dais, both thralls and free; and scarce were all
gathered there, ere the Hall-Sun began speaking, and said:

   "The days of the world thrust onward, and men are born therein
   A many and a many, and divers deeds they win
   In the fashioning of stories for the kindreds of the earth,
   A garland interwoven of sorrow and of mirth.
   To the world a warrior cometh; from the world he passeth away,
   And no man then may sunder his good from his evil day.
   By the Gods hath he been tormented, and been smitten by the foe:
   He hath seen his maiden perish, he hath seen his speech-friend go:
   His heart hath conceived a joyance and hath brought it unto birth:
   But he hath not carried with him his sorrow or his mirth.
   He hath lived, and his life hath fashioned the outcome of the deed,
   For the blossom of the people, and the coming kindreds' seed.

   "Thus-wise the world is fashioned, and the new sun of the morn
   Where earth last night was desert beholds a kindred born,
   That to-morrow and to-morrow blossoms all gloriously
   With many a man and maiden for the kindreds yet to be,
   And fair the Goth-folk groweth.  And yet the story saith
   That the deeds that make the summer make too the winter's death,
   That summer-tides unceasing from out the grave may grow
   And the spring rise up unblemished from the bosom of the snow.

   "Thus as to every kindred the day comes once for all
   When yesterday it was not, and to-day it builds the hall,
   So every kindred bideth the night-tide of the day,
   Whereof it knoweth nothing, e'en when noon is past away.
   E'en thus the House of the Wolfings 'twixt dusk and dark doth stand,
   And narrow is the pathway with the deep on either hand.
   On the left are the days forgotten, on the right the days to come,
   And another folk and their story in the stead of the Wolfing home.
   Do the shadows darken about it, is the even here at last?
   Or is this but a storm of the noon-tide that the wind is driving past?

   "Unscathed as yet it standeth; it bears the stormy drift,
   Nor bows to the lightening flashing adown from the cloudy lift.
   I see the hail of battle and the onslaught of the strong,
   And they go adown to the folk-mote that shall bide there over long.
   I see the slain-heaps rising and the alien folk prevail,
   And the Goths give back before them on the ridge o'er the treeless
   vale.
   I see the ancient fallen, and the young man smitten dead,
   And yet I see the War-duke shake Throng-plough o'er his head,
   And stand unhelmed, unbyrnied before the alien host,
   And the hurt men rise around him to win back battle lost;
   And the wood yield up her warriors, and the whole host rushing on,
   And the swaying lines of battle until the lost is won.
   Then forth goes the cry of triumph, as they ring the captives round
   And cheat the crow of her portion and heap the warriors' mound.
   There are faces gone from our feast-hall not the least beloved nor
   worst,
   But the wane of the House of the Wolfings not yet the world hath
   cursed.
   The sun shall rise to-morrow on our cold and dewy roof,
   For they that longed for slaughter were slaughtered far aloof."

She ceased for a little, but her countenance, which had not changed
during her song, changed not at all now: so they all kept silence
although they were rejoicing in this new tale of victory; for they deemed
that she was not yet at the end of her speaking.  And in good sooth she
spake again presently, and said:

   "I wot not what hath befallen nor where my soul may be,
   For confusion is within me and but dimly do I see,
   As if the thing that I look on had happed a while ago.
   They stand by the tofts of a war-garth, a captain of the foe,
   And a man that is of the Goth-folk, and as friend and friend they
   speak,
   But I hear no word they are saying, though for every word I seek.
   And now the mist flows round me and blind I come aback
   To the House-roof of the Wolfings and the hearth that hath no lack."

Her voice grew weaker as she spake the last words, and she sank backward
on to her chair: her clenched hands opened, the lids fell down over her
bright eyes, her breast heaved no more as it had done, and presently she
fell asleep.

The folk were doubtful and somewhat heavy-hearted because of those last
words of hers; but they would not ask her more, or rouse her from her
sleep, lest they should grieve her; so they departed to their beds and
slept for what was yet left of the night.




CHAPTER XIV--THE HALL-SUN IS CAREFUL CONCERNING THE PASSES OF THE WOOD


In the morning early folk arose; and the lads and women who were not of
the night-shift got them ready to go to the mead and the acres; for the
sunshine had been plenty these last days and the wheat was done
blossoming, and all must be got ready for harvest.  So they broke their
fast, and got their tools into their hands: but they were somewhat heavy-
hearted because of those last words of the Hall-Sun, and the doubt of
last night still hung about them, and they were scarcely as merry as men
are wont to be in the morning.

As for the Hall-Sun, she was afoot with the earliest, and was no less,
but mayhap more merry than her wont was, and was blithe with all, both
old and young.

But as they were at the point of going she called to them, and said:

"Tarry a little, come ye all to the dais and hearken to me."

So they all gathered thereto, and she stood in her place and spake.

"Women and elders of the Wolfings, is it so that I spake somewhat of
tidings last night?"

"Yea," said they all.

She said, "And was it a word of victory?"

They answered "yea" again.

"Good is that," she said; "doubt ye not! there is nought to unsay.  But
hearken!  I am nothing wise in war like Thiodolf or Otter of the Laxings,
or as Heriulf the Ancient was, though he was nought so wise as they be.
Nevertheless ye shall do well to take me for your captain, while this
House is bare of warriors."

"Yea, yea," they said, "so will we."

And an old warrior, hight Sorli, who sat in his chair, no longer quite
way-worthy, said:

"Hall-Sun, this we looked for of thee; since thy wisdom is not wholly the
wisdom of a spae-wife, but rather is of the children of warriors: and we
know thine heart to be high and proud, and that thy death seemeth to thee
a small matter beside the life of the Wolfing House."

Then she smiled and said, "Will ye all do my bidding?"

And they all cried out heartily, "Yea, Hall-Sun, that will we."

She said: "Hearken then; ye all know that east of Mirkwood-water, when ye
come to the tofts of the Bearings, and their Great Roof, the thicket
behind them is close, but that there is a wide way cut through it; and
often have I gone there: if ye go by that way, in a while ye come to the
thicket's end and to bare places where the rocks crop up through the
gravel and the woodland loam.  There breed the coneys without number; and
wild-cats haunt the place for that sake, and foxes; and the wood-wolf
walketh there in summer-tide, and hard by the she-wolf hath her litter of
whelps, and all these have enough; and the bald-head erne hangeth over it
and the kite, and also the kestril, for shrews and mice abound there.  Of
these things there is none that feareth me, and none that maketh me
afraid.  Beyond this place for a long way the wood is nowise thick, for
first grow ash-trees about the clefts of the rock and also quicken-trees,
but not many of either; and here and there a hazel brake easy to thrust
through; then comes a space of oak-trees scattered about the lovely wood-
lawn, and then at last the beech-wood close above but clear beneath.  This
I know well, because I myself have gone so far and further; and by this
easy way have I gone so far to the south, that I have come out into the
fell country, and seen afar off the snowy mountains beyond the Great
Water.

"Now fear ye not, but pluck up a heart!  For either I have seen it or
dreamed it, or thought it, that by this road easy to wend the Romans
should come into the Mark.  For shall not those dastards and traitors
that wear the raiment and bodies of the Goths over the hearts and the
lives of foemen, tell them hereof?  And will they not have heard of our
Thiodolf, and this my holy namesake?

"Will they not therefore be saying to themselves, 'Go to now, why should
we wrench the hinges off the door with plenteous labour, when another
door to the same chamber standeth open before us?  This House of the
Wolfings is the door to the treasure chamber of the Markmen; let us fall
on that at once rather than have many battles for other lesser matters,
and then at last have to fight for this also: for having this we have
all, and they shall be our thralls, and we may slaughter what we will,
and torment what we will and deflower what we will, and make our souls
glad with their grief and anguish, and take aback with us to the cities
what we will of the thralls, that their anguish and our joy may endure
the longer.'  Thus will they say: therefore is it my rede that the
strongest and hardiest of you women take horse, a ten of you and one to
lead besides, and ride the shallows to the Bearing House, and tell them
of our rede; which is to watch diligently the ways of the wood; the
outgate to the Mark, and the places where the wood is thin and easy to
travel on: and ye shall bid them give you of their folk as many as they
deem fittest thereto to join your company, so that ye may have a chain of
watchers stretching far into the wilds; but two shall lie without the
wood, their horses ready for them to leap on and ride on the spur to the
wain-burg in the Upper-mark if any tidings befal.

"Now of these eleven I ordain Hrosshild to be the leader and captain, and
to choose for her fellows the stoutest-limbed and heaviest-handed of all
the maidens here: art thou content Hrosshild?"

Then stood Hrosshild forth and said nought, but nodded yea; and soon was
her choice made amid jests and laughter, for this seemed no hard matter
to them.

So the ten got together, and the others fell off from them, and there
stood the ten maidens with Hrosshild, well nigh as strong as men, clean-
limbed and tall, tanned with sun and wind; for all these were unwearied
afield, and oft would lie out a-nights, since they loved the lark's song
better than the mouse's squeak; but as their kirtles shifted at neck and
wrist, you might see their skins as white as privet-flower where they
were wont to be covered.

Then said the Hall-Sun: "Ye have heard the word, see ye to it, Hrosshild,
and take this other word also: Bid the Bearing stay-at-homes bide not the
sword and the torch at home if the Romans come, but hie them over hither,
to hold the Hall or live in the wild-wood with us, as need may be; for
might bides with many.

"But ye maidens, take this counsel for yourselves; do ye each bear with
you a little keen knife, and if ye be taken, and it seem to you that ye
may not bear the smart of the Roman torments (for they be wise in
tormenting), but will speak and bewray us under them, then thrust this
little edge tool into the place of your bodies where the life lieth
closest, and so go to the Gods with a good tale in your mouths: so may
the Almighty God of Earth speed you, and the fathers of the kindred!"

So she spoke; and they made no delay but each one took what axe or spear
or sword she liked best, and two had their bows and quivers of arrows;
and so all folk went forth from the Hall.

Soon were the horses saddled and bridled, and the maidens bestrode them
joyously and set forth on their way, going down the lanes of the wheat,
and rode down speedily toward the shallows of the water, and all cried
good speed after them.  But the others would turn to their day's work,
and would go about their divers errands.  But even as they were at point
to sunder, they saw a swift runner passing by those maidens just where
the acres joined the meadow, and he waved his hand aloft and shouted to
them, but stayed not his running for them, but came up the lanes of the
wheat at his swiftest: so they knew at once that this was again a
messenger from the host, and they stood together and awaited his coming;
and as he drew near they knew him for Egil, the swiftest-footed of the
Wolfings; and he gave a great shout as he came among them; and he was
dusty and way-worn, but eager; and they received him with all love, and
would have brought him to the Hall to wash him and give him meat and
drink, and cherish him in all ways.

But he cried out, "To the Speech-Hill first, to the Speech-Hill first!
But even before that, one word to thee, Hall-Sun!  Saith Thiodolf, Send
ye watchers to look to the entrance into Mid-mark, which is by the
Bearing dwelling; and if aught untoward befalleth let one ride on the
spur with the tidings to the Wain-burg.  For by that way also may peril
come."

Then smiled some of the bystanders, and the Hall-Sun said: "Good is it
when the thought of a friend stirreth betimes in one's own breast.  The
thing is done, Egil; or sawest thou not those ten women, and Hrosshild
the eleventh, as thou camest up into the acres?"

Said Egil; "Fair fall thine hand, Hall-Sun! thou art the Wolfings'
Ransom.  Wend we now to the Speech-Hill."

So did they, and every thrall that was about the dwellings, man, woman,
and child fared with them, and stood about the Speech-Hill: and the dogs
went round about the edge of that assembly, wandering in and out, and
sometimes looking hard on some one whom they knew best, if he cried out
aloud.

But the men-folk gave all their ears to hearkening, and stood as close as
they might.

Then Egil clomb the Speech-Hill, and said.




CHAPTER XV--THEY HEAR TELL OF THE BATTLE ON THE RIDGE


"Ye have heard how the Daylings were appointed to go to help Thiodolf in
driving the folk-spear home to the heart of the Roman host.  So they
went; but six hours thereafter comes one to Otter bidding him send a
great part of the kindreds to him; for that he had had tidings that a
great host of Romans were drawing near the wood-edge, but were not
entered therein, and that fain would he meet them in the open field.

"So the kindreds drew lots, and the lot fell first to the Elkings, who
are a great company, as ye know; and then to the Hartings, the Beamings,
the Alftings, the Vallings (also a great company), the Galtings, (and
they no lesser) each in their turn; and last of all to the Laxings; and
the Oselings prayed to go with the Elkings, and this Otter deemed good,
whereas a many of them be bowmen.

"All these then to the number of a thousand or more entered the wood; and
I was with them, for in sooth I was the messenger.

"No delay made we in the wood, nor went we over warily, trusting to the
warding of the wood by Thiodolf; and there were men with us who knew the
paths well, whereof I was one; so we speedily came through into the open
country.

"Shortly we came upon our folk and the War-duke lying at the foot of a
little hill that went up as a buttress to a long ridge high above us,
whereon we set a watch; and a little brook came down the dale for our
drink.

"Night fell as we came thither; so we slept for a while, but abode not
the morning, and we were afoot (for we had no horses with us) before the
moon grew white.  We took the road in good order, albeit our folk-banners
we had left behind in the burg; so each kindred raised aloft a shield of
its token to be for a banner.  So we went forth, and some swift footmen,
with Fox, who hath seen the Roman war-garth, had been sent on before to
spy out the ways of the foemen.

"Two hours after sunrise cometh one of these, and telleth how he hath
seen the Romans, and how that they are but a short mile hence breaking
their fast, not looking for any onslaught; 'but,' saith he, 'they are on
a high ridge whence they can see wide about, and be in no danger of
ambush, because the place is bare for the most part, nor is there any
cover except here and there down in the dales a few hazels and blackthorn
bushes, and the rushes of the becks in the marshy bottoms, wherein a
snipe may hide, or a hare, but scarce a man; and note that there is no
way up to that ridge but by a spur thereof as bare as my hand; so ye will
be well seen as ye wend up thereto.'

"So spake he in my hearing.  But Thiodolf bade him lead on to that spur,
and old Heriulf, who was standing nigh, laughed merrily and said: 'Yea,
lead on, and speedily, lest the day wane and nothing done save the
hunting of snipes.'

"So on we went, and coming to the hither side of that spur beheld those
others and Fox with them; and he held in his hand an arrow of the aliens,
and his face was all astir with half-hidden laughter, and he breathed
hard, and pointed to the ridge, and somewhat low down on it we saw a
steel cap and three spear-heads showing white from out a little hollow in
its side, but the men hidden by the hollow: so we knew that Fox had been
chased, and that the Romans were warned and wary.

"No delay made the War-duke, but led us up that spur, which was somewhat
steep; and as we rose higher we saw a band of men on the ridge, a little
way down it, not a many; archers and slingers mostly, who abode us till
we were within shot, and then sent a few shots at us, and so fled.  But
two men were hurt with the sling-plummets, and one, and he not
grievously, with an arrow, and not one slain.

"Thus we came up on to the ridge, so that there was nothing between us
and the bare heavens; thence we looked south-east and saw the Romans
wisely posted on the ridge not far from where it fell down steeply to the
north; but on the south, that is to say on their left hands, and all
along the ridge past where we were stayed, the ground sloped gently to
the south-west for a good way, before it fell, somewhat steeply, into
another long dale.  Looking north we saw the outer edge of Mirkwood but a
little way from us, and we were glad thereof; because ere we left our
sleeping-place that morn Thiodolf had sent to Otter another messenger
bidding him send yet more men on to us in case we should be hard-pressed
in the battle; for he had had a late rumour that the Romans were many.
And now when he had looked on the Roman array and noted how wise it was,
he sent three swift-foot ones to take stand on a high knoll which we had
passed on the way, that they might take heed where our folk came out from
the wood and give signal to them by the horn, and lead them to where the
battle should be.

"So we stood awhile and breathed us, and handled our weapons some half a
furlong from the alien host.  They had no earth rampart around them, for
that ridge is waterless, and they could not abide there long, but they
had pitched sharp pales in front of them and they stood in very good
order, as if abiding an onslaught, and moved not when they saw us; for
that band of shooters had joined themselves to them already.  Taken one
with another we deemed them to be more than we were; but their hauberked
footmen with the heavy cast-spears not so many as we by a good deal.

"Now we were of mind to fall on them ere they should fall on us; so all
such of us as had shot-weapons spread out from our company and went forth
a little; and of the others Heriulf stood foremost along with the leaders
of the Beamings and the Elkings; but as yet Thiodolf held aback and led
the midmost company, as his wont was, and the more part of the Wolfings
were with him.

"Thus we ordered ourselves, and awaited a little while yet what the
aliens should do; and presently a war-horn blew amongst them, and from
each flank of their mailed footmen came forth a many bowmen and slingers
and a band of horsemen; and drew within bowshot, the shooters in open
array yet wisely, and so fell to on us, and the horsemen hung aback a
little as yet.

"Their arrow-shot was of little avail, their bowmen fell fast before
ours; but deadly was their sling-shot, and hurt and slew many and some
even in our main battle; for they slung round leaden balls and not
stones, and they aimed true and shot quick; and the men withal were so
light and lithe, never still, but crouching and creeping and bounding
here and there, that they were no easier to hit than coneys amidst of the
fern, unless they were very nigh.

"Howbeit when this storm had endured a while, and we moved but little,
and not an inch aback, and gave them shot for shot, then was another horn
winded from amongst the aliens; and thereat the bowmen cast down their
bows, and the slingers wound their slings about their heads, and they all
came on with swords and short spears and feathered darts, running and
leaping lustily, making for our flanks, and the horsemen set spurs to
their horses and fell on in the very front of our folk like good and
valiant men-at-arms.

"That saw Heriulf and his men, and they set up the war-whoop, and ran
forth to meet them, axe and sword aloft, terribly yet maybe somewhat
unwarily.  The archers and slingers never came within sword-stroke of
them, but fell away before them on all sides; but the slingers fled not
far, but began again with their shot, and slew a many.  Then was a horn
winded, as if to call back the horsemen, who, if they heard, heeded not,
but rode hard on our kindred like valiant warriors who feared not death.
Sooth to say, neither were the horses big or good, nor the men fit for
the work, saving for their hardihood; and their spears were short withal
and their bucklers unhandy to wield.

"Now could it be seen how the Goths gave way before them to let them into
the trap, and then closed around again, and the axes and edge weapons
went awork hewing as in a wood; and Heriulf towered over all the press,
and the Wolf's-sister flashed over his head in the summer morning.

"Soon was that storm over, and we saw the Goths tossing up their spears
over the slain, and horses running loose and masterless adown over the
westward-lying slopes, and a few with their riders still clinging to
them.  Yet some, sore hurt by seeming, galloping toward the main battle
of the Romans.

"Unwarily then fared the children of Tyr that were with Heriulf; for by
this time they were well nigh within shot of the spears of those mighty
footmen of the Romans: and on their flanks were the slingers, and the
bowmen, who had now gotten their bows again; and our bowmen, though they
shot well and strong, were too few to quell them; and indeed some of them
had cast by their bows to join in Heriulf's storm.  Also the lie of the
ground was against us, for it sloped up toward the Roman array at first
very gently, but afterwards steeply enough to breathe a short-winded man.
Also behind them were we of the other kindreds, whom Thiodolf had ordered
into the wedge-array; and we were all ready to move forward, so that had
they abided somewhat, all had been well and better.

"So did they not, but straightway set up the Victory-whoop and ran
forward on the Roman host.  And these were so ordered that, as aforesaid,
they had before them sharp piles stuck into the earth and pointed against
us, as we found afterwards to our cost; and within these piles stood the
men some way apart from each other, so as to handle their casting spears,
and in three ranks were they ordered and many spears could be cast at
once, and if any in the front were slain, his fellow behind him took his
place.

"So now the storm of war fell at once upon our folk, and swift and fierce
as was their onslaught yet were a many slain and hurt or ever they came
to the piles aforesaid.  Then saw they death before them and heeded it
nought, but tore up the piles and dashed through them, and fell in on
those valiant footmen.  Short is the tale to tell: wheresoever a sword or
spear of the Goths was upraised there were three upon him, and saith Toti
of the Beamings, who was hurt and crawled away and yet lives, that on
Heriulf there were six at first and then more; and he took no thought of
shielding himself, but raised up the Wolf's-sister and hewed as the
woodman in the thicket, when night cometh and hunger is on him.  There
fell Heriulf the Ancient and many a man of the Beamings and the Elkings
with him, and many a Roman.

"But amidst the slain and the hurt our wedge-array moved forward slowly
now, warily shielded against the plummets and shafts on either side; and
when the Romans saw our unbroken array, and Thiodolf the first with
Throng-plough naked in his hand, they chased not such men of ours unhurt
or little hurt, as drew aback from before them: so these we took amongst
us, and when we had gotten all we might, and held a grim face to the foe,
we drew aback little by little, still facing them till we were out of
shot of their spears, though the shot of the arrows and the
sling-plummets ceased not wholly from us.  Thus ended Heriulf's Storm."

Then he rested from his speaking for a while, and none said aught, but
they gazed on him as if he bore with him a picture of the battle, and
many of the women wept silently for Heriulf, and yet more of the younger
ones were wounded to the heart when they thought of the young men of the
Elkings, and the Beamings, since with both those houses they had
affinity; and they lamented the loves that they had lost, and would have
asked concerning their own speech-friends had they durst.  But they held
their peace till the tale was told out to an end.

Then Egil spake again:

"No long while had worn by in Heriulf's Storm, and though men's hearts
were nothing daunted, but rather angered by what had befallen, yet would
Thiodolf wear away the time somewhat more, since he hoped for succour
from the Wain-burg and the Wood; and he would not that any of these
Romans should escape us, but would give them all to Tyr, and to be a
following to Heriulf the Old and the Great.

"So there we abided a while moving nought, and Thiodolf stood with Throng-
plough on his shoulder, unhelmed, unbyrnied, as though he trusted to the
kindred for all defence.  Nor for their part did the Romans dare to leave
their vantage-ground, when they beheld what grim countenance we made
them.

"Albeit, when we had thrice made as if we would fall on, and yet they
moved not, whereas it trieth a man sorely to stand long before the
foeman, and do nought but endure, and whereas many of our bowmen were
slain or hurt, and the rest too few to make head against the shot-weapons
of the aliens, then at last we began to draw nearer and a little nearer,
not breaking the wedge-array; and at last, just before we were within
shot of the cast-spears of their main battle, loud roared our war-horn:
then indeed we broke the wedge-array, but orderly as we knew how,
spreading out from right and left of the War-duke till we were facing
them in a long line: one minute we abode thus, and then ran forth through
the spear-storm: and even therewith we heard, as it were, the echo of our
own horn, and whoso had time to think betwixt the first of the storm and
the handstrokes of the Romans deemed that now would be coming fresh
kindreds for our helping.

"Not long endured the spear-rain, so swift we were, neither were we in
one throng as betid in Heriulf's Storm, but spread abroad, each trusting
in the other that none thought of the backward way.

"Though we had the ground against us we dashed like fresh men at their
pales, and were under the weapons at once.  Then was the battle grim;
they could not thrust us back, nor did we break their array with our
first storm; man hewed at man as if there were no foes in the world but
they two: sword met sword, and sax met sax; it was thrusting and hewing
with point and edge, and no long-shafted weapons were of any avail; there
we fought hand to hand and no man knew by eyesight how the battle went
two yards from where he fought, and each one put all his heart in the
stroke he was then striking, and thought of nothing else.

"Yet at the last we felt that they were faltering and that our work was
easier and our hope higher; then we cried our cries and pressed on
harder, and in that very nick of time there arose close behind us the
roar of the Markmen's horn and the cries of the kindreds answering ours.
Then such of the Romans as were not in the very act of smiting, or
thrusting, or clinging or shielding, turned and fled, and the whoop of
victory rang around us, and the earth shook, and past the place of the
slaughter rushed the riders of the Goths; for they had sent horsemen to
us, and the paths were grown easier for our much treading of them.  Then
I beheld Thiodolf, that he had just slain a foe, and clear was the space
around him, and he rushed sideways and caught hold of the stirrup of
Angantyr of the Bearings, and ran ten strides beside him, and then
bounded on afoot swifter than the red horses of the Bearings, urging on
the chase, as his wont was.

"But we who were wearier, when we had done our work, stood still between
the living and the dead, between the freemen of the Mark and their war-
thralls.  And in no long while there came back to us Thiodolf and the
chasers, and we made a great ring on the field of the slain, and sang the
Song of Triumph; and it was the Wolfing Song that we sang.

"Thus then ended Thiodolf's Storm."

When he held his peace there was but little noise among the
stay-at-homes, for still were they thinking about the deaths of their
kindred and their lovers.  But Egil spoke again.

"Yet within that ring lay the sorrow of our hearts; for Odin had called a
many home, and there lay their bodies; and the mightiest was Heriulf; and
the Romans had taken him up from where he fell, and cast him down out of
the way, but they had not stripped him, and his hand still gripped the
Wolf's-sister.  His shield was full of shafts of arrows and spears; his
byrny was rent in many places, his helm battered out of form.  He had
been grievously hurt in the side and in the thigh by cast-spears or ever
he came to hand-blows with the Romans, but moreover he had three great
wounds from the point of the sax, in the throat, in the side, in the
belly, each enough for his bane.  His face was yet fair to look on, and
we deemed that he had died smiling.

"At his feet lay a young man of the Beamings in a gay green coat, and
beside him was the head of another of his House, but his green-clad body
lay some yards aloof.  There lay of the Elkings a many.  Well may ye
weep, maidens, for them that loved you.  Now fare they to the Gods a
goodly company, but a goodly company is with them.

"Seventy and seven of the Sons of the Goths lay dead within the Roman
battle, and fifty-four on the slope before it; and to boot there were
twenty-four of us slain by the arrows and plummets of the shooters, and a
many hurt withal.

"But there were no hurt men inside the Roman array or before it.  All
were slain outright, for the hurt men either dragged themselves back to
our folk, or onward to the Roman ranks, that they might die with one more
stroke smitten.

"Now of the aliens the dead lay in heaps in that place, for grim was the
slaughter when the riders of the Bearings and the Wormings fell on the
aliens; and a many of the foemen scorned to flee, but died where they
stood, craving no peace; and to few of them was peace given.  There fell
of the Roman footmen five hundred and eighty and five, and the remnant
that fled was but little: but of the slingers and bowmen but eighty and
six were slain, for they were there to shoot and not to stand; and they
were nimble and fleet of foot, men round of limb, very dark-skinned, but
not foul of favour."

Then he said:

   "There are men through the dusk a-faring, our speech-fiends and our
   kin,
   No more shall they crave our helping, nor ask what work to win;
   They have done their deeds and departed when they had holpen the
   House,
   So high their heads are holden, and their hurts are glorious
   With the story of strokes stricken, and new weapons to be met,
   And new scowling of foes' faces, and new curses unknown yet.
   Lo, they dight the feast in Godhome, and fair are the tables spread,
   Late come, but well-beloved is every war-worn head,
   And the God-folk and the Fathers, as these cross the tinkling bridge,
   Crowd round and crave for stories of the Battle on the Ridge."

Therewith he came down from the Speech-Hill and the women-folk came round
about him, and they brought him to the Hall, and washed him, and gave him
meat and drink; and then would he sleep, for he was weary.

Howbeit some of the women could not refrain themselves, but must needs
ask after their speech-friends who had been in the battle; and he
answered as he could, and some he made glad, and some sorry; and as to
some, he could not tell them whether their friends were alive or dead.  So
he went to his place and fell asleep and slept long, while the women went
down to acre and meadow, or saw to the baking of bread or the sewing of
garments, or went far afield to tend the neat and the sheep.

Howbeit the Hall-Sun went not with them; but she talked with that old
warrior, Sorli, who was now halt and grown unmeet for the road, but was a
wise man; and she and he together with some old carlines and a few young
lads fell to work, and saw to many matters about the Hall and the garth
that day; and they got together what weapons there were both for shot and
for the handplay, and laid them where they were handy to come at, and
they saw to the meal in the hall that there was provision for many days;
and they carried up to a loft above the Women's-Chamber many great
vessels of water, lest the fire should take the Hall; and they looked
everywhere to the entrances and windows and had fastenings and bolts and
bars fashioned and fitted to them; and saw that all things were trim and
stout.  And so they abided the issue.




CHAPTER XVI--HOW THE DWARF-WROUGHT HAUBERK WAS BROUGHT AWAY FROM THE HALL
OF THE DAYLINGS


Now it must be told that early in the morning, after the night when Gisli
had brought to the Wolfing Stead the tidings of the Battle in the Wood, a
man came riding from the south to the Dayling abode.  It was just before
sunrise, and but few folk were stirring about the dwellings.  He rode up
to the Hall and got off his black horse, and tied it to a ring in the
wall by the Man's-door, and went in clashing, for he was in his battle-
gear, and had a great wide-rimmed helm on his head.

Folk were but just astir in the Hall, and there came an old woman to him,
and looked on him and saw by his attire that he was a man of the Goths
and of the Wolfing kindred; so she greeted him kindly: but he said:

"Mother, I am come hither on an errand, and time presses."

Said she: "Yea, my son, or what tidings bearest thou from the south? for
by seeming thou art new-come from the host."

Said he: "The tidings are as yesterday, save that Thiodolf will lead the
host through the wild-wood to look for the Romans beyond it: therefore
will there soon be battle again.  See ye, Mother, hast thou here one that
knoweth this ring of Thiodolf's, if perchance men doubt me when I say
that I am sent on my errand by him?"

"Yea," she said, "Agni will know it; since he knoweth all the chief men
of the Mark; but what is thine errand, and what is thy name?"

"It is soon told," said he, "I am a Wolfing hight Thorkettle, and I come
to have away for Thiodolf the treasure of the world, the Dwarf-wrought
Hauberk, which he left with you when we fared hence to the south three
days ago.  Now let Agni come, that I may have it, for time presses
sorely."

There were three or four gathered about them now, and a maiden of them
said: "Shall I bring Agni hither, mother?"

"What needeth it?" said the carline, "he sleepeth, and shall be hard to
awaken; and he is old, so let him sleep.  I shall go fetch the hauberk,
for I know where it is, and my hand may come on it as easily as on mine
own girdle."

So she went her ways to the treasury where were the precious things of
the kindred; the woven cloths were put away in fair coffers to keep them
clean from the whirl of the Hall-dust and the reek; and the vessels of
gold and some of silver were standing on the shelves of a cupboard before
which hung a veil of needlework: but the weapons and war-gear hung upon
pins along the wall, and many of them had much fair work on them, and
were dight with gold and gems: but amidst them all was the wondrous
hauberk clear to see, dark grey and thin, for it was so wondrously
wrought that it hung in small compass.  So the carline took it down from
the pin, and handled it, and marvelled at it, and said:

"Strange are the hands that have passed over thee, sword-rampart, and in
strange places of the earth have they dwelt!  For no smith of the
kindreds hath fashioned thee, unless he had for his friend either a God
or a foe of the Gods.  Well shalt thou wot of the tale of sword and spear
ere thou comest back hither!  For Thiodolf shall bring thee where the
work is wild."

Then she went with the hauberk to the new-come warrior, and made no
delay, but gave it to him, and said:

"When Agni awaketh, I shall tell him that Thorkettle of the Wolfings hath
borne aback to Thiodolf the Treasure of the World, the Dwarf-wrought
Hauberk."

Then Thorkettle took it and turned to go; but even therewith came old
Asmund from out of his sleeping-place, and gazed around the Hall, and his
eyes fell on the shape of the Wolfing as he was going out of the door,
and he asked the carline.

"What doeth he here?  What tidings is there from the host?  For my soul
was nought unquiet last night."

"It is a little matter," she said; "the War-duke hath sent for the
wondrous Byrny that he left in our treasury when he departed to meet the
Romans.  Belike there shall be a perilous battle, and few hearts need a
stout sword-wall more than Thiodolf's."

As she spoke, Thorkettle had passed the door, and got into his saddle,
and sat his black horse like a mighty man as he slowly rode down the turf
bridge that led into the plain.  And Asmund went to the door and stood
watching him till he set spurs to his horse, and departed a great gallop
to the south.  Then said Asmund:

   "What then are the Gods devising, what wonders do they will?
   What mighty need is on them to work the kindreds ill,
   That the seed of the Ancient Fathers and a woman of their kin
   With her all unfading beauty must blend herself therein?
   Are they fearing lest the kindreds should grow too fair and great,
   And climb the stairs of God-home, and fashion all their fate,
   And make all earth so merry that it never wax the worse,
   Nor need a gift from any, nor prayers to quench the curse?
   Fear they that the Folk-wolf, growing as the fire from out the spark
   Into a very folk-god, shall lead the weaponed Mark
   From wood to field and mountain, to stand between the earth
   And the wrights that forge its thraldom and the sword to slay its
   mirth?
   Fear they that the sons of the wild-wood the Loathly Folk shall quell,
   And grow into Gods thereafter, and aloof in God-home dwell?"

Therewith he turned back into the Hall, and was heavy-hearted and dreary
of aspect; for he was somewhat foreseeing; and it may not be hidden that
this seeming Thorkettle was no warrior of the Wolfings, but the Wood-Sun
in his likeness; for she had the power and craft of shape-changing.




CHAPTER XVII--THE WOOD-SUN SPEAKETH WITH THIODOLF


Now the Markmen laid Heriulf in howe on the ridge-crest where he had
fallen, and heaped a mighty howe over him that could be seen from far,
and round about him they laid the other warriors of the kindreds.  For
they deemed it was fittest that they should lie on the place whose story
they had fashioned.  But they cast earth on the foemen lower down on the
westward-lying bents.

The sun set amidst their work, and night came on; and Thiodolf was weary
and would fain rest him and sleep: but he had many thoughts, and pondered
whitherward he should lead the folk, so as to smite the Romans once
again, and he had a mind to go apart and be alone for rest and slumber;
so he spoke to a man of the kindred named Solvi in whom he put all trust,
and then he went down from the ridge, and into a little dale on the
southwest side thereof, a furlong from the place of the battle.  A beck
ran down that dale, and the further end of it was closed by a little wood
of yew trees, low, but growing thick together, and great grey stones were
scattered up and down on the short grass of the dale.  Thiodolf went down
to the brook-side, and to a place where it trickled into a pool, whence
it ran again in a thin thread down the dale, turning aside before it
reached the yew-wood to run its ways under low ledges of rock into a
wider dale.  He looked at the pool and smiled to himself as if he had
thought of something that pleased him; then he drew a broad knife from
his side, and fell to cutting up turfs till he had what he wanted; and
then he brought stones to the place, and built a dam across the mouth of
the pool, and sat by on a great stone to watch it filling.

As he sat he strove to think about the Roman host and how he should deal
with it; but despite himself his thoughts wandered, and made for him
pictures of his life that should be when this time of battle was over; so
that he saw nothing of the troubles that were upon his hands that night,
but rather he saw himself partaking in the deeds of the life of man.
There he was between the plough-stilts in the acres of the kindred when
the west wind was blowing over the promise of early spring; or smiting
down the ripe wheat in the hot afternoon amidst the laughter and merry
talk of man and maid; or far away over Mirkwood-water watching the edges
of the wood against the prowling wolf and lynx, the stars just beginning
to shine over his head, as now they were; or wending the windless woods
in the first frosts before the snow came, the hunter's bow or javelin in
hand: or coming back from the wood with the quarry on the sledge across
the snow, when winter was deep, through the biting icy wind and the whirl
of the drifting snow, to the lights and music of the Great Roof, and the
merry talk therein and the smiling of the faces glad to see the hunting-
carles come back; and the full draughts of mead, and the sweet rest a
night-tide when the north wind was moaning round the ancient home.

All seemed good and fair to him, and whiles he looked around him, and saw
the long dale lying on his left hand and the dark yews in its jaws
pressing up against the rock-ledges of the brook, and on his right its
windings as the ground rose up to the buttresses of the great ridge.  The
moon was rising over it, and he heard the voice of the brook as it
tinkled over the stones above him; and the whistle of the plover and the
laugh of the whimbrel came down the dale sharp and clear in the calm
evening; and sounding far away, because the great hill muffled them, were
the voices of his fellows on the ridge, and the songs of the warriors and
the high-pitched cries of the watch.  And this also was a part of the
sweet life which was, and was to be; and he smiled and was happy and
loved the days that were coming, and longed for them, as the young man
longs for the feet of his maiden at the trysting-place.

So as he sat there, the dreams wrapping him up from troublous thoughts,
at last slumber overtook him, and the great warrior of the Wolfings sat
nodding like an old carle in the chimney ingle, and he fell asleep, his
dreams going with him, but all changed and turned to folly and emptiness.

He woke with a start in no long time; the night was deep, the wind had
fallen utterly, and all sounds were stilled save the voice of the brook,
and now and again the cry of the watchers of the Goths.  The moon was
high and bright, and the little pool beside him glittered with it in all
its ripples; for it was full now and trickling over the lip of his dam.
So he arose from the stone and did off his war-gear, casting
Throng-plough down into the grass beside him, for he had been minded to
bathe him, but the slumber was still on him, and he stood musing while
the stream grew stronger and pushed off first one of his turfs and then
another, and rolled two or three of the stones over, and then softly
thrust all away and ran with a gush down the dale, filling all the little
bights by the way for a minute or two; he laughed softly thereat, and
stayed the undoing of his kirtle, and so laid himself down on the grass
beside the stone looking down the dale, and fell at once into a dreamless
sleep.

When he awoke again, it was yet night, but the moon was getting lower and
the first beginnings of dawn were showing in the sky over the ridge; he
lay still a moment gathering his thoughts and striving to remember where
he was, as is the wont of men waking from deep sleep; then he leapt to
his feet, and lo, he was face to face with a woman, and she who but the
Wood-Sun? and he wondered not, but reached out his hand to touch her,
though he had not yet wholly cast off the heaviness of slumber or
remembered the tidings of yesterday.

She drew aback a little from him, and his eyes cleared of the slumber,
and he saw her that she was scantily clad in black raiment, barefoot,
with no gold ring on her arms or necklace on her neck, or crown about her
head.  But she looked so fair and lovely even in that end of the night-
tide, that he remembered all her beauty of the day and the sunshine, and
he laughed aloud for joy of the sight of her, and said:

"What aileth thee, O Wood-Sun, and is this a new custom of thy kindred
and the folk of God-home that their brides array themselves like thralls
new-taken, and as women who have lost their kindred and are outcast?  Who
then hath won the Burg of the Anses, and clomb the rampart of God-home?"

But she spoke from where she stood in a voice so sweet, that it thrilled
to the very marrow of his bones.

   "I have dwelt a while with sorrow since we met, we twain, in the wood:
   I have mourned, while thou hast been merry, who deemest the war-play
   good.
   For I know the heart of the wilful and how thou wouldst cast away
   The rampart of thy life-days, and the wall of my happy day.
   Yea I am the thrall of Sorrow; she hath stripped my raiment off
   And laid sore stripes upon me with many a bitter scoff.
   Still bidding me remember that I come of the God-folk's kin,
   And yet for all my godhead no love of thee may win."

Then she looked longingly at him a while and at last could no longer
refrain her, but drew nigh him and took his hands in hers, and kissed his
mouth, and said as she caressed him:

   "O where are thy wounds, beloved? how turned the spear from thy
   breast,
   When the storm of war blew strongest, and the best men met the best?
   Lo, this is the tale of to-day: but what shall to-morrow tell?
   That Thiodolf the Mighty in the fight's beginning fell;
   That there came a stroke ill-stricken, there came an aimless thrust,
   And the life of the people's helper lay quenched in the summer dust."

He answered nothing, but smiled as though the sound of her voice and the
touch of her hand were pleasant to him, for so much love there was in
her, that her very grief was scarcely grievous.  But she said again:

   "Thou sayest it: I am outcast; for a God that lacketh mirth
   Hath no more place in God-home and never a place on earth.
   A man grieves, and he gladdens, or he dies and his grief is gone;
   But what of the grief of the Gods, and the sorrow never undone?
   Yea verily I am the outcast.  When first in thine arms I lay
   On the blossoms of the woodland my godhead passed away;
   Thenceforth unto thee was I looking for the light and the glory of
   life
   And the Gods' doors shut behind me till the day of the uttermost
   strife.
   And now thou hast taken my soul, thou wilt cast it into the night,
   And cover thine head with the darkness, and turn thine eyes from the
   light.
   Thou wouldst go to the empty country where never a seed is sown
   And never a deed is fashioned, and the place where each is alone;
   But I thy thrall shall follow, I shall come where thou seemest to lie,
   I shall sit on the howe that hides thee, and thou so dear and nigh!
   A few bones white in their war-gear that have no help or thought,
   Shall be Thiodolf the Mighty, so nigh, so dear--and nought."

His hands strayed over her shoulders and arms, caressing them, and he
said softly and lovingly:

   "I am Thiodolf the Mighty: but as wise as I may be
   No story of that grave-night mine eyes can ever see,
   But rather the tale of the Wolfings through the coming days of earth,
   And the young men in their triumph and the maidens in their mirth;
   And morn's promise every evening, and each day the promised morn,
   And I amidst it ever reborn and yet reborn.
   This tale I know, who have seen it, who have felt the joy and pain,
   Each fleeing, each pursuing, like the links of the draw-well's chain:
   But that deedless tide of the grave-mound, and the dayless nightless
   day,
   E'en as I strive to see it, its image wanes away.
   What say'st thou of the grave-mound? shall I be there at all
   When they lift the Horn of Remembrance, and the shout goes down the
   hall,
   And they drink the Mighty War-duke and Thiodolf the old?
   Nay rather; there where the youngling that longeth to be bold
   Sits gazing through the hall-reek and sees across the board
   A vision of the reaping of the harvest of the sword,
   There shall Thiodolf be sitting; e'en there shall the youngling be
   That once in the ring of the hazels gave up his life to thee."

She laughed as he ended, and her voice was sweet, but bitter was her
laugh.  Then she said:

   "Nay thou shalt be dead, O warrior, thou shalt not see the Hall
   Nor the children of thy people 'twixt the dais and the wall.
   And I, and I shall be living; still on thee shall waste my thought:
   I shall long and lack thy longing; I shall pine for what is nought."

But he smiled again, and said:

   "Not on earth shall I learn this wisdom; and how shall I learn it then
   When I lie alone in the grave-mound, and have no speech with men?
   But for thee,--O doubt it nothing that my life shall live in thee,
   And so shall we twain be loving in the days that yet shall be."

It was as if she heard him not; and she fell aback from him a little and
stood silently for a while as one in deep thought; and then turned and
went a few paces from him, and stooped down and came back again with
something in her arms (and it was the hauberk once more), and said
suddenly:

   "O Thiodolf, now tell me for what cause thou wouldst not bear
   This grey wall of the hammer in the tempest of the spear?
   Didst thou doubt my faith, O Folk-wolf, or the counsel of the Gods,
   That thou needs must cast thee naked midst the flashing battle-rods,
   Or is thy pride so mighty that it seemed to thee indeed
   That death was a better guerdon than the love of the Godhead's seed?"

But Thiodolf said: "O Wood-Sun, this thou hast a right to ask of me, why
I have not worn in the battle thy gift, the Treasure of the World, the
Dwarf-wrought Hauberk!  And what is this that thou sayest?  I doubt not
thy faith towards me and thine abundant love: and as for the rede of the
Gods, I know it not, nor may I know it, nor turn it this way nor that:
and as for thy love and that I would choose death sooner, I know not what
thou meanest; I will not say that I love thy love better than life
itself; for these two, my life and my love, are blended together and may
not be sundered.

"Hearken therefore as to the Hauberk: I wot well that it is for no light
matter that thou wouldst have me bear thy gift, the wondrous hauberk,
into battle; I deem that some doom is wrapped up in it; maybe that I
shall fall before the foe if I wear it not; and that if I wear it,
somewhat may betide me which is unmeet to betide a warrior of the
Wolfings.  Therefore will I tell thee why I have fought in two battles
with the Romans with unmailed body, and why I left the hauberk, (which I
see that thou bearest in thine arms) in the Roof of the Daylings.  For
when I entered therein, clad in the hauberk, there came to meet me an
ancient man, one of the very valiant of days past, and he looked on me
with the eyes of love, as though he had been the very father of our folk,
and I the man that was to come after him to carry on the life thereof.
But when he saw the hauberk and touched it, then was his love smitten
cold with sadness and he spoke words of evil omen; so that putting this
together with thy words about the gift, and that thou didst in a manner
compel me to wear it, I could not but deem that this mail is for the
ransom of a man and the ruin of a folk.

"Wilt thou say that it is not so? then will I wear the hauberk, and live
and die happy.  But if thou sayest that I have deemed aright, and that a
curse goeth with the hauberk, then either for the sake of the folk I will
not wear the gift and the curse, and I shall die in great glory, and
because of me the House shall live; or else for thy sake I shall bear it
and live, and the House shall live or die as may be, but I not helping,
nay I no longer of the House nor in it.  How sayest thou?"

Then she said:

   "Hail be thy mouth, beloved, for that last word of thine,
   And the hope that thine heart conceiveth and the hope that is born in
   mine.
   Yea, for a man's delivrance was the hauberk born indeed
   That once more the mighty warrior might help the folk at need.
   And where is the curse's dwelling if thy life be saved to dwell
   Amidst the Wolfing warriors and the folk that loves thee well
   And the house where the high Gods left thee to be cherished well
   therein?

   "Yea more: I have told thee, beloved, that thou art not of the kin;
   The blood in thy body is blended of the wandering Elking race,
   And one that I may not tell of, who in God-home hath his place,
   And who changed his shape to beget thee in the wild-wood's leafy roof.
   How then shall the doom of the Wolfings be woven in the woof
   Which the Norns for thee have shuttled? or shall one man of war
   Cast down the tree of the Wolfings on the roots that spread so far?
   O friend, thou art wise and mighty, but other men have lived
   Beneath the Wolfing roof-tree whereby the folk has thrived."

He reddened at her word; but his eyes looked eagerly on her.  She cast
down the hauberk, and drew one step nigher to him.  She knitted her
brows, her face waxed terrible, and her stature seemed to grow greater,
as she lifted up her gleaming right arm, and cried out in a great voice.

   "Thou Thiodolf the Mighty!  Hadst thou will to cast the net
   And tangle the House in thy trouble, it is I would slay thee yet;
   For 'tis I and I that love them, and my sorrow would I give,
   And thy life, thou God of battle, that the Wolfing House might live."

Therewith she rushed forward, and cast herself upon him, and threw her
arms about him, and strained him to her bosom, and kissed his face, and
he her in likewise, for there was none to behold them, and nought but the
naked heaven was the roof above their heads.

And now it was as if the touch of her face and her body, and the
murmuring of her voice changed and soft close to his ear, as she murmured
mere words of love to him, drew him away from the life of deeds and
doubts and made a new world for him, wherein he beheld all those fair
pictures of the happy days that had been in his musings when first he
left the field of the dead.

So they sat down on the grey stone together hand in hand, her head laid
upon his shoulder, no otherwise than if they had been two lovers, young
and without renown in days of deep peace.

So as they sat, her foot smote on the cold hilts of the sword, which
Thiodolf had laid down in the grass; and she stooped and took it up, and
laid it across her knees and his as they sat there; and she looked on
Throng-plough as he lay still in the sheath, and smiled on him, and saw
that the peace-strings were not yet wound about his hilts.  So she drew
him forth and raised him up in her hand, and he gleamed white and fearful
in the growing dawn, for all things had now gotten their colours again,
whereas amidst their talking had the night worn, and the moon low down
was grown white and pale.

But she leaned aside, and laid her cheek against Thiodolf's, and he took
the sword out of her hand and set it on his knees again, and laid his
right hand on it, and said:

   "Two things by these blue edges in the face of the dawning I swear;
   And first this warrior's ransom in the coming fight to bear,
   And evermore to love thee who hast given me second birth.
   And by the sword I swear it, and by the Holy Earth,
   To live for the House of the Wolfings, and at last to die for their
   need.
   For though I trow thy saying that I am not one of their seed,
   Nor yet by the hand have been taken and unto the Father shown
   As a very son of the Fathers, yet mid them hath my body grown;
   And I am the guest of their Folk-Hall, and each one there is my
   friend.
   So with them is my joy and sorrow, and my life, and my death in the
   end.
   Now whatso doom hereafter my coming days shall bide,
   Thou speech-friend, thou deliverer, thine is this dawning-tide."

She spoke no word to him; but they rose up and went hand in hand down the
dale, he still bearing his naked sword over his shoulder, and thus they
went together into the yew-copse at the dale's end.  There they abode
till after the rising of the sun, and each to each spake many loving
words at their departure; and the Wood-Sun went her ways at her will.

But Thiodolf went up the dale again, and set Throng-plough in his sheath,
and wound the peace-strings round him.  Then he took up the hauberk from
the grass whereas the Wood-Sun had cast it, and did it on him, as it were
of the attire he was wont to carry daily.  So he girt Throng-plough to
him, and went soberly up to the ridge-top to the folk, who were just
stirring in the early morning.




CHAPTER XVIII--TIDINGS BROUGHT TO THE WAIN-BURG


Now it must be told of Otter and they of the Wain-burg how they had the
tidings of the overthrow of the Romans on the Ridge, and that Egil had
left them on his way to Wolf-stead.  They were joyful of the tale, as was
like to be, but eager also to strike their stroke at the foemen, and in
that mood they abode fresh tidings.

It has been told how Otter had sent the Bearings and the Wormings to the
aid of Thiodolf and his folk, and these two were great kindreds, and they
being gone, there abode with Otter, one man with another, thralls and
freemen, scant three thousand men: of these many were bowmen good to
fight from behind a wall or fence, or some such cover, but scarce meet to
withstand a shock in the open field.  However it was deemed at this time
in the Wain-burg that Thiodolf and his men would soon return to them; and
in any case, they said, he lay between the Romans and the Mark, so that
they had but little doubt; or rather they feared that the Romans might
draw aback from the Mark before they could be met in battle again, for as
aforesaid they were eager for the fray.

Now it was in the cool of the evening two days after the Battle on the
Ridge, that the men, both freemen and thralls, had been disporting
themselves in the plain ground without the Burg in casting the spear and
putting the stone, and running races a-foot and a-horseback, and now
close on sunset three young men, two of the Laxings and one of the
Shieldings, and a grey old thrall of that same House, were shooting a
match with the bow, driving their shafts at a rushen roundel hung on a
pole which the old thrall had dight.  Men were peaceful and happy, for
the time was fair and calm, and, as aforesaid, they dreaded not the Roman
Host any more than if they were Gods dwelling in God-home.  The shooters
were deft men, and they of the Burg were curious to note their deftness,
and many were breathed with the games wherein they had striven, and
thought it good to rest, and look on the new sport: so they sat and stood
on the grass about the shooters on three sides, and the mead-horn went
briskly from man to man; for there was no lack of meat and drink in the
Burg, whereas the kindreds that lay nighest to it had brought in abundant
provision, and women of the kindreds had come to them, and not a few were
there scattered up and down among the carles.

Now the Shielding man, Geirbald by name, had just loosed at the mark, and
had shot straight and smitten the roundel in the midst, and a shout went
up from the onlookers thereat; but that shout was, as it were, lined with
another, and a cry that a messenger was riding toward the Burg: thereat
most men looked round toward the wood, because their minds were set on
fresh tidings from Thiodolf's company, but as it happened it was from the
north and the side toward Mid-mark that they on the outside of the throng
had seen the rider coming; and presently the word went from man to man
that so it was, and that the new comer was a young man on a grey horse,
and would speedily be amongst them; so they wondered what the tidings
might be, but yet they did not break up the throng, but abode in their
places that they might receive the messenger more orderly; and as the
rider drew near, those who were nighest to him perceived that it was a
woman.

So men made way before the grey horse, and its rider, and the horse was
much spent and travel-worn.  So the woman rode right into the ring of
warriors, and drew rein there, and lighted down slowly and painfully, and
when she was on the ground could scarce stand for stiffness; and two or
three of the swains drew near her to help her, and knew her at once for
Hrosshild of the Wolfings, for she was well-known as a doughty woman.

Then she said: "Bring me to Otter the War-duke; or bring him hither to
me, which were best, since so many men are gathered together; and
meanwhile give me to drink; for I am thirsty and weary."

So while one went for Otter, another reached to her the mead-horn, and
she had scarce done her draught, ere Otter was there, for they had found
him at the gate of the Burg.  He had many a time been in the Wolfing
Hall, so he knew her at once and said:

"Hail, Hrosshild! how farest thou?"

She said: "I fare as the bearer of evil tidings.  Bid thy folk do on
their war-gear and saddle their horses, and make no delay; for now
presently shall the Roman host be in Mid-mark!"

Then cried Otter: "Blow up the war-horn! get ye all to your weapons and
be ready to leap on your horses, and come ye to the Thing in good order
kindred by kindred: later on ye shall hear Hrosshild's story as she shall
tell it to me!"

Therewith he led her to a grassy knoll that was hard by, and set her down
thereon and himself beside her, and said:

"Speak now, damsel, and fear not!  For now shall one fate go over us all,
either to live together or die together as the free children of Tyr, and
friends of the Almighty God of the Earth.  How camest thou to meet the
Romans and know of their ways and to live thereafter?"

She said: "Thus it was: the Hall-Sun bethought her how that the eastern
ways into Mid-mark that bring a man to the thicket behind the Roof of the
Bearings are nowise hard, even for an host; so she sent ten women, and me
the eleventh to the Bearing dwelling and the road through the thicket
aforesaid; and we were to take of the Bearing stay-at-homes whomso we
would that were handy, and then all we to watch the ways for fear of the
Romans.  And methinks she has had some vision of their ways, though
mayhap not altogether clear.

"Anyhow we came to the Bearing dwellings, and they gave us of their folk
eight doughty women and two light-foot lads, and so we were twenty and
one in all.

"So then we did as the Hall-Sun bade us, and ordained a chain of watchers
far up into the waste; and these were to sound a point of war upon their
horns each to each till the sound thereof should come to us who lay with
our horses hoppled ready beside us in the fair plain of the Mark outside
the thicket.

"To be short, the horns waked us up in the midst of yesternight, and of
the watches also came to us the last, which had heard the sound amidst
the thicket, and said that it was certainly the sound of the Goths' horn,
and the note agreed on.  Therefore I sent a messenger at once to the
Wolfing Roof to say what was toward; but to thee I would not ride until I
had made surer of the tidings; so I waited awhile, and then rode into the
wild-wood; and a long tale I might make both of the waiting and the
riding, had I time thereto; but this is the end of it; that going warily
a little past where the thicket thinneth and the road endeth, I came on
three of those watches or links in the chain we had made, and half of
another watch or link; that is to say six women, who were come together
after having blown their horns and fled (though they should rather have
abided in some lurking-place to espy whatever might come that way) and
one other woman, who had been one of the watch much further off, and had
spoken with the furthest of all, which one had seen the faring of the
Roman Host, and that it was very great, and no mere band of pillagers or
of scouts.  And, said this fleer (who was indeed half wild with fear),
that while they were talking together, came the Romans upon them, and saw
them; and a band of Romans beat the wood for them when they fled, and
she, the fleer, was at point to be taken, and saw two taken indeed, and
haled off by the Roman scourers of the wood.  But she escaped and so came
to the others on the skirts of the thicket, having left of her skin and
blood on many a thornbush and rock by the way.

"Now when I heard this, I bade this fleer get her home to the Bearings as
swiftly as she might, and tell her tale; and she went away trembling, and
scarce knowing whether her feet were on earth or on water or on fire; but
belike failed not to come there, as no Romans were before her.

"But for the others, I sent one to go straight to Wolf-stead on the heels
of the first messenger, to tell the Hall-Sun what had befallen, and other
five I set to lurk in the thicket, whereas none could lightly lay hands
on them, and when they had new tidings, to flee to Wolf-stead as occasion
might serve them; and for myself I tarried not, but rode on the spur to
tell thee hereof.

"But my last word to thee, Otter, is that by the Hall-sun's bidding the
Bearings will not abide fire and steel at their own stead, but when they
hear true tidings of the Romans being hard at hand, will take with them
all that is not too hot or too heavy to carry, and go their ways unto
Wolf-stead: and the tidings will go up and down the Mark on both sides of
the water, so that whatever is of avail for defence will gather there at
our dwelling, and if we fall, goodly shall be the howe heaped over us,
even if ye come not in time.

"Now have I told thee what I needs must and there is no need to question
me more, for thou hast it all--do thou what thou hast to do!"

With that word she cast herself down on the grass by the mound-side, and
was presently asleep, for she was very weary.

But all the time she had been telling her tale had the horn been
sounding, and there were now a many warriors gathered and more coming in
every moment: so Otter stood up on the mound after he had bidden a man of
his House to bring him his horse and war-gear, and abided a little, till,
as might be said, the whole host was gathered: then he bade cry silence,
and spake:

"Sons of Tyr, now hath an Host of the Romans gotten into the Mark; a
mighty host, but not so mighty that it may not be met.  Few words are
best: let the Steerings, who are not many, but are men well-tried in war
and wisdom abide in the Burg along with the fighting thralls: but let the
Burg be broken up and moved from the place, and let its warders wend
towards Mid-mark, but warily and without haste, and each night let them
make the wain-garth and keep good watch.

"But know ye that the Romans shall fall with all their power on the
Wolfing dwellings, deeming that when they have that, they shall have all
that is ours with ourselves also.  For there is the Hall-Sun under the
Great Roof, and there hath Thiodolf, our War-duke, his dwelling-place;
therefore shall all of us, save those that abide with the wains, take
horse, and ride without delay, and cross the water at Battleford, so that
we may fall upon the foe before they come west of the water; for as ye
know there is but one ford whereby a man wending straight from the
Bearings may cross Mirkwood-water, and it is like that the foe will tarry
at the Bearing stead long enough to burn and pillage it.

"So do ye order yourselves according to your kindreds, and let the
Shieldings lead.  Make no more delay!  But for me I will now send a
messenger to Thiodolf to tell him of the tidings, and then speedily shall
he be with us.  Geirbald, I see thee; come hither!"

Now Geirbald stood amidst the Shieldings, and when Otter had spoken, he
came forth bestriding a white horse, and with his bow slung at his back.
Said Otter: "Geirbald, thou shalt ride at once through the wood, and find
Thiodolf; and tell him the tidings, and that in nowise he follow the
Roman fleers away from the Mark, nor to heed anything but the trail of
the foemen through the south-eastern heaths of Mirkwood, whether other
Romans follow him or not: whatever happens let him lead the Goths by that
road, which for him is the shortest, towards the defence of the Wolfing
dwellings.  Lo thou, my ring for a token!  Take it and depart in haste.
Yet first take thy fellow Viglund the Woodman with thee, lest if
perchance one fall, the other may bear the message.  Tarry not, nor rest
till thy word be said!"

Then turned Geirbald to find Viglund who was anigh to him, and he took
the ring, and the twain went their ways without more ado, and rode into
the wild-wood.

But about the wain-burg was there plenteous stir of men till all was
ordered for the departure of the host, which was no long while, for there
was nothing to do but on with the war-gear and up on to the horse.

Forth then they went duly ordered in their kindreds towards the head of
the Upper-mark, riding as swiftly as they might without breaking their
array.




CHAPTER XIX--THOSE MESSENGERS COME TO THIODOLF


Of Geirbald and Viglund the tale tells that they rode the woodland paths
as speedily as they might.  They had not gone far, and were winding
through a path amidst of a thicket mingled of the hornbeam and holly,
betwixt the openings of which the bracken grew exceeding tall, when
Viglund, who was very fine-eared, deemed that he heard a horse coming to
meet them: so they lay as close as they might, and drew back their horses
behind a great holly-bush lest it should be some one or more of the foes
who had fled into the wood when the Romans were scattered in that first
fight.  But as the sound drew nearer, and it was clearly the footsteps of
a great horse, they deemed it would be some messenger from Thiodolf, as
indeed it turned out: for as the new-comer fared on, somewhat unwarily,
they saw a bright helm after the fashion of the Goths amidst of the
trees, and then presently they knew by his attire that he was of the
Bearings, and so at last they knew him to be Asbiorn of the said House, a
doughty man; so they came forth to meet him and he drew rein when he saw
armed men, but presently beholding their faces he knew them and laughed
on them, and said:

"Hail fellows! what tidings are toward?"

"These," said Viglund, "that thou art well met, since now shalt thou turn
back and bring us to Thiodolf as speedily as may be."

But Asbiorn laughed and said: "Nay rather turn about with me; or why are
ye so grim of countenance?"

"Our errand is no light one," said Geirbald, "but thou, why art thou so
merry?"

"I have seen the Romans fall," said he, "and belike shall soon see more
of that game: for I am on an errand to Otter from Thiodolf: the War-duke,
when he had questioned some of those whom we took on the Day of the
Ridge, began to have a deeming that the Romans had beguiled us, and will
fall on the Mark by the way of the south-east heaths: so now is he
hastening to fetch a compass and follow that road either to overtake them
or prevent them; and he biddeth Otter tarry not, but ride hard along the
water to meet them if he may, or ever they have set their hands to the
dwellings of my House.  And belike when I have done mine errand to Otter
I shall ride with him to look on these burners and slayers once more;
therefore am I merry.  Now for your tidings, fellows."

Said Geirbald: "Our tidings are that both our errands are prevented, and
come to nought: for Otter hath not tarried, but hath ridden with all his
folk toward the stead of thine House.  So shalt thou indeed see these
burners and slayers if thou ridest hard; since we have tidings that the
Romans will by now be in Mid-mark.  And as for our errand, it is to bid
Thiodolf do even as he hath done.  Hereby may we see how good a pair of
War-dukes we have gotten, since each thinketh of the same wisdom.  Now
take we counsel together as to what we shall do; whether we shall go back
to Otter with thee, or thou go back to Thiodolf with us; or else each go
the road ordained for us."

Said Asbiorn: "To Otter will I ride as I was bidden, that I may look on
the burning of our roof, and avenge me of the Romans afterwards; and I
bid you, fellows, ride with me, since fewer men there are with Otter, and
he must be the first to bide the brunt of battle."

"Nay," said Geirbald, "as for me ye must even lose a man's aid; for to
Thiodolf was I sent, and to Thiodolf will I go: and bethink thee if this
be not best, since Thiodolf hath but a deeming of the ways of the Romans
and we wot surely of them.  Our coming shall make him the speedier, and
the less like to turn back if any alien band shall follow after him.  What
sayest thou, Viglund?"

Said Viglund: "Even as thou, Geirbald: but for myself I deem I may well
turn back with Asbiorn.  For I would serve the House in battle as soon as
may be; and maybe we shall slaughter these kites of the cities, so that
Thiodolf shall have no work to do when he cometh."

Said Asbiorn; "Geirbald, knowest thou right well the ways through the
wood and on the other side thereof, to the place where Thiodolf abideth?
for ye see that night is at hand."

"Nay, not over well," said Geirbald.

Said Asbiorn: "Then I rede thee take Viglund with thee; for he knoweth
them yard by yard, and where they be hard and where they be soft.
Moreover it were best indeed that ye meet Thiodolf betimes; for I deem
not but that he wendeth leisurely, though always warily, because he
deemeth not that Otter will ride before to-morrow morning.  Hearken,
Viglund!  Thiodolf will rest to-night on the other side of the water,
nigh to where the hills break off into the sheer cliffs that are called
the Kites' Nest, and the water runneth under them, coming from the east:
and before him lieth the easy ground of the eastern heaths where he is
minded to wend to-morrow betimes in the morning: and if ye do your best
ye shall be there before he is upon the road, and sure it is that your
tidings shall hasten him."

"Thou sayest sooth," saith Geirbald, "tarry we no longer; here sunder our
ways; farewell!"

"Farewell," said he, "and thou, Viglund, take this word in parting, that
belike thou shalt yet see the Romans, and strike a stroke, and maybe be
smitten.  For indeed they be most mighty warriors."

Then made they no delay but rode their ways either side.  And Geirbald
and Viglund rode over rough and smooth all night, and were out of the
thick wood by day-dawn: and whereas they rode hard, and Viglund knew the
ways well, they came to Mirkwood-water before the day was old, and saw
that the host was stirring, but not yet on the way.  And or ever they
came to the water's edge, they were met by Wolfkettle of the Wolfings,
and Hiarandi of the Elkings, and three others who were but just come from
the place where the hurt men lay down in a dale near the Great Ridge;
there had Wolfkettle and Hiarandi been tending Toti of the Beamings,
their fellow-in-arms, who had been sorely hurt in the battle, but was
doing well, and was like to live.  So when they saw the messengers, they
came up to them and hailed them, and asked them if the tidings were good
or evil.

"That is as it may be," said Geirbald, "but they are short to tell; the
Romans are in Mid-mark, and Otter rideth on the spur to meet them, and
sendeth us to bid Thiodolf wend the heaths to fall in on them also.  Nor
may we tarry one minute ere we have seen Thiodolf."

Said Wolfkettle, "We will lead you to him; he is on the east side of the
water, with all his host, and they are hard on departing."

So they went down the ford, which was not very deep; and Wolfkettle rode
the ford behind Geirbald, and another man behind Viglund; but Hiarandi
went afoot with the others beside the horses, for he was a very tall man.

But as they rode amidst the clear water Wolfkettle lifted up his voice
and sang:

   "White horse, with what are ye laden as ye wade the shallows warm,
   But with tidings of the battle, and the fear of the fateful storm?
   What loureth now behind us, what pileth clouds before,
   On either hand what gathereth save the stormy tide of war?
   Now grows midsummer mirky, and fallow falls the morn,
   And dusketh the Moon's Sister, and the trees look overworn;
   God's Ash tree shakes and shivers, and the sheer cliff standeth white
   As the bones of the giants' father when the Gods first fared to
   fight."

And indeed the morning had grown mirky and grey and threatening, and from
far away the thunder growled, and the face of the Kite's Nest showed pale
and awful against a dark steely cloud; and a few drops of rain pattered
into the smooth water before them from a rag of the cloud-flock right
over head.  They were in mid stream now, for the water was wide there; on
the eastern bank were the warriors gathering, for they had beheld the
faring of those men, and the voice of Wolfkettle came to them across the
water, so they deemed that great tidings were toward, and would fain know
on what errand those were come.

Then the waters of the ford deepened till Hiarandi was wading more than
waist-deep, and the water flowed over Geirbald's saddle; then Wolfkettle
laughed, and turning as he sat, dragged out his sword, and waved it from
east to west and sang:

   "O sun, pale up in heaven, shrink from us if thou wilt,
   And turn thy face from beholding the shock of guilt with guilt!
   Stand still, O blood of summer! and let the harvest fade,
   Till there be nought but fallow where once was bloom and blade!
   O day, give out but a glimmer of all thy flood of light,
   If it be but enough for our eyen to see the road of fight!
   Forget all else and slumber, if still ye let us wake,
   And our mouths shall make the thunder, and our swords shall the
   lightening make,
   And we shall be the storm-wind and drive the ruddy rain,
   Till the joy of our hearts in battle bring back the day again."

As he spake that word they came up through the shallow water dripping on
to the bank, and they and the men who abode them on the bank shouted
together for joy of fellowship, and all tossed aloft their weapons.  The
man who had ridden behind Viglund slipped off on to the ground; but
Wolfkettle abode in his place behind Geirbald.

So the messengers passed on, and the others closed up round about them,
and all the throng went up to where Thiodolf was sitting on a rock
beneath a sole ash-tree, the face of the Kite's Nest rising behind him on
the other side of a bight of the river.  There he sat unhelmed with the
dwarf-wrought hauberk about him, holding Throng-plough in its sheath
across his knees, while he gave word to this and that man concerning the
order of the host.

So when they were come thither, the throng opened that the messengers
might come forward; for by this time had many more drawn near to hearken
what was toward.  There they sat on their horses, the white and the grey,
and Wolfkettle stood by Geirbald's bridle rein, for he had now lighted
down; and a little behind him, his head towering over the others, stood
Hiarandi great and gaunt.  The ragged cloud had drifted down south-east
now and the rain fell no more, but the sun was still pale and clouded.

Then Thiodolf looked gravely on them, and spake:

   "What do ye sons of the War-shield? what tale is there to tell?
   Is the kindred fallen tangled in the grasp of the fallow Hell?
   Crows the red cock over the homesteads, have we met the foe too late?
   For meseems your brows are heavy with the shadowing o'er of fate."

But Geirbald answered:

   "Still cold with dew in the morning the Shielding Roof-ridge stands,
   Nor yet hath grey Hell bounden the Shielding warriors' hands;
   But lo, the swords, O War-duke, how thick in the wind they shake,
   Because we bear the message that the battle-road ye take,
   Nor tarry for the thunder or the coming on of rain,
   Or the windy cloudy night-tide, lest your battle be but vain.
   And this is the word that Otter yestre'en hath set in my mouth;
   Seek thou the trail of the Aliens of the Cities of the South,
   And thou shalt find it leading o'er the heaths to the beechen-wood,
   And thence to the stony places where the foxes find their food;
   And thence to the tangled thicket where the folkway cleaves it
   through,
   To the eastern edge of Mid-mark where the Bearings deal and do."

Then said Thiodolf in a cold voice, "What then hath befallen Otter?"

Said Geirbald:

   "When last I looked upon Otter, all armed he rode the plain,
   With his whole host clattering round him like the rush of the summer
   rain;
   To the right or the left they looked not but they rode through the
   dusk and the dark
   Beholding nought before them but the dream of the foes in the Mark.
   So he went; but his word fled from him and on my horse it rode,
   And again it saith, O War-duke seek thou the Bear's abode,
   And tarry never a moment for ought that seems of worth,
   For there shall ye find the sword-edge and the flame of the foes of
   the earth.

"Tarry not, Thiodolf, nor turn aback though a new foe followeth on thine
heels.  No need to question me more; I have no more to tell, save that a
woman brought these tidings to us, whom the Hall-Sun had sent with others
to watch the ways: and some of them had seen the Romans, who are a great
host and no band stealing forth to lift the herds."

Now all those round about him heard his words, for he spake with a loud
voice; and they knew what the bidding of the War-duke would be; so they
loitered not, but each man went about his business of looking to his war-
gear and gathering to the appointed place of his kindred.  And even while
Geirbald had been speaking, had Hiarandi brought up the man who bore the
great horn, who when Thiodolf leapt to his feet to find him, was close at
hand.  So he bade him blow the war-blast, and all men knew the meaning of
that voice of the horn, and every man armed him in haste, and they who
had horses (and these were but the Bearings and the Warnings), saddled
them, and mounted, and from mouth to mouth went the word that the Romans
were gotten into Mid-mark, and were burning the Bearing abodes.  So
speedily was the whole host ready for the way, the Wolfings at the head
of all.  Then came forth Thiodolf from the midst of his kindred, and they
raised him upon a great war-shield upheld by many men, and he stood
thereon and spake:

   "O sons of Tyr, ye have vanquished, and sore hath been your pain;
   But he that smiteth in battle must ever smite again;
   And thus with you it fareth, and the day abideth yet
   When ye shall hold the Aliens as the fishes in the net.
   On the Ridge ye slew a many; but there came a many more
   From their strongholds by the water to their new-built garth of war,
   And all these have been led by dastards o'er the way our feet must
   tread
   Through the eastern heaths and the beech-wood to the door of the
   Bearing stead,
   Now e'en yesterday I deemed it, but I durst not haste away
   Ere the word was borne to Otter and 'tis he bids haste to-day;
   So now by day and by night-tide it behoveth us to wend
   And wind the reel of battle and weave its web to end.
   Had ye deemed my eyes foreseeing, I would tell you of my sight,
   How I see the folk delivered and the Aliens turned to flight,
   While my own feet wend them onwards to the ancient Father's Home.
   But belike these are but the visions that to many a man shall come
   When he goeth adown to the battle, and before him riseth high
   The wall of valiant foemen to hide all things anigh.
   But indeed I know full surely that no work that we may win
   To-morrow or the next day shall quench the Markmen's kin.
   On many a day hereafter shall their warriors carry shield;
   On many a day their maidens shall drive the kine afield,
   On many a day their reapers bear sickle in the wheat
   When the golden wind-wrought ripple stirs round the feast-hall's feet.
   Lo, now is the day's work easy--to live and overcome,
   Or to die and yet to conquer on the threshold of the Home."

And therewith he gat him down and went a-foot to the head of the Wolfing
band, a great shout going with him, which was mingled with the voice of
the war-horn that bade away.

So fell the whole host into due array, and they were somewhat over three
thousand warriors, all good and tried men and meet to face the uttermost
of battle in the open field; so they went their ways with all the speed
that footmen may, and in fair order; and the sky cleared above their
heads, but the distant thunder still growled about the world.  Geirbald
and Viglund joined themselves to the Wolfings and went a-foot along with
Wolfkettle; but Hiarandi went with his kindred who were second in the
array.




CHAPTER XX--OTTER AND HIS FOLK COME INTO MID-MARK


Otter and his folk rode their ways along Mirkwood-water, and made no
stay, except now and again to breathe their horses, till they came to
Battleford in the early morning; there they baited their horses, for the
grass was good in the meadow, and the water easy to come at.

So after they had rested there a short hour, and had eaten what was easy
for them to get, they crossed the ford, and wended along Mirkwood-water
between the wood and the river, but went slower than before lest they
should weary their horses; so that it was high-noon before they had come
out of the woodland way into Mid-mark; and at once as soon as the whole
plain of the Mark opened out before them, they saw what most of them
looked to see (since none doubted Hrosshild's tale), and that was a
column of smoke rising high and straight up into the air, for the
afternoon was hot and windless.  Great wrath rose in their hearts
thereat, and many a strong man trembled for anger, though none for fear,
as Otter raised his right hand and stretched it out towards that token of
wrack and ruin; yet they made no stay, nor did they quicken their pace
much; because they knew that they should come to Bearham before night-
fall, and they would not meet the Romans way-worn and haggard; but they
rode on steadily, a terrible company of wrathful men.

They passed by the dwellings of the kindreds, though save for the
Galtings the houses on the east side of the water between the Bearings
and the wild-wood road were but small; for the thicket came somewhat near
to the water and pinched the meadows.  But the Galtings were great
hunters and trackers of the wild-wood, and they of the Geddings, the
Erings and the Withings, which were smaller Houses, lived somewhat on the
take of fish from Mirkwood-water (as did the Laxings also of the Nether-
mark), for thereabout were there goodly pools and eddies, and sun-warmed
shallows therewithal for the spawning of the trouts; as there were eyots
in the water, most of which tailed off into a gravelly shallow at their
lower ends.

Now as the riders of the Goths came over against the dwellings of the
Withings, they saw people, mostly women, driving up the beasts from the
meadow towards the garth; but upon the tofts about their dwellings were
gathered many folk, who had their eyes turned toward the token of ravage
that hung in the sky above the fair plain; but when these beheld the
riding of the host, they tossed up their arms to them and whatever they
bore in them, and the sound of their shrill cry (for they were all women
and young lads) came down the wind to the ears of the riders.  But down
by the river on a swell of the ground were some swains and a few thralls,
and among them some men armed and a-horseback; and these, when they
perceived the host coming on turned and rode to meet them; and as they
drew near they shouted as men overjoyed to meet their kindred; and indeed
the fighting-men of their own House were riding in the host.  And the
armed men were three old men, and one very old with marvellous long white
hair, and four long lads of some fifteen winters, and four stout carles
of the thralls bearing bows and bucklers, and these rode behind the
swains; so they found their own kindred and rode amongst them.

But when they were all jingling and clashing on together, the dust
arising from the sun-dried turf, the earth shaking with the thunder of
the horse-hoofs, then the heart of the long-hoary one stirred within him
as he bethought him of the days of his youth, and to his old nostrils
came the smell of the horses and the savour of the sweat of warriors
riding close together knee to knee adown the meadow.  So he lifted up his
voice and sang:

      "Rideth lovely along
      The strong by the strong;
      Soft under his breath
      Singeth sword in the sheath,
      And shield babbleth oft
      Unto helm-crest aloft;
   How soon shall their words rise mid wrath of the battle
   Into wrangle unheeded of clanging and rattle,
   And no man shall note then the gold on the sword
   When the runes have no meaning, the mouth-cry no word,
   When all mingled together, the war-sea of men
   Shall toss up the steel-spray round fourscore and ten.

      "Now as maids burn the weed
      Betwixt acre and mead,
      So the Bearings' Roof
      Burneth little aloof,
      And red gloweth the hall
      Betwixt wall and fair wall,
   Where often the mead-sea we sipped in old days,
   When our feet were a-weary with wending the ways;
   When the love of the lovely at even was born,
   And our hands felt fair hands as they fell on the horn.
   There round about standeth the ring of the foe
   Tossing babes on their spears like the weeds o'er the low.

      "Ride, ride then! nor spare
      The red steeds as ye fare!
      Yet if daylight shall fail,
      By the fire-light of bale
      Shall we see the bleared eyes
      Of the war-learned, the wise.
   In the acre of battle the work is to win,
   Let us live by the labour, sheaf-smiting therein;
   And as oft o'er the sickle we sang in time past
   When the crake that long mocked us fled light at the last,
   So sing o'er the sword, and the sword-hardened hand
   Bearing down to the reaping the wrath of the land."

So he sang; and a great shout went up from his kindred and those around
him, and it was taken up all along the host, though many knew not why
they shouted, and the whole host quickened its pace, and went a great
trot over the smooth meadow.

So in no long while were they come over against the stead of the Erings,
and thereabouts were no beasts afield, and no women, for all the neat
were driven into the garth of the House; but all they who were not war-
fit were standing without doors looking down the Mark towards the reek of
the Bearing dwellings, and these also sent a cry of welcome toward the
host of their kindred.  But along the river-bank came to meet the host an
armed band of two old men, two youths who were their sons, and twelve
thralls who were armed with long spears; and all these were a-horseback:
so they fell in with their kindred and the host made no stay for them,
but pressed on over-running the meadow.  And still went up that column of
smoke, and thicker and blacker it grew a-top, and ruddier amidmost.

So came they by the abode of the Geddings, and there also the neat and
sheep were close in the home-garth: but armed men were lying or standing
about the river bank, talking or singing merrily none otherwise than
though deep peace were on the land; and when they saw the faring of the
host they sprang to their feet with a shout and gat to their horses at
once: they were more than the other bands had been, for the Geddings were
a greater House; they were seven old men, and ten swains, and ten thralls
bearing long spears like to those of the Erings; and no sooner had they
fallen in with their kindred, than the men of the host espied a greater
company yet coming to meet them: and these were of the folk of the
Galtings; and amongst them were ten warriors in their prime, because they
had but of late come back from the hunting in the wood and had been
belated from the muster of the kindreds; and with them were eight old men
and fifteen lads, and eighteen thralls; and the swains and thralls all
bore bows besides the swords that they were girt withal, and not all of
them had horses, but they who had none rode behind the others: so they
joined themselves to the host, shouting aloud; and they had with them a
great horn that they blew on till they had taken their place in the
array; and whereas their kindred was with Thiodolf, they followed along
with the hinder men of the Shieldings.

So now all the host went on together, and when they had passed the
Galting abodes, there was nothing between them and Bearham, nor need they
look for any further help of men; there were no beasts afield nor any to
herd them, and the stay-at-homes were within doors dighting them for
departure into the wild-wood if need should be: but a little while after
they had passed these dwellings came into the host two swains of about
twenty winters, and a doughty maid, their sister, and they bare no
weapons save short spears and knives; they were wet and dripping with the
water, for they had just swum Mirkwood-water.  They were of the Wolfing
House, and had been shepherding a few sheep on the west side of the
water, when they saw the host faring to battle, and might not refrain
them, but swam their horses across the swift deeps to join their kindred
to live and die with them.  The tale tells that they three fought in the
battles that followed after, and were not slain there, though they
entered them unarmed, but lived long years afterwards: of them need no
more be said.

Now, when the host was but a little past the Galting dwellings men began
to see the flames mingled with the smoke of the burning, and the smoke
itself growing thinner, as though the fire had over-mastered everything
and was consuming itself with its own violence; and somewhat afterwards,
the ground rising, they could see the Bearing meadow and the foemen
thereon: yet a little further, and from the height of another swelling of
the earth they could see the burning houses themselves and the array of
the Romans; so there they stayed and breathed their horses a while.  And
they beheld how of the Romans a great company was gathered together in
close array betwixt the ford and the Bearing Hall, but nigher unto the
ford, and these were a short mile from them; but others they saw
streaming out from the burning dwellings, as if their work were done
there, and they could not see that they had any captives with them.  Other
Romans there were, and amongst them men in the attire of the Goths,
busied about the river banks, as though they were going to try the ford.

But a little while abode Otter in that place, and then waved his arm and
rode on and all the host followed; and as they drew nigher, Otter, who
was wise in war, beheld the Romans and deemed them a great host, and the
very kernel and main body of them many more than all his company; and
moreover they were duly and well arrayed as men waiting a foe; so he knew
that he must be wary or he would lose himself and all his men.

So he stayed his company when they were about two furlongs from them, and
the main body of the foe stirred not, but horsemen and slingers came
forth from its sides and made on toward the Goths, and in three or four
minutes were within bowshot of them.  Then the bowmen of the Goths
slipped down from their horses and bent their bows and nocked their
arrows and let fly, and slew and hurt many of the horsemen, who endured
their shot but for a minute or two and then turned rein and rode back
slowly to their folk, and the slingers came not on very eagerly whereas
they were dealing with men a-horseback, and the bowmen of the Goths also
held them still.

Now turned Otter to his folk and made them a sign, which they knew well,
that they should get down from their horses; and when they were afoot the
leaders of tens and hundreds arrayed them, into the wedge-array, with the
bowmen on either flank: and Otter smiled as he beheld this adoing and
that the Romans meddled not with them, belike because they looked to have
them good cheap, since they were but a few wild men.

But when they were all arrayed he sat still on his horse and spake to
them short and sharply, saying:

"Men of the Goths, will ye mount your horses again and ride into the wood
and let it cover you, or will ye fight these Romans?"  They answered him
with a great shout and the clashing of their weapons on their shields.
"That is well," quoth Otter, "since we have come so far; for I perceive
that the foe will come to meet us, so that we must either abide their
shock or turn our backs.  Yet must we fight wisely or we are undone, and
Thiodolf in risk of undoing; this have we to do if we may, to thrust in
between them and the ford, and if we may do that, there let us fight it
out, till we fall one over another.  But if we may not do it, then will
we not throw our lives away but do the foemen what hurt we may without
mingling ourselves amongst them, and so abide the coming of Thiodolf; for
if we get not betwixt them and the ford we may in no case hinder them
from crossing.  And all this I tell you that ye may follow me wisely, and
refrain your wrath that ye may live yet to give it the rein when the time
comes."

So he spake and got down from his horse and drew his sword and went to
the head of the wedge-array and began slowly to lead forth; but the
thralls and swains had heed of the horses, and they drew aback with them
towards the wood which was but a little way from them.

But for Otter he led his men down towards the ford, and when the Romans
saw that, their main body began to move forward, faring slant-wise, as a
crab, down toward the ford; then Otter hastened somewhat, as he well
might, since his men were well learned in war and did not break their
array; but now by this time were those burners of the Romans come up with
the main battle, and the Roman captain sent them at once against the
Goths, and they advanced boldly enough, a great cloud of men in loose
array who fell to with arrows and slings on the wedge-array and slew and
hurt many: yet did not Otter stay his folk; but it was ill going for
them, for their unshielded sides were turned to the Romans, nor durst
Otter scatter his bowmen out from the wedge-array, lest the Romans, who
were more than they, should enter in amongst them.  Ever he gazed
earnestly on the main battle of the Romans, and what they were doing, and
presently it became clear to him that they would outgo him and come to
the ford, and then he wotted well that they would set on him just when
their light-armed were on his flank and his rearward, and then it would
go hard but they would break their array and all would be lost: therefore
he slacked his pace and went very slowly and the Romans went none the
slower for that; but their light-armed grew bolder and drew more together
as they came nigher to the Goths, as though they would give them an
onset; but just at that nick of time Otter passed the word down the
ranks, and, waving his sword, turned sharply to the right and fell with
all the wedge-array on the clustering throng of the light-armed, and his
bowmen spread out now from the right flank of the wedge-array, and shot
sharp and swift and the bowmen on the left flank ran forward swiftly till
they had cleared the wedge-array and were on the flank of the light-armed
Romans; and they, what between the onset of the swordsmen and spearmen of
the Goths, and their sharp arrows, knew not which way to turn, and a
great slaughter befell amongst them, and they of them were the happiest
who might save themselves by their feet.

Now after this storm, and after these men had been thrust away, Otter
stayed not, but swept round about the field toward the horses; and indeed
he looked to it that the main-battle of the Romans should follow him, but
they did not, but stayed still to receive the fleers of their
light-armed.  And this indeed was the goodhap of the Goths; for they were
somewhat disordered by their chase of the light-armed, and they smote and
spared not, their hearts being full of bitter wrath, as might well be;
for even as they turned on the Romans, they beheld the great roof of the
Bearings fall in over the burned hall, and a great shower of sparks burst
up from its fall, and there were the ragged gables left standing, licked
by little tongues of flame which could not take hold of them because of
the clay which filled the spaces between the great timbers and was daubed
over them.  And they saw that all the other houses were either alight or
smouldering, down to the smallest cot of a thrall, and even the barns and
booths both great and little.

Therefore, whereas the Markmen were far fewer in all than the Roman main-
battle, and whereas this same host was in very good array, no doubt there
was that the Markmen would have been grievously handled had the Romans
fallen on; but the Roman Captain would not have it so: for though he was
a bold man, yet was his boldness that of the wolf, that falleth on when
he is hungry and skulketh when he is full.  He was both young and very
rich, and a mighty man among his townsmen, and well had he learned that
ginger is hot in the mouth, and though he had come forth to the war for
the increasing of his fame, he had no will to die among the Markmen,
either for the sake of the city of Rome, or of any folk whatsoever, but
was liefer to live for his own sake.  Therefore was he come out to
vanquish easily, that by his fame won he might win more riches and
dominion in Rome; and he was well content also to have for his own
whatever was choice amongst the plunder of these wild-men (as he deemed
them), if it were but a fair woman or two.  So this man thought, It is my
business to cross the ford and come to Wolfstead, and there take the
treasure of the tribe, and have a stronghold there, whence we may slay so
many of these beasts with little loss to us that we may march away easily
and with our hands full, even if Maenius with his men come not to our
aid, as full surely he will: therefore as to these angry men, who be not
without might and conduct in battle, let us remember the old saw that
saith 'a bridge of gold to a fleeing foe,' and let them depart with no
more hurt of Romans, and seek us afterwards when we are fenced into their
stead, which shall then be our stronghold: even so spake he to his
Captains about him.

For it must be told that he had no tidings of the overthrow of the Romans
on the Ridge; nor did he know surely how many fighting-men the Markmen
might muster, except by the report of those dastards of the Goths; and
though he had taken those two women in the wastes, yet had he got no word
from them, for they did as the Hall-Sun bade them, when they knew that
they would be questioned with torments, and smiting themselves each with
a little sharp knife, so went their ways to the Gods.

Thus then the Roman Captain let the Markmen go their ways, and turned
toward the ford, and the Markmen went slowly now toward their horses.
Howbeit there were many of them who murmured against Otter, saying that
it was ill done to have come so far and ridden so hard, and then to have
done so little, and that were to-morrow come, they would not be led away
so easily: but now they said it was ill; for the Romans would cross the
water, and make their ways to Wolfstead, none hindering them, and would
burn the dwellings and slay the old men and thralls, and have away the
women and children and the Hall-Sun the treasure of the Markmen.  In
sooth, they knew not that a band of the Roman light-armed had already
crossed the water, and had fallen upon the dwellings of the Wolfings; but
that the old men and younglings and thralls of the House had come upon
them as they were entangled amidst the tofts and the garths, and had
overcome them and slain many.

Thus went Otter and his men to their horses when it was now drawing
toward sunset (for all this was some while adoing), and betook them to a
rising ground not far from the wood-side, and there made what sort of a
garth they might, with their horses and the limbs of trees and
long-shafted spears; and they set a watch and abode in the garth right
warily, and lighted no fires when night fell, but ate what meat they had
with them, which was but little, and so sleeping and watching abode the
morning.  But the main body of the Romans did not cross the ford that
night, for they feared lest they might go astray therein, for it was an
ill ford to those that knew not the water: so they abode on the bank nigh
to the water's edge, with the mind to cross as soon as it was fairly
daylight.

Now Otter had lost of his men some hundred and twenty slain or grievously
hurt, and they had away with them the hurt men and the bodies of the
slain.  The tale tells not how many of the Romans were slain, but a many
of their light-armed had fallen, since the Markmen had turned so hastily
upon them, and they had with them many of the best bowmen of the Mark.




CHAPTER XXI--THEY BICKER ABOUT THE FORD


In the grey of the morning was Otter afoot with the watchers, and
presently he got on his horse and peered over the plain, but the mist yet
hung low on it, so that he might see nought for a while; but at last he
seemed to note something coming toward the host from the upper water
above the ford, so he rode forward to meet it, and lo, it was a lad of
fifteen winters, naked save his breeches, and wet from the river; and
Otter drew rein, and the lad said to him: "Art thou the War-duke?"  "Yea,"
said Otter.

Said the lad, "I am Ali, the son of Grey, and the Hall-Sun hath sent me
to thee with this word: 'Are ye coming?  Is Thiodolf at hand?  For I have
seen the Roof-ridge red in the sunlight as if it were painted with
cinnabar.'"

Said Otter, "Art thou going back to Wolfstead, son?"

"Yea, at once, my father," said Ali.

"Then tell her," said Otter, "that Thiodolf is at hand, and when he
cometh we shall both together fall upon the Romans either in crossing the
ford or in the Wolfing meadow; but tell her also that I am not strong
enough to hinder the Romans from crossing."

"Father," said Ali, "the Hall-Sun saith: Thou art wise in war; now tell
us, shall we hold the Hall against the Romans that ye may find us there?
For we have discomfited their vanguard already, and we have folk who can
fight; but belike the main battle of the Romans shall get the upper hand
of us ere ye come to our helping: belike it were better to leave the
hall, and let the wood cover us."

"Now is this well asked," said Otter; "get thee back, my son, and bid the
Hall-Sun trust not to warding of the Hall, for the Romans are a mighty
host: and this day, even when Thiodolf cometh hither, shall be hard for
the Goth-folk: let her hasten lest these thieves come upon her hastily;
let her take the Hall-Sun her namesake, and the old men and children and
the women, and let those fighting folk she hath be a guard to all this in
the wood.  And hearken moreover; it will, maybe, be six hours ere
Thiodolf cometh; tell her I will cast the dice for life or death, and
stir up these Romans now at once, that they may have other things to
think of than burning old men and women and children in their dwellings;
thus may she reach the wood unhindered.  Hast thou all this in thine
head?  Then go thy ways."

But the lad lingered, and he reddened and looked on the ground and then
he said: "My father, I swam the deeps, and when I reached this bank, I
crept along by the mist and the reeds toward where the Romans are, and I
came near to them, and noted what they were doing; and I tell thee that
they are already stirring to take the water at the ford.  Now then do
what thou wilt."

Therewith he turned about, and went his way at once, running like a colt
which has never felt halter or bit.

But Otter rode back hastily and roused certain men in whom he trusted,
and bid them rouse the captains and all the host and bid men get to horse
speedily and with as little noise as might be.  So did they, and there
was little delay, for men were sleeping with one eye open, as folk say,
and many were already astir.  So in a little while they were all in the
saddle, and the mist yet stretched low over the meadow; for the morning
was cool and without wind.  Then Otter bade the word be carried down the
ranks that they should ride as quietly as may be and fare through the
mist to do the Romans some hurt, but in nowise to get entangled in their
ranks, and all men to heed well the signal of turning and drawing aback;
and therewith they rode off down the meadow led by men who could have led
them through the dark night.

But for the Romans, they were indeed getting ready to cross the ford when
the mist should have risen; and on the bank it was thinning already and
melting away; for a little air of wind was beginning to breathe from the
north-east and the sunrise, which was just at hand; and the bank,
moreover, was stonier and higher than the meadow's face, which fell away
from it as a shallow dish from its rim: thereon yet lay the mist like a
white wall.

So the Romans and their friends the dastards of the Goths had well nigh
got all ready, and had driven stakes into the water from bank to bank to
mark out the safe ford, and some of their light-armed and most of their
Goths were by now in the water or up on the Wolfing meadow with the more
part of their baggage and wains; and the rest of the host was drawn up in
good order, band by band, waiting the word to take the water, and the
captain was standing nigh to the river bank beside their God the chief
banner of the Host.

Of a sudden one of the dastards of the Goths who was close to the Captain
cried out that he heard horse coming; but because he spake in the Gothic
tongue, few heeded; but even therewith an old leader of a hundred cried
out the same tidings in the Roman tongue, and all men fell to handling
their weapons; but before they could face duly toward the meadow, came
rushing from out of the mist a storm of shafts that smote many men, and
therewithal burst forth the sound of the Markmen's war-horn, like the
roaring of a hundred bulls mingled with the thunder of horses at the
gallop; and then dark over the wall of mist showed the crests of the
riders of the Mark, though scarce were their horses seen till their whole
war-rank came dark and glittering into the space of the rising-ground
where the mist was but a haze now, and now at last smitten athwart by the
low sun just arisen.

Therewith came another storm of shafts, wherein javelins and spears cast
by the hand were mingled with the arrows: but the Roman ranks had faced
the meadow and the storm which it yielded, swiftly and steadily, and they
stood fast and threw their spears, albeit not with such good aim as might
have been, because of their haste, so that few were slain by them.  And
the Roman Captain still loth to fight with the Goths in earnest for no
reward, and still more and more believing that this was the only band of
them that he had to look to, bade those who were nighest the ford not to
tarry for the onset of a few wild riders, but to go their ways into the
water; else by a sudden onrush might the Romans have entangled Otter's
band in their ranks, and so destroyed all.  As it was the horsemen fell
not on the Roman ranks full in face, but passing like a storm athwart the
ranks to the right, fell on there where they were in thinnest array (for
they were gathered to the ford as aforesaid), and slew some and drave
some into the deeps and troubled the whole Roman host.

So now the Roman Captain was forced to take new order, and gather all his
men together, and array his men for a hard fight; and by now the mist was
rolling off from the face of the whole meadow and the sun was bright and
hot.  His men serried their ranks, and the front rank cast their spears,
and slew both men and horses of the Goths as those rode along their front
casting their javelins, and shooting here and there from behind their
horses if occasion served, or making a shift to send an arrow even as
they sat a-horseback; then the second rank of the Romans would take the
place of the first, and cast in their turn, and they who had taken the
water turned back and took their place behind the others, and many of the
light-armed came with them, and all the mass of them flowed forward
together, looking as if it might never be broken.  But Otter would not
abide the shock, since he had lost men and horses, and had no mind to be
caught in the sweep of their net; so he made the sign, and his Company
drew off to right and left, yet keeping within bowshot, so that the
bowmen still loosed at the Romans.

But they for their part might not follow afoot men on untired horses, and
their own horse was on the west side with the baggage, and had it been
there would have been but of little avail, as the Roman Captain knew.  So
they stood awhile making grim countenance, and then slowly drew back to
the ford under cover of their light-armed who shot at the Goths as they
rode forward, but abode not their shock.

But Otter and his folk followed after the Romans again, and again did
them some hurt, and at last drew so nigh, that once more the Romans
stormed forth, and once more smote a stroke in the air; nor even so would
the Markmen cease to meddle with them, though never would Otter suffer
his men to be mingled with them.  At the last the Romans, seeing that
Otter would not walk into the open trap, and growing weary of this
bickering, began to take the water little by little, while a strong
Company kept face to the Markmen; and now Otter saw that they would not
be hindered any longer, and he had lost many men, and even now feared
lest he should be caught in the trap, and so lose all.  And on the other
hand it was high noon by now, so that he had given respite to the stay-at-
homes of the Wolfings, so that they might get them into the wood.  So he
drew out of bowshot and bade his men breathe their horses and rest
themselves and eat something; and they did so gladly, since they saw that
they might not fall upon the Romans to live and die for it until Thiodolf
was come, or until they knew that he was not coming.  But the Romans
crossed the ford in good earnest and were soon all gathered together on
the western bank making them ready for the march to Wolfstead.  And it
must be told that the Roman Captain was the more deliberate about this
because after the overthrow of his light-armed there the morning before,
he thought that the Roof was held by warriors of the kindreds, and not by
a few old men, and women, and lads.  Therefore he had no fear of their
escaping him.  Moreover it was this imagination of his, to wit that a
strong band of warriors was holding Wolf-stead, that made him deem there
were no more worth thinking about of the warriors of the Mark save
Otter's Company and the men in the Hall of the Wolfings.




CHAPTER XXII--OTTER FALLS ON AGAINST HIS WILL


It was with the same imagination working in him belike that the Roman
Captain set none to guard the ford on the westward side of
Mirkwood-water.  The Romans tarried there but a little hour, and then
went their ways; but Otter sent a man on a swift horse to watch them, and
when they were clean gone for half an hour, he bade his folk to horse,
and they departed, all save a handful of the swains and elders, who were
left to tell the tidings to Thiodolf when he should come into Mid-mark.

So Otter and his folk crossed the ford, and drew up in good order on the
westward bank, and it was then somewhat more than three hours after noon.
He had been there but a little while before he noted a stir in the
Bearing meadow, and lo, it was the first of Thiodolf's folk, who had
gotten out of the wood and had fallen in with the men whom he had left
behind.  And these first were the riders of the Bearings, and the
Wormings, (for they had out-gone the others who were afoot).  It may well
be thought how fearful was their anger when they set eyes on the
smouldering ashes of the dwellings; nor even when those folk of Otter had
told them all they had to tell could some of them refrain them from
riding off to the burnt houses to seek for the bodies of their kindred.
But when they came there, and amidst the ashes could find no bones, their
hearts were lightened, and yet so mad wroth they were, that some could
scarce sit their horses, and great tears gushed from the eyes of some,
and pattered down like hail-stones, so eager were they to see the blood
of the Romans.  So they rode back to where they had left their folk
talking with them of Otter; and the Bearings were sitting grim upon their
horses and somewhat scowling on Otter's men.  Then the foremost of those
who had come back from the houses waved his hand toward the ford, but
could say nought for a while; but the captain and chief of the Bearings,
a grizzled man very big of body, whose name was Arinbiorn, spake to that
man and said; "What aileth thee Sweinbiorn the Black?  What hast thou
seen?"

He said:

   "Now red and grey is the pavement of the Bearings' house of old:
   Red yet is the floor of the dais, but the hearth all grey and cold.
   I knew not the house of my fathers; I could not call to mind
   The fashion of the building of that Warder of the Wind.
   O wide were grown the windows, and the roof exceeding high!
   For nought there was to look on 'twixt the pavement and the sky.
   But the tie-beam lay on the dais, and methought its staining fair;
   For rings of smoothest charcoal were round it here and there,
   And the red flame flickered o'er it, and never a staining wight
   Hath red earth in his coffer so clear and glittering bright,
   And still the little smoke-wreaths curled o'er it pale and blue.
   Yea, fair is our hall's adorning for a feast that is strange and new."

Said Arinbiorn: "What sawest thou therein, O Sweinbiorn, where sat thy
grandsire at the feast?  Where were the bones of thy mother lying?"

Said Sweinbiorn:

   "We sought the feast-hall over, and nought we found therein
   Of the bones of the ancient mothers, or the younglings of the kin.
   The men are greedy, doubtless, to lose no whit of the prey,
   And will try if the hoary elders may yet outlive the way
   That leads to the southland cities, till at last they come to stand
   With the younglings in the market to be sold in an alien land."

Arinbiorn's brow lightened somewhat; but ere he could speak again an
ancient thrall of the Galtings spake and said:

"True it is, O warriors of the Bearings, that we might not see any war-
thralls being led away by the Romans when they came away from the burning
dwellings; and we deem it certain that they crossed the water before the
coming of the Romans, and that they are now with the stay-at-homes of the
Wolfings in the wild-wood behind the Wolfing dwellings, for we hear tell
that the War-duke would not that the Hall-Sun should hold the Hall
against the whole Roman host."

Then Sweinbiorn tossed up his sword into the air and caught it by the
hilts as it fell, and cried out: "On, on to the meadow, where these
thieves abide us!"  Arinbiorn spake no word, but turned his horse and
rode down to the ford, and all men followed him; and of the Bearings
there were an hundred warriors save one, and of the Wormings eighty and
seven.

So rode they over the meadow and into the ford and over it, and Otter's
company stood on the bank to meet them, and shouted to see them; but the
others made but little noise as they crossed the water.

So when they were on the western bank Arinbiorn came among them of Otter,
and cried out: "Where then is Otter, where is the War-duke, is he alive
or dead?"

And the throng opened to him and Otter stood facing him; and Arinbiorn
spake and said: "Thou art alive and unhurt, War-duke, when many have been
hurt and slain; and methinks thy company is little minished though the
kindred of the Bearings lacketh a roof; and its elders and women and
children are gone into captivity.  What is this?  Was it a light thing
that gangrel thieves should burn and waste in Mid-mark and depart unhurt,
that ye stand here with clean blades and cold bodies?"

Said Otter: "Thou grievest for the hurt of thine House, Arinbiorn; but
this at least is good, that though ye have lost the timber of your house
ye have not lost its flesh and blood; the shell is gone, but the kernel
is saved: for thy folk are by this time in the wood with the Wolfing stay-
at-homes, and among these are many who may fight on occasion, so they are
safe as for this time: the Romans may not come at them to hurt them."

Said Arinbiorn: "Had ye time to learn all this, Otter, when ye fled so
fast before the Romans, that the father tarried not for the son, nor the
son for the father?"

He spoke in a loud voice so that many heard him, and some deemed it evil;
for anger and dissension between friends seemed abroad; but some were so
eager for battle, that the word of Arinbiorn seemed good to them, and
they laughed for pride and anger.

Then Otter answered meekly, for he was a wise man and a bold: "We fled
not, Arinbiorn, but as the sword fleeth, when it springeth up from the
iron helm to fall on the woollen coat.  Are we not now of more avail to
you, O men of the Bearings, than our dead corpses would have been?"

Arinbiorn answered not, but his face waxed red, as if he were struggling
with a weight hard to lift: then said Otter:

"But when will Thiodolf and the main battle be with us?"

Arinbiorn answered calmly: "Maybe in a little hour from now, or somewhat
more."

Said Otter: "My rede is that we abide him here, and when we are all met
and well ordered together, fall on the Romans at once: for then shall we
be more than they; whereas now we are far fewer, and moreover we shall
have to set on them in their ground of vantage."

Arinbiorn answered nothing; but an old man of the Bearings, one
Thorbiorn, came up and spake:

"Warriors, here are we talking and taking counsel, though this is no
Hallowed Thing to bid us what we shall do, and what we shall forbear; and
to talk thus is less like warriors than old women wrangling over the why
and wherefore of a broken crock.  Let the War-duke rule here, as is but
meet and right.  Yet if I might speak and not break the peace of the
Goths, then would I say this, that it might be better for us to fall on
these Romans at once before they have cast up a dike about them, as Fox
telleth is their wont, and that even in an hour they may do much."

As he spake there was a murmur of assent about him, but Otter spake
sharply, for he was grieved.

"Thorbiorn, thou art old, and shouldest not be void of prudence.  Now it
had been better for thee to have been in the wood to-day to order the
women and the swains according to thine ancient wisdom than to egg on my
young warriors to fare unwarily.  Here will I abide Thiodolf."

Then Thorbiorn reddened and was wroth; but Arinbiorn spake:

"What is this to-do?  Let the War-duke rule as is but right: but I am now
become a man of Thiodolf's company; and he bade me haste on before to
help all I might.  Do thou as thou wilt, Otter: for Thiodolf shall be
here in an hour's space, and if much diking shall be done in an hour, yet
little slaying, forsooth, shall be done, and that especially if the foe
is all armed and slayeth women and children.  Yea if the Bearing women be
all slain, yet shall not Tyr make us new ones out of the stones of the
waste to wed with the Galtings and the fish-eating Houses?--this is easy
to be done forsooth.  Yea, easier than fighting the Romans and overcoming
them!"

And he was very wrath, and turned away; and again there was a murmur and
a hum about him.  But while these had been speaking aloud, Sweinbiorn had
been talking softly to some of the younger men, and now he shook his
naked sword in the air and spake aloud and sang:

   "Ye tarry, Bears of Battle! ye linger, Sons of the Worm!
   Ye crouch adown, O kindreds, from the gathering of the storm!
   Ye say, it shall soon pass over and we shall fare afield
   And reap the wheat with the war-sword and winnow in the shield.
   But where shall be the corner wherein ye then shall abide,
   And where shall be the woodland where the whelps of the bears shall
   hide
   When 'twixt the snowy mountains and the edges of the sea
   These men have swept the wild-wood and the fields where men may be
   Of every living sword-blade, and every quivering spear,
   And in the southland cities the yoke of slaves ye bear?
   Lo ye! whoever follows I fare to sow the seed
   Of the days to be hereafter and the deed that comes of deed."

Therewith he waved his sword over his head, and made as if he would spur
onward.  But Arinbiorn thrust through the press and outwent him and cried
out:

"None goeth before Arinbiorn the Old when the battle is pitched in the
meadows of the kindred.  Come, ye sons of the Bear, ye children of the
Worm!  And come ye, whosoever hath a will to see stout men die!"

Then on he rode nor looked behind him, and the riders of the Bearings and
the Wormings drew themselves out of the throng, and followed him, and
rode clattering over the meadow towards Wolfstead.  A few of the others
rode with them, and yet but a few.  For they remembered the holy Folk-
mote and the oath of the War-duke, and how they had chosen Otter to be
their leader.  Howbeit, man looked askance at man, as if in shame to be
left behind.

But Otter bethought him in the flash of a moment, "If these men ride
alone, they shall die and do nothing; and if we ride with them it may be
that we shall overthrow the Romans, and if we be vanquished, it shall go
hard but we shall slay many of them, so that it shall be the easier for
Thiodolf to deal with them."

Then he spake hastily, and bade certain men abide at the ford for a
guard; then he drew his sword and rode to the front of his folk, and
cried out aloud to them:

"Now at last has come the time to die, and let them of the Markmen who
live hereafter lay us in howe.  Set on, Sons of Tyr, and give not your
lives away, but let them be dearly earned of our foemen."

Then all shouted loudly and gladly; nor were they otherwise than
exceeding glad; for now had they forgotten all other joys of life save
the joy of fighting for the kindred and the days to be.

So Otter led them forth, and when he heard the whole company clattering
and thundering on the earth behind him and felt their might enter into
him, his brow cleared, and the anxious lines in the face of the old man
smoothed themselves out, and as he rode along the soul so stirred within
him that he sang out aloud:

   "Time was when hot was the summer and I was young on the earth,
   And I grudged me every moment that lacked its share of mirth.
   I woke in the morn and was merry and all the world methought
   For me and my heart's deliverance that hour was newly wrought.
   I have passed through the halls of manhood, I have reached the doors
   of eld,
   And I have been glad and sorry, but ever have upheld
   My heart against all trouble that none might call me sad,
   But ne'er came such remembrance of how my heart was glad
   In the afternoon of summer 'neath the still unwearied sun
   Of the days when I was little and all deeds were hopes to be won,
   As now at last it cometh when e'en in such-like tide,
   For the freeing of my trouble o'er the fathers' field I ride."

Many men perceived that he sang, and saw that he was merry, howbeit few
heard his very words, and yet all were glad of him.

Fast they rode, being wishful to catch up with the Bearings and the
Wormings, and soon they came anigh them, and they, hearing the thunder of
the horse-hoofs, looked and saw that it was the company of Otter, and so
slacked their speed till they were all joined together with joyous
shouting and laughter.  So then they ordered the ranks anew and so set
forward in great joy without haste or turmoil toward Wolfstead and the
Romans.  For now the bitterness of their fury and the sourness of their
abiding wrath were turned into the mere joy of battle; even as the clear
red and sweet wine comes of the ugly ferment and rough trouble of the
must.




CHAPTER XXIII--THIODOLF MEETETH THE ROMANS IN THE WOLFING MEADOW


It was scarce an hour after this that the footmen of Thiodolf came out of
the thicket road on to the meadow of the Bearings; there saw they men
gathered on a rising ground, and they came up to them and saw how some of
them were looking with troubled faces towards the ford and what lay
beyond it, and some toward the wood and the coming of Thiodolf.  But
these were they whom Otter had bidden abide Thiodolf there, and he had
sent two messengers to them for Thiodolf's behoof that he might have due
tidings so soon as he came out of the thicket: the first told how Otter
had been compelled in a manner to fall on the Romans along with the
riders of the Bearings and the Wormings, and the second who had but just
then come, told how the Markmen had been worsted by the Romans, and had
given back from the Wolfing dwellings, and were making a stand against
the foemen in the meadow betwixt the ford and Wolfstead.

Now when Thiodolf heard of these tidings he stayed not to ask long
questions, but led the whole host straightway down to the ford, lest the
remnant of Otter's men should be driven down there, and the Romans should
hold the western bank against him.

At the ford there was none to withstand them, nor indeed any man at all;
for the men whom Otter had set there, when they heard that the battle had
gone against their kindred, had ridden their ways to join them.  So
Thiodolf crossed over the ford, he and his in good order all afoot, he
like to the others; but for him he was clad in the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk,
but was unhelmeted and bare no shield.  Throng-plough was naked in his
hand as he came up all dripping on to the bank and stood in the meadow of
the Wolfings; his face was stern and set as he gazed straight onward to
the place of the fray, but he did not look as joyous as his wont was in
going down to the battle.

Now they had gone but a short way from the ford before the noise of the
fight and the blowing of horns came down the wind to them, but it was a
little way further before they saw the fray with their eyes; because the
ground fell away from the river somewhat at first, and then rose and fell
again before it went up in one slope toward the Wolfing dwellings.

But when they were come to the top of the next swelling of the ground,
they beheld from thence what they had to deal with; for there round about
a ground of vantage was the field black with the Roman host, and in the
midst of it was a tangle of struggling men and tossing spears, and
glittering swords.

So when they beheld the battle of their kindred they gave a great shout
and hastened onward the faster; and they were ordered into the
wedge-array and Thiodolf led them, as meet it was.  And now even as they
who were on the outward edge of the array and could see what was toward
were looking on the battle with eager eyes, there came an answering shout
down the wind, which they knew for the voice of the Goths amid the
foemen, and then they saw how the ring of the Romans shook and parted,
and their array fell back, and lo the company of the Markmen standing
stoutly together, though sorely minished; and sure it was that they had
not fled or been scattered, but were ready to fall one over another in
one band, for there were no men straggling towards the ford, though many
masterless horses ran here and there about the meadow.  Now, therefore,
none doubted but that they would deliver their friends from the Romans,
and overthrow the foemen.

But now befel a wonder, a strange thing to tell of.  The Romans soon
perceived what was adoing, whereupon the half of them turned about to
face the new comers, while the other half still withstood the company of
Otter: the wedge-array of Thiodolf drew nearer and nearer till it was
hard on the place where it should spread itself out to storm down on the
foe, and the Goths beset by the Romans made them ready to fall on from
their side.  There was Thiodolf leading his host, and all men looking for
the token and sign to fall on; but even as he lifted up Throng-plough to
give that sign, a cloud came over his eyes and he saw nought of all that
was before him, and he staggered back as one who hath gotten a deadly
stroke, and so fell swooning to the earth, though none had smitten him.
Then stayed was the wedge-array even at the very point of onset, and the
hearts of the Goths sank, for they deemed that their leader was slain,
and those who were nearest to him raised him up and bore him hastily
aback out of the battle; and the Romans also had beheld him fall, and
they also deemed him dead or sore hurt, and shouted for joy and loitered
not, but stormed forth on the wedge-array like valiant men; for it must
be told that they, who erst out-numbered the company of Otter, were now
much out-numbered, but they deemed it might well be that they could
dismay the Goths since they had been stayed by the fall of their leader;
and Otter's company were wearied with sore fighting against a great host.
Nevertheless these last, who had not seen the fall of Thiodolf (for the
Romans were thick between him and them) fell on with such exceeding fury
that they drove the Romans who faced them back on those who had set on
the wedge-array, which also stood fast undismayed; for he who stood next
to Thiodolf, a man big of body, and stout of heart, hight Thorolf, hove
up a great axe and cried out aloud:

"Here is the next man to Thiodolf! here is one who will not fall till
some one thrusts him over, here is Thorolf of the Wolfings!  Stand fast
and shield you, and smite, though Thiodolf be gone untimely to the Gods!"

So none gave back a foot, and fierce was the fight about the wedge-array;
and the men of Otter--but there was no Otter there, and many another man
was gone, and Arinbiorn the Old led them--these stormed on so fiercely
that they cleft their way through all and joined themselves to their
kindred, and the battle was renewed in the Wolfing meadow.  But the
Romans had this gain, that Thiodolf's men had let go their occasion for
falling on the Romans with their line spread out so that every man might
use his weapons; yet were the Goths strong both in valiancy and in
numbers, nor might the Romans break into their array, and as aforesaid
the Romans were the fewer, for it was less than half of their host that
had pursued the Goths when they had been thrust back from their fierce
onset: nor did more than the half seem needed, so many of them had fallen
along with Otter the War-duke and Sweinbiorn of the Bearings, that they
seemed to the Romans but a feeble band easy to overcome.

So fought they in the Wolfing meadow in the fifth hour after high-noon,
and neither yielded to the other: but while these things were a-doing,
men laid Thiodolf adown aloof from the battle under a doddered oak half a
furlong from where the fight was a-doing, round whose bole clung flocks
of wool from the sheep that drew around it in the hot summer-tide and
rubbed themselves against it, and the ground was trodden bare of grass
round the bole, and close to the trunk was worn into a kind of trench.
There then they laid Thiodolf, and they wondered that no blood came from
him, and that there was no sign of a shot-weapon in his body.

But as for him, when he fell, all memory of the battle and what had gone
before it faded from his mind, and he passed into sweet and pleasant
dreams wherein he was a lad again in the days before he had fought with
the three Hun-Kings in the hazelled field.  And in these dreams he was
doing after the manner of young lads, sporting in the meadows, backing
unbroken colts, swimming in the river, going a-hunting with the elder
carles.  And especially he deemed that he was in the company of one old
man who had taught him both wood-craft and the handling of weapons: and
fair at first was his dream of his doings with this man; he was with him
in the forge smithying a sword-blade, and hammering into its steel the
thin golden wires; and fishing with an angle along with him by the eddies
of Mirkwood-water; and sitting with him in an ingle of the Hall, the old
man telling a tale of an ancient warrior of the Wolfings hight Thiodolf
also: then suddenly and without going there, they were in a little
clearing of the woods resting after hunting, a roe-deer with an arrow in
her lying at their feet, and the old man was talking, and telling
Thiodolf in what wise it was best to go about to get the wind of a hart;
but all the while there was going on the thunder of a great gale of wind
through the woodland boughs, even as the drone of a bag-pipe cleaves to
the tune.  Presently Thiodolf arose and would go about his hunting again,
and stooped to take up his spear, and even therewith the old man's speech
stayed, and Thiodolf looked up, and lo, his face was white like stone,
and he touched him, and he was hard as flint, and like the image of an
ancient god as to his face and hands, though the wind stirred his hair
and his raiment, as they did before.  Therewith a great pang smote
Thiodolf in his dream, and he felt as if he also were stiffening into
stone, and he strove and struggled, and lo, the wild-wood was gone, and a
white light empty of all vision was before him, and as he moved his head
this became the Wolfing meadow, as he had known it so long, and thereat a
soft pleasure and joy took hold of him, till again he looked, and saw
there no longer the kine and sheep, and the herd-women tending them, but
the rush and turmoil of that fierce battle, the confused thundering noise
of which was going up to the heavens; for indeed he was now fully awake
again.

So he stood up and looked about; and around him was a ring of the
sorrowful faces of the warriors, who had deemed that he was hurt deadly,
though no hurt could they find upon him.  But the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk
lay upon the ground beside him; for they had taken it off him to look for
his hurts.

So he looked into their faces and said: "What aileth you, ye men?  I am
alive and unhurt; what hath betided?"

And one said: "Art thou verily alive, or a man come back from the dead?
We saw thee fall as thou wentest leading us against the foe as if thou
hadst been smitten by a thunder-bolt, and we deemed thee dead or
grievously hurt.  Now the carles are fighting stoutly, and all is well
since thou livest yet."

So he said: "Give me the point and edges that I know, that I may smite
myself therewith and not the foemen; for I have feared and blenched from
the battle."

Said an old warrior: "If that be so, Thiodolf, wilt thou blench twice?  Is
not once enough?  Now let us go back to the hard handplay, and if thou
wilt, smite thyself after the battle, when we have once more had a man's
help of thee."

Therewith he held out Throng-plough to him by the point, and Thiodolf
took hold of the hilts and handled it and said: "Let us hasten, while the
Gods will have it so, and while they are still suffering me to strike a
stroke for the kindred."

And therewith he brandished Throng-plough, and went forth toward the
battle, and the heart grew hot within him, and the joy of waking life
came back to him, the joy which but erewhile he had given to a mere
dream.

But the old man who had rebuked him stooped down and lifted the Hauberk
from the ground, and cried out after him, "O Thiodolf, and wilt thou go
naked into so strong a fight? and thou with this so goodly
sword-rampart?"

Thiodolf stayed a moment, and even therewith they looked, and lo! the
Romans giving back before the Goths and the Goths following up the chase,
but slowly and steadily.  Then Thiodolf heeded nothing save the battle,
but ran forward hastily, and those warriors followed him, the old man
last of all holding the Hauberk in his hand, and muttering:

   "So fares hot blood to the glooming and the world beneath the grass;
   And the fruit of the Wolfings' orchard in a flash from the world must
   pass.
   Men say that the tree shall blossom in the garden of the folk,
   And the new twig thrust him forward from the place where the old one
   broke,
   And all be well as aforetime: but old and old I grow,
   And I doubt me if such another the folk to come shall know."

And he still hurried forward as fast as his old body might go, so that he
might wrap the safeguard of the Hauberk round Thiodolf's body.




CHAPTER XXIV--THE GOTHS ARE OVERTHROWN BY THE ROMANS


Now rose up a mighty shout when Thiodolf came back to the battle of the
kindreds, for many thought he had been slain; and they gathered round
about him, and cried out to him joyously out of their hearts of
good-fellowship, and the old man who had rebuked Thiodolf, and who was
Jorund of the Wolfings, came up to him and reached out to him the
Hauberk, and he did it on scarce heeding; for all his heart and soul was
turned toward the battle of the Romans and what they were a-doing; and he
saw that they were falling back in good order, as men out-numbered, but
undismayed.  So he gathered all his men together and ordered them afresh;
for they were somewhat disarrayed with the fray and the chase: and now he
no longer ordered them in the wedge array, but in a line here three deep,
here five deep, or more, for the foes were hard at hand, and outnumbered,
and so far overcome, that he and all men deemed it a little matter to
give these their last overthrow, and then onward to Wolf-stead to storm
on what was left there and purge the house of the foemen.  Howbeit
Thiodolf bethought him that succour might come to the Romans from their
main-battle, as they needed not many men there, since there was nought to
fear behind them: but the thought was dim within him, for once more since
he had gotten the Hauberk on him the earth was wavering and dream-like:
he looked about him, and nowise was he as in past days of battle when he
saw nought but the foe before him, and hoped for nothing save the
victory.  But now indeed the Wood-Sun seemed to him to be beside him, and
not against his will, as one besetting and hindering him, but as though
his own longing had drawn her thither and would not let her depart; and
whiles it seemed to him that her beauty was clearer to be seen than the
bodies of the warriors round about him.  For the rest he seemed to be in
a dream indeed, and, as men do in dreams, to be for ever striving to be
doing something of more moment than anything which he did, but which he
must ever leave undone.  And as the dream gathered and thickened about
him the foe before him changed to his eyes, and seemed no longer the
stern brown-skinned smooth-faced men under their crested iron helms with
their iron-covered shields before them, but rather, big-headed men, small
of stature, long-bearded, swart, crooked of body, exceeding foul of
aspect.  And he looked on and did nothing for a while, and his head
whirled as though he had been grievously smitten.

Thus tarried the kindreds awhile, and they were bewildered and their
hearts fell because Thiodolf did not fly on the foemen like a falcon on
the quarry, as his wont was.  But as for the Romans, they had now stayed,
and were facing their foes again, and that on a vantage-ground, since the
field sloped up toward the Wolfing dwelling; and they gathered heart when
they saw that the Goths tarried and forbore them.  But the sun was
sinking, and the evening was hard at hand.

So at last Thiodolf led forward with Throng-plough held aloft in his
right hand; but his left hand he held out by his side, as though he were
leading someone along.  And as he went, he muttered: "When will these
accursed sons of the nether earth leave the way clear to us, that we may
be alone and take pleasure each in each amidst of the flowers and the
sun?"

Now as the two hosts drew near to one another, again came the sound of
trumpets afar off, and men knew that this would be succour coming to the
Romans from their main-battle, and the Romans thereon shouted for joy,
and the host of the kindreds might no longer forbear, but rushed on
fiercely against them; and for Thiodolf it was now come to this, that so
entangled was he in his dream that he rather went with his men than led
them.  Yet had he Throng-plough in his right hand, and he muttered in his
beard as he went, "Smite before! smite behind! and smite on the right
hand! but never on the left!"

Thus then they met, and as before, neither might the Goths sweep the
Romans away, nor the Romans break the Goths into flight; yet were many of
the kindred anxious and troubled, since they knew that aid was coming to
the Romans, and they heard the trumpets sounding nearer and more joyous;
and at last, as the men of the kindreds were growing a-wearied with
fighting, they heard those horns as it were in their very ears, and the
thunder of the tramp of footmen, and they knew that a fresh host of men
was upon them; then those they had been fighting with opened before them,
falling aside to the right and the left, and the fresh men passing
between them, fell on the Goths like the waters of a river when a sluice-
gate is opened.  They came on in very good order, never breaking their
ranks, but swift withal, smiting and pushing before them, and so brake
through the array of the Goth-folk, and drave them this way and that way
down the slopes.

Yet still fought the warriors of the kindred most valiantly, making stand
and facing the foe again and again in knots of a score or two score, or
maybe ten score; and though many a man was slain, yet scarce any one
before he had slain or hurt a Roman; and some there were, and they the
oldest, who fought as if they and the few about them were all the host
that was left to the folk, and heeded not that others were driven back,
or that the Romans gathered about them, cutting them off from all succour
and aid, but went on smiting till they were felled with many strokes.

Howbeit the array of the Goths was broken and many were slain, and
perforce they must give back, and it seemed as if they would be driven
into the river and all be lost.

But for Thiodolf, this befell him: that at first, when those fresh men
fell on, he seemed, as it were, to wake unto himself again, and he cried
aloud the cry of the Wolf, and thrust into the thickest of the fray, and
slew many and was hurt of none, and for a moment of time there was an
empty space round about him, such fear he cast even into the valiant
hearts of the foemen.  But those who had time to see him as they stood by
him noted that he was as pale as a dead man, and his eyes set and
staring; and so of a sudden, while he stood thus threatening the ring of
doubtful foemen, the weakness took him again, Throng-plough tumbled from
his hand, and he fell to earth as one dead.

Then of those who saw him some deemed that he had been striving against
some secret hurt till he could do no more; and some that there was a
curse abroad that had fallen upon him and upon all the kindreds of the
Mark; some thought him dead and some swooning.  But, dead or alive, the
warriors would not leave their War-duke among the foemen, so they lifted
him, and gathered about him a goodly band that held its own against all
comers, and fought through the turmoil stoutly and steadily; and others
gathered to them, till they began to be something like a host again, and
the Romans might not break them into knots of desperate men any more.

Thus they fought their way, Arinbiorn of the Bearings leading them now,
with a mind to make a stand for life or death on some vantage-ground; and
so, often turning upon the Romans, they came in array ever growing more
solid to the rising ground looking one way over the ford and the other to
the slopes where the battle had just been.  There they faced the foe as
men who may be slain, but will be driven no further; and what bowmen they
had got spread out from their flanks and shot on the Romans, who had with
them no light-armed, or slingers or bowmen, for they had left them at
Wolf-stead.  So the Romans stood a while, and gave breathing-space to the
Markmen, which indeed was the saving of them: for if they had fallen on
hotly and held to it steadily, it is like that they would have passed
over all the bodies of the Markmen: for these had lost their leader,
either slain, as some thought, or, as others thought, banned from
leadership by the Gods; and their host was heavy-hearted; and though it
is like that they would have stood there till each had fallen over other,
yet was their hope grown dim, and the whole folk brought to a perilous
and fearful pass, for if these were slain or scattered there were no more
but they, and nought between fire and the sword and the people of the
Mark.

But once again the faint-heart folly of the Roman Captain saved his foes:
for whereas he once thought that the whole power of the Markmen lay in
Otter and his company, and deemed them too little to meddle with, so now
he ran his head into the other hedge, and deemed that Thiodolf's company
was but a part of the succour that was at hand for the Goths, and that
they were over-big for him to meddle with.

True it is also that now dark night was coming on, and the land was
unknown to the Romans, who moreover trusted not wholly to the dastards of
the Goths who were their guides and scouts: furthermore the wood was at
hand, and they knew not what it held; and with all this and above it all,
it is to be said that over them also had fallen a dread of some doom
anear; for those habitations amidst of the wild-woods were terrible to
them as they were dear to the Goths; and the Gods of their foemen seemed
to be lying in wait to fall upon them, even if they should slay every man
of the kindreds.

So now having driven back the Goths to that height over the ford, which
indeed was no stronghold, no mountain, scarce a hill even, nought but a
gentle swelling of the earth, they forebore them; and raising up the
whoop of victory drew slowly aback, picking up their own dead and
wounded, and slaying the wounded Markmen.  They had with them also some
few captives, but not many; for the fighting had been to the death
between man and man on the Wolfing Meadow.




CHAPTER XXV--THE HOST OF THE MARKMEN COMETH INTO THE WILD-WOOD


Yet though the Romans were gone, the Goth-folk were very hard bested.
They had been overthrown, not sorely maybe if they had been in an alien
land, and free to come and go as they would; yet sorely as things were,
because the foeman was sitting in their own House, and they must needs
drag him out of it or perish: and to many the days seemed evil, and the
Gods fighting against them, and both the Wolfings and the other kindreds
bethought them of the Hall-Sun and her wisdom and longed to hear of
tidings concerning her.

But now the word ran through the host that Thiodolf was certainly not
slain.  Slowly he had come to himself, and yet was not himself, for he
sat among his men gloomy and silent, clean contrary to his wont; for
hitherto he had been a merry man, and a joyous fellow.

Amidst of the ridge whereon the Markmen now abode, there was a ring made
of the chief warriors and captains and wise men who had not been slain or
grievously hurt in the fray, and amidst them all sat Thiodolf on the
ground, his chin sunken on his breast, looking more like a captive than
the leader of a host amidst of his men; and that the more as his scabbard
was empty; for when Throng-plough had fallen from his hand, it had been
trodden under foot, and lost in the turmoil.  There he sat, and the
others in that ring of men looked sadly upon him; such as Arinbiorn of
the Bearings, and Wolfkettle and Thorolf of his own House, and Hiarandi
of the Elkings, and Geirbald the Shielding, the messenger of the woods,
and Fox who had seen the Roman Garth, and many others.  It was night now,
and men had lighted fires about the host, for they said that the Romans
knew where to find them if they listed to seek; and about those fires
were men eating and drinking what they might come at, but amidmost of
that ring was the biggest fire, and men turned them towards it for
counsel and help, for elsewhere none said, "What do we?" for they were
heavy-hearted and redeless, since the Gods had taken the victory out of
their hands just when they seemed at point to win it.

But amidst all this there was a little stir outside that biggest ring,
and men parted, and through them came a swain amongst the chiefs, and
said, "Who will lead me to the War-duke?"

Thiodolf, who was close beside the lad, answered never a word; but
Arinbiorn said; "This man here sitting is the War-duke: speak to him, for
he may hearken to thee: but first who art thou?"

Said the lad; "My name is Ali the son of Grey, and I come with a message
from the Hall-Sun and the stay-at-homes who are in the Woodland."

Now when he named the Hall-Sun Thiodolf started and looked up, and
turning to his left-hand said, "And what sayeth thy daughter?"

Men did not heed that he said _thy_ daughter, but deemed that he said
_my_ daughter, since he was wont as her would-be foster-father to call
her so.  But Ali spake:

"War-duke and ye chieftains, thus saith the Hall-Sun: 'I know that by
this time Otter hath been slain and many another, and ye have been
overthrown and chased by the Romans, and that now there is little counsel
in you except to abide the foe where ye are and there to die valiantly.
But now do my bidding and as I am bidden, and then whosoever dieth or
liveth, the kindreds shall vanquish that they may live and grow greater.
Do ye thus: the Romans think no otherwise but to find you here to-morrow
or else departed across the water as broken men, and they will fall upon
you with their whole host, and then make a war-garth after their manner
at Wolf-stead and carry fire and the sword and the chains of thralldom
into every House of the Mark.  Now therefore fetch a compass and come
into the wood on the north-west of the houses and make your way to the
Thing-stead of the Mid-mark.  For who knoweth but that to-morrow we may
fall upon these thieves again?  Of this shall ye hear more when we may
speak together and take counsel face to face; for we stay-at-homes know
somewhat closely of the ways of these Romans.  Haste then! let not the
grass grow over your feet!

"'But to thee, Thiodolf, have I a word to say when we meet; for I wot
that as now thou canst not hearken to my word.'  Thus saith the
Hall-Sun."

"Wilt thou speak, War-duke?" said Arinbiorn.  But Thiodolf shook his
head.  Then said Arinbiorn; "Shall I speak for thee?" and Thiodolf nodded
yea.  Then said Arinbiorn: "Ali son of Grey, art thou going back to her
that sent thee?"

"Yea," said the lad, "but in your company, for ye will be coming
straightway and I know all the ways closely; and there is need for a
guide through the dark night as ye will see presently."

Then stood up Arinbiorn and said: "Chiefs and captains, go ye speedily
and array your men for departure: bid them leave all the fires burning
and come their ways as silently as maybe; for now will we wend this same
hour before moonrise into the Wild-wood and the Thing-stead of Mid-mark;
thus saith the War-duke."

But when they were gone, and Arinbiorn and Thiodolf were left alone,
Thiodolf lifted up his head and spake slowly and painfully:

"Arinbiorn, I thank thee: and thou dost well to lead this folk: since as
for me that is somewhat that weighs me down, and I know not whether it be
life or death; therefore I may no longer be your captain, for twice now
have I blenched from the battle.  Yet command me, and I will obey, set a
sword in my hand and I will smite, till the God snatches it out of my
hand, as he did Throng-plough to-day."

"And that is well," said Arinbiorn, "it may be that ye shall meet that
God to-morrow, and heave up sword against him, and either overcome him or
go to thy fathers a proud and valiant man."

So they spake, and Thiodolf stood up and seemed of better cheer.  But
presently the whole host was afoot, and they went their ways warily with
little noise, and wound little by little about the Wolfing meadow and
about the acres towards the wood at the back of the Houses; and they met
nothing by the way except an out-guard of the Romans, whom they slew
there nigh silently, and bore away their bodies, twelve in number, lest
the Romans when they sent to change the guard, should find the slain and
have an inkling of the way the Goths were gone; but now they deemed that
the Romans might think their guard fled, or perchance that they had been
carried away by the Gods of the woodland folk.

So came they into the wood, and Arinbiorn and the chiefs were for
striking the All-men's road to the Thing-stead and so coming thither; but
the lad Ali when he heard it laughed and said:

"If ye would sleep to-night ye shall wend another way.  For the Hall-Sun
hath had us at work cumbering it against the foe with great trees felled
with limbs, branches, and all.  And indeed ye shall find the Thing-stead
fenced like a castle, and the in-gate hard to find; yet will I bring you
thither."

So did he without delay, and presently they came anigh the Thing-stead;
and the place was fenced cunningly, so that if men would enter they must
go by a narrow way that had a fence of tree-trunks on each side wending
inward like the maze in a pleasance.  Thereby now wended the host all
afoot, since it was a holy place and no beast must set foot therein, so
that the horses were left without it: so slowly and right quietly once
more they came into the garth of the Thing-stead; and lo, a many folk
there, of the Wolfings and the Bearings and other kindreds, who had
gathered thereto; and albeit these were not warriors in their prime, yet
were there none save the young children and the weaker of the women but
had weapons of some kind; and they were well ordered, standing or sitting
in ranks like folk awaiting battle.  There were booths of boughs and
rushes set up for shelter of the feebler women and the old men and
children along the edges of the fence, for the Hall-Sun had bidden them
keep the space clear round about the Doom-ring and the Hill-of-Speech as
if for a mighty folk-mote, so that the warriors might have room to muster
there and order their array.  There were some cooking-fires lighted about
the aforesaid booths, but neither many nor great, and they were screened
with wattle from the side that lay toward the Romans; for the Hall-Sun
would not that they should hold up lanterns for their foemen to find them
by.  Little noise there was in that stronghold, moreover, for the hearts
of all who knew their right hands from their left were set on battle and
the destruction of the foe that would destroy the kindreds.

Anigh the Speech-Hill, on its eastern side, had the bole of a slender
beech tree been set up, and at the top of it a cross-beam was nailed on,
and therefrom hung the wondrous lamp, the Hall-Sun, glimmering from on
high, and though its light was but a glimmer amongst the mighty wood, yet
was it also screened on three sides from the sight of the chance wanderer
by wings of thin plank.  But beneath her namesake as beforetime in the
Hall sat the Hall-Sun, the maiden, on a heap of faggots, and she was
wrapped in a dark blue cloak from under which gleamed the folds of the
fair golden-broidered gown she was wont to wear at folk-motes, and her
right hand rested on a naked sword that lay across her knees: beside her
sat the old man Sorli, the Wise in War, and about her were slim lads and
sturdy maidens and old carles of the thralls or freedmen ready to bear
the commands that came from her mouth; for she and Sorli were the
captains of the stay-at-homes.

Now came Thiodolf and Arinbiorn and other leaders into the ring of men
before her, and she greeted them kindly and said:

"Hail, Sons of Tyr! now that I behold you again it seemeth to me as if
all were already won: the time of waiting hath been weary, and we have
borne the burden of fear every day from morn till even, and in the waking
hour we presently remembered it.  But now ye are come, even if this Thing-
stead were lighted by the flames of the Wolfing Roof instead of by these
moonbeams; even if we had to begin again and seek new dwellings, and
another water and other meadows, yet great should grow the kindreds of
the Men who have dwelt in the Mark, and nought should overshadow them:
and though the beasts and the Romans were dwelling in their old places,
yet should these kindreds make new clearings in the Wild-wood; and they
with their deeds should cause other waters to be famous, that as yet have
known no deeds of man; and they should compel the Earth to bear increase
round about their dwelling-places for the welfare of the kindreds.  O
Sons of Tyr, friendly are your faces, and undismayed, and the Terror of
the Nations has not made you afraid any more than would the onrush of the
bisons that feed adown the grass hills.  Happy is the eve, O children of
the Goths, yet shall to-morrow morn be happier."

Many heard what she spake, and a murmur of joy ran through the ranks of
men: for they deemed her words to forecast victory.

And now amidst her speaking, the moon, which had arisen on Mid-mark, when
the host first entered into the wood, had overtopped the tall trees that
stood like a green wall round about the Thing-stead, and shone down on
that assembly, and flashed coldly back from the arms of the warriors.  And
the Hall-Sun cast off her dark blue cloak and stood up in her
golden-broidered raiment, which flashed back the grey light like as it
had been an icicle hanging from the roof of some hall in the midnight of
Yule, when the feast is high within, and without the world is silent with
the night of the ten-weeks' frost.

Then she spake again: "O War-duke, thy mouth is silent; speak to this
warrior of the Bearings that he bid the host what to do; for wise are ye
both, and dear are the minutes of this night and should not be wasted;
since they bring about the salvation of the Wolfings, and the vengeance
of the Bearings, and the hope renewed of all the kindreds."

Then Thiodolf abode a while with his head down cast; his bosom heaved,
and he set his left hand to his swordless scabbard, and his right to his
throat, as though he were sore troubled with something he might not tell
of: but at last he lifted up his head and spoke to Arinbiorn, but slowly
and painfully, as he had spoken before:

"Chief of the Bearings, go up on to the Hill of Speech, and speak to the
folk out of thy wisdom, and let them know that to-morrow early before the
sun-rising those that may, and are not bound by the Gods against it,
shall do deeds according to their might, and win rest for themselves, and
new days of deeds for the kindreds."

Therewith he ceased, and let his head fall again, and the Hall-Sun looked
at him askance.  But Arinbiorn clomb the Speech-Hill and said:

"Men of the kindreds, it is now a few days since we first met the Romans
and fought with them; and whiles we have had the better, and whiles the
worse in our dealings, as oft in war befalleth: for they are men, and we
no less than men.  But now look to it what ye will do; for we may no
longer endure these outlanders in our houses, and we must either die or
get our own again: and that is not merely a few wares stored up for use,
nor a few head of neat, nor certain timbers piled up into a dwelling, but
the life we have made in the land we have made.  I show you no choice,
for no choice there is.  Here are we bare of everything in the wild-wood:
for the most part our children are crying for us at home, our wives are
longing for us in our houses, and if we come not to them in kindness, the
Romans shall come to them in grimness.  Down yonder in the plain,
moreover, is our wain-burg slowly drawing near to us, and with it is much
livelihood of ours, which is a little thing, for we may get more; but
also there are our banners of battle and the tokens of the kindred, which
is a great thing.  And between all this and us there lieth but little;
nought but a band of valiant men, and a few swords and spears, and a few
wounds, and the hope of death amidst the praise of the people; and this
ye have to set out to wend across within two or three hours.  I will not
ask if ye will do so, for I wot that even so ye will; therefore when I
have done, shout not, nor clash sword on shield, for we are no great way
off that house of ours wherein dwells the foe that would destroy us.  Let
each man rest as he may, and sleep if he may with his war-gear on him and
his weapons by his side, and when he is next awakened by the captains and
the leaders of hundreds and scores, let him not think that it is night,
but let him betake himself to his place among his kindred and be ready to
go through the wood with as little noise as may be.  Now all is said that
the War-duke would have me say, and to-morrow shall those see him who are
foremost in falling upon the foemen, for he longeth sorely for his seat
on the days of the Wolfing Hall."

So he spake, and even as he bade them, they made no sound save a joyous
murmur; and straightway the more part of them betook themselves to sleep
as men who must busy themselves about a weighty matter; for they were
wise in the ways of war.  So sank all the host to the ground save those
who were appointed as watchers of the night, and Arinbiorn and Thiodolf
and the Hall-Sun; they three yet stood together; and Arinbiorn said:

"Now it seems to me not so much as if we had vanquished the foe and were
safe and at rest, but rather as if we had no foemen and never have had.
Deep peace is on me, though hitherto I have been deemed a wrathful man,
and it is to me as if the kindreds that I love had filled the whole
earth, and left no room for foemen: even so it may really be one day.  To-
night it is well, yet to-morrow it shall be better.  What thine errand
may be, Thiodolf, I scarce know; for something hath changed in thee, and
thou art become strange to us.  But as for mine errand, I will tell it
thee; it is that I am seeking Otter of the Laxings, my friend and fellow,
whose wisdom my foolishness drave under the point and edge of the Romans,
so that he is no longer here; I am seeking him, and to-morrow I think I
shall find him, for he hath not had time to travel far, and we shall be
blithe and merry together.  And now will I sleep; for I have bidden the
watchers awaken me if any need be.  Sleep thou also, Thiodolf! and wake
up thine old self when the moon is low."  Therewith he laid himself down
under the lee of the pile of faggots, and was presently asleep.




CHAPTER XXVI--THIODOLF TALKETH WITH THE WOOD-SUN


Now were Thiodolf and the Hall-Sun left alone together standing by the
Speech-Hill; and the moon was risen high in the heavens above the tree-
tops of the wild-wood.  Thiodolf scarce stirred, and he still held his
head bent down as one lost in thought.

Then said the Hall-Sun, speaking softly amidst the hush of the camp:

"I have said that the minutes of this night are dear, and they are
passing swiftly; and it may be that thou wilt have much to say and to do
before the host is astir with the dawning.  So come thou with me a little
way, that thou mayst hear of new tidings, and think what were best to do
amidst them."

And without more ado she took him by the hand and led him forth, and he
went as he was led, not saying a word.  They passed out of the camp into
the wood, none hindering, and went a long way where under the
beech-leaves there was but a glimmer of the moonlight, and presently
Thiodolf's feet went as it were of themselves; for they had hit a path
that he knew well and over-well.

So came they to that little wood-lawn where first in this tale Thiodolf
met the Wood-Sun; and the stone seat there was not empty now any more
than it was then; for thereon sat the Wood-Sun, clad once more in her
glittering raiment.  Her head was sunken down, her face hidden by her
hands; neither did she look up when she heard their feet on the grass,
for she knew who they were.

Thiodolf lingered not; for a moment it was to him as if all that past
time had never been, and its battles and hurry and hopes and fears but
mere shows, and the unspoken words of a dream.  He went straight up to
her and sat down by her side and put his arm about her shoulders, and
strove to take her hand to caress it; but she moved but little, and it
was as if she heeded him not.  And the Hall-Sun stood before them and
looked at them for a little while; and then she fell to speech; but at
the first sound of her voice, it seemed that the Wood-Sun trembled, but
still she hid her face.  Said the Hall-Sun:

   "Two griefs I see before me in mighty hearts grown great;
   And to change both these into gladness out-goes the power of fate.
   Yet I, a lonely maiden, have might to vanquish one
   Till it melt as the mist of the morning before the summer sun.
   O Wood-Sun, thou hast borne me, and I were fain indeed
   To give thee back thy gladness; but thou com'st of the Godhead's seed,
   And herein my might avails not; because I can but show
   Unto these wedded sorrows the truth that the heart should know
   Ere the will hath wielded the hand; and for thee, I can tell thee
   nought
   That thou hast not known this long while; thy will and thine hand have
   wrought,
   And the man that thou lovest shall live in despite of Gods and of men,
   If yet thy will endureth.  But what shall it profit thee then
   That after the fashion of Godhead thou hast gotten thee a thrall
   To be thine and never another's, whatso in the world may befall?
   Lo! yesterday this was a man, and to-morrow it might have been
   The very joy of the people, though never again it were seen;
   Yet a part of all they hoped for through all the lapse of years,
   To make their laughter happy and dull the sting of tears;
   To quicken all remembrance of deeds that never die,
   And death that maketh eager to live as the days go by.
   Yea, many a deed had he done as he lay in the dark of the mound;
   As the seed-wheat plotteth of spring, laid under the face of the
   ground
   That the foot of the husbandman treadeth, that the wind of the winter
   wears,
   That the turbid cold flood hideth from the constant hope of the years.
   This man that should leave in his death his life unto many an one
   Wilt thou make him a God of the fearful who live lone under the sun?
   And then shalt thou have what thou wouldedst when amidst of the
   hazelled field
   Thou kissed'st the mouth of the helper, and the hand of the people's
   shield,
   Shalt thou have the thing that thou wouldedst when thou broughtest me
   to birth,
   And I, the soul of the Wolfings, began to look on earth?
   Wilt thou play the God, O mother, and make a man anew,
   A joyless thing and a fearful?  Then I betwixt you two,
   'Twixt your longing and your sorrow will cast the sundering word,
   And tell out all the story of that rampart of the sword!
   I shall bid my mighty father make choice of death in life,
   Or life in death victorious and the crowned end of strife."

Ere she had ended, the Wood-Sun let her hands fall down, and showed her
face, which for all its unpaled beauty looked wearied and anxious; and
she took Thiodolf's hand in hers, while she looked with eyes of love upon
the Hall-Sun, and Thiodolf laid his cheek to her cheek, and though he
smiled not, yet he seemed as one who is happy.  At last the Wood-Sun
spoke and said:

   "Thou sayest sooth, O daughter: I am no God of might,
   Yet I am of their race, and I think with their thoughts and see with
   their sight,
   And the threat of the doom did I know of, and yet spared not to lie:
   For I thought that the fate foreboded might touch and pass us by,
   As the sword that heweth the war-helm and cleaveth a cantle away,
   And the cunning smith shall mend it and it goeth again to the fray;
   If my hand might have held for a moment, yea, even against his will,
   The life of my beloved!  But Weird is the master still:
   And this man's love of my body and his love of the ancient kin
   Were matters o'er mighty to deal with and the game withal to win.
   Woe's me for the waning of all things, and my hope that needs must
   fade
   As the fruitless sun of summer on the waste where nought is made!
   And now farewell, O daughter, thou mayst not see the kiss
   Of the hapless and the death-doomed when I have told of this;
   Yet once again shalt thou see him, though I no more again,
   Fair with the joy that hopeth and dieth not in vain."

Then came the Hall-Sun close to her, and knelt down by her, and laid her
head upon her knees and wept for love of her mother, who kissed her oft
and caressed her; and Thiodolf's hand strayed, as it were, on to his
daughter's head, and he looked kindly on her, though scarce now as if he
knew her.  Then she arose when she had kissed her mother once more, and
went her ways from that wood-lawn into the woods again, and so to the
Folk-mote of her people.

But when those twain were all alone again, the Wood-Sun spoke: "O
Thiodolf canst thou hear me and understand?"

"Yea," he said, "when thou speakest of certain matters, as of our love
together, and of our daughter that came of our love."

"Thiodolf," she said, "How long shall our love last?"

"As long as our life," he said.

"And if thou diest to-day, where then shall our love be?" said the Wood-
Sun.

He said, "I must now say, I wot not; though time was I had said, It shall
abide with the soul of the Wolfing Kindred."

She said: "And when that soul dieth, and the kindred is no more?"

"Time agone," quoth he, "I had said, it shall abide with the Kindreds of
the Earth; but now again I say, I wot not."

"Will the Earth hide it," said she, "when thou diest and art borne to
mound?"

"Even so didst thou say when we spake together that other night," said
he; "and now I may say nought against thy word."

"Art thou happy, O Folk-Wolf?" she said.

"Why dost thou ask me?" said he; "I know not; we were sundered and I
longed for thee; thou art here; it is enough."

"And the people of thy Kindred?" she said, "dost thou not long for them?"

He said; "Didst thou not say that I was not of them?  Yet were they my
friends, and needed me, and I loved them: but by this evening they will
need me no more, or but little; for they will be victorious over their
foes: so hath the Hall-Sun foretold.  What then! shall I take all from
thee to give little to them?"

"Thou art wise," she said; "Wilt thou go to battle to-day?"

"So it seemeth," said he.

She said: "And wilt thou bear the Dwarf-wrought Hauberk? for if thou
dost, thou wilt live, and if thou dost not, thou wilt die."

"I will bear it," said he, "that I may live to love thee."

"Thinkest thou that any evil goes with it?" said she.

There came into his face a flash of his ancient boldness as he answered:
"So it seemed to me yesterday, when I fought clad in it the first time;
and I fell unsmitten on the meadow, and was shamed, and would have slain
myself but for thee.  And yet it is not so that any evil goes with it;
for thou thyself didst say that past night that there was no evil weird
in it."

She said: "How then if I lied that night?"

Said he; "It is the wont of the Gods to lie, and be unashamed, and men-
folk must bear with it."

"Ah! how wise thou art!" she said; and was silent for a while, and drew
away from him a little, and clasped her hands together and wrung them for
grief and anger.  Then she grew calm again, and said:

"Wouldest thou die at my bidding?"

"Yea," said he, "not because thou art of the Gods, but because thou hast
become a woman to me, and I love thee."

Then was she silent some while, and at last she said, "Thiodolf, wilt
thou do off the Hauberk if I bid thee?"

"Yea, yea," said he, "and let us depart from the Wolfings, and their
strife, for they need us not."

She was silent once more for a longer while still, and at last she said
in a cold voice; "Thiodolf, I bid thee arise, and put off the Hauberk
from thee."

He looked at her wondering, not at her words, but at the voice wherewith
she spake them; but he arose from the stone nevertheless, and stood stark
in the moonlight; he set his hand to the collar of the war-coat, and
undid its clasps, which were of gold and blue stones, and presently he
did the coat from off him and let it slide to the ground where it lay in
a little grey heap that looked but a handful.  Then he sat down on the
stone again, and took her hand and kissed her and caressed her fondly,
and she him again, and they spake no word for a while: but at the last he
spake in measure and rhyme in a low voice, but so sweet and clear that it
might have been heard far in the hush of the last hour of the night:

   "Dear now are this dawn-dusk's moments as is the last of the light
   When the foemen's ranks are wavering, and the victory feareth night;
   And of all the time I have loved thee of these am I most fain,
   When I know not what shall betide me, nor what shall be my gain.
   But dear as they are, they are waning, and at last the time is come
   When no more shall I behold thee till I wend to Odin's Home.
   Now is the time so little that once hath been so long
   That I fain would ask thee pardon wherein I have done thee wrong,
   That thy longing might be softer, and thy love more sweet to have.
   But in nothing have I wronged thee, there is nought that I may crave.
   Strange too! as the minutes fail me, so do my speech-words fail,
   Yet strong is the joy within me for this hour that crowns the tale."

Therewith he clipped her and caressed her, and she spake nothing for a
while; and he said; "Thy face is fair and bright; art thou not joyous of
these minutes?"

She said: "Thy words are sweet; but they pierce my heart like a sharp
knife; for they tell me of thy death and the ending of our love."

Said he; "I tell thee nothing, beloved, that thou hast not known: is it
not for this that we have met here once more?"

She answered after a while; "Yea, yea; yet mightest thou have lived."

He laughed, but not scornfully or bitterly and said:

"So thought I in time past: but hearken, beloved; If I fall to-day, shall
there not yet be a minute after the stroke hath fallen on me, wherein I
shall know that the day is won and see the foemen fleeing, and wherein I
shall once again deem I shall never die, whatever may betide afterwards,
and though the sword lieth deep in my breast?  And shall I not see then
and know that our love hath no end?"

Bitter grief was in her face as she heard him.  But she spake and said:
"Lo here the Hauberk which thou hast done off thee, that thy breast might
be the nearer to mine!  Wilt thou not wear it in the fight for my sake?"

He knit his brows somewhat, and said:

"Nay, it may not be: true it is that thou saidest that no evil weird went
with it, but hearken!  Yesterday I bore it in the fight, and ere I
mingled with the foe, before I might give the token of onset, a cloud
came before my eyes and thick darkness wrapped me around, and I fell to
the earth unsmitten; and so was I borne out of the fight, and evil dreams
beset me of evil things, and the dwarfs that hate mankind.  Then I came
to myself, and the Hauberk was off me, and I rose up and beheld the
battle, that the kindreds were pressing on the foe, and I thought not
then of any past time, but of the minutes that were passing; and I ran
into the fight straightway: but one followed me with that Hauberk, and I
did it on, thinking of nought but the battle.  Fierce then was the fray,
yet I faltered in it; till the fresh men of the Romans came in upon us
and broke up our array.  Then my heart almost broke within me, and I
faltered no more, but rushed on as of old, and smote great strokes all
round about: no hurt I got, but once more came that ugly mist over my
eyes, and again I fell unsmitten, and they bore me out of battle: then
the men of our folk gave back and were overcome; and when I awoke from my
evil dreams, we had gotten away from the fight and the Wolfing dwellings,
and were on the mounds above the ford cowering down like beaten men.
There then I sat shamed among the men who had chosen me for their best
man at the Holy Thing, and lo I was their worst!  Then befell that which
never till then had befallen me, that life seemed empty and worthless and
I longed to die and be done with it, and but for the thought of thy love
I had slain myself then and there.

"Thereafter I went with the host to the assembly of the stay-at-homes and
fleers, and sat before the Hall-Sun our daughter, and said the words
which were put into my mouth.  But now must I tell thee a hard and evil
thing; that I loved them not, and was not of them, and outside myself
there was nothing: within me was the world and nought without me.  Nay,
as for thee, I was not sundered from thee, but thou wert a part of me;
whereas for the others, yea, even for our daughter, thine and mine, they
were but images and shows of men, and I longed to depart from them, and
to see thy body and to feel thine heart beating.  And by then so evil was
I grown that my very shame had fallen from me, and my will to die: nay, I
longed to live, thou and I, and death seemed hateful to me, and the deeds
before death vain and foolish.

"Where then was my glory and my happy life, and the hope of the days
fresh born every day, though never dying?  Where then was life, and
Thiodolf that once had lived?

"But now all is changed once more; I loved thee never so well as now, and
great is my grief that we must sunder, and the pain of farewell wrings my
heart.  Yet since I am once more Thiodolf the Mighty, in my heart there
is room for joy also.  Look at me, O Wood-Sun, look at me, O beloved!
tell me, am I not fair with the fairness of the warrior and the helper of
the folk?  Is not my voice kind, do not my lips smile, and mine eyes
shine?  See how steady is mine hand, the friend of the folk!  For mine
eyes are cleared again, and I can see the kindreds as they are, and their
desire of life and scorn of death, and this is what they have made me
myself.  Now therefore shall they and I together earn the merry days to
come, the winter hunting and the spring sowing, the summer haysel, the
ingathering of harvest, the happy rest of midwinter, and Yuletide with
the memory of the Fathers, wedded to the hope of the days to be.  Well
may they bid me help them who have holpen me!  Well may they bid me die
who have made me live!

"For whereas thou sayest that I am not of their blood, nor of their
adoption, once more I heed it not.  For I have lived with them, and eaten
and drunken with them, and toiled with them, and led them in battle and
the place of wounds and slaughter; they are mine and I am theirs; and
through them am I of the whole earth, and all the kindreds of it; yea,
even of the foemen, whom this day the edges in mine hand shall smite.

"Therefore I will bear the Hauberk no more in battle; and belike my body
but once more: so shall I have lived and death shall not have undone me.

"Lo thou, is not this the Thiodolf whom thou hast loved? no changeling of
the Gods, but the man in whom men have trusted, the friend of Earth, the
giver of life, the vanquisher of death?"

And he cast himself upon her, and strained her to his bosom and kissed
her, and caressed her, and awoke the bitter-sweet joy within her, as he
cried out:

"O remember this, and this, when at last I am gone from thee!"

But when they sundered her face was bright, but the tears were on it, and
she said: "O Thiodolf, thou wert fain hadst thou done a wrong to me so
that I might forgive thee; now wilt thou forgive me the wrong I have done
thee?"

"Yea," he said, "Even so would I do, were we both to live, and how much
more if this be the dawn of our sundering day!  What hast thou done?"

She said: "I lied to thee concerning the Hauberk when I said that no evil
weird went with it: and this I did for the saving of thy life."

He laid his hand fondly on her head, and spake smiling: "Such is the wont
of the God-kin, because they know not the hearts of men.  Tell me all the
truth of it now at last."

She said:

   "Hear then the tale of the Hauberk and the truth there is to tell:
   There was a maid of the God-kin, and she loved a man right well,
   Who unto the battle was wending; and she of her wisdom knew
   That thence to the folk-hall threshold should come back but a very
   few;
   And she feared for her love, for she doubted that of these he should
   not be;
   So she wended the wilds lamenting, as I have lamented for thee;
   And many wise she pondered, how to bring her will to pass
   (E'en as I for thee have pondered), as her feet led over the grass,
   Till she lifted her eyes in the wild-wood, and lo! she stood before
   The Hall of the Hollow-places; and the Dwarf-lord stood in the door
   And held in his hand the Hauberk, whereon the hammer's blow
   The last of all had been smitten, and the sword should be hammer now.
   Then the Dwarf beheld her fairness, and the wild-wood many-leaved
   Before his eyes was reeling at the hope his heart conceived;
   So sorely he longed for her body; and he laughed before her and cried,
   'O Lady of the Disir, thou farest wandering wide
   Lamenting thy beloved and the folk-mote of the spear,
   But if amidst of the battle this child of the hammer he bear
   He shall laugh at the foemen's edges and come back to thy lily breast
   And of all the days of his life-time shall his coming years be best.'
   Then she bowed adown her godhead and sore for the Hauberk she prayed;
   But his greedy eyes devoured her as he stood in the door and said;
   'Come lie in mine arms!  Come hither, and we twain the night to wake!
   And then as a gift of the morning the Hauberk shall ye take.'
   So she humbled herself before him, and entered into the cave,
   The dusky, the deep-gleaming, the gem-strewn golden grave.
   But he saw not her girdle loosened, or her bosom gleam on his love,
   For she set the sleep-thorn in him, that he saw, but might not move,
   Though the bitter salt tears burned him for the anguish of his greed;
   And she took the hammer's offspring, her unearned morning meed,
   And went her ways from the rock-hall and was glad for her warrior's
   sake.
   But behind her dull speech followed, and the voice of the hollow
   spake:
   'Thou hast left me bound in anguish, and hast gained thine heart's
   desire;
   Now I would that the dewy night-grass might be to thy feet as the
   fire,
   And shrivel thy raiment about thee, and leave thee bare to the flame,
   And no way but a fiery furnace for the road whereby ye came!
   But since the folk of God-home we may not slay nor smite,
   And that fool of the folk that thou lovest, thou hast saved in my
   despite,
   Take with thee, thief of God-home, this other word I say:
   Since the safeguard wrought in the ring-mail I may not do away
   I lay this curse upon it, that whoso weareth the same,
   Shall save his life in the battle, and have the battle's shame;
   He shall live through wrack and ruin, and ever have the worse,
   And drag adown his kindred, and bear the people's curse.'

   "Lo, this the tale of the Hauberk, and I knew it for the truth:
   And little I thought of the kindreds; of their day I had no ruth;
   For I said, They are doomed to departure; in a little while must they
   wane,
   And nought it helpeth or hindreth if I hold my hand or refrain.
   Yea, thou wert become the kindred, both thine and mine; and thy birth
   To me was the roofing of heaven, and the building up of earth.
   I have loved, and I must sorrow; thou hast lived, and thou must die;
   Ah, wherefore were there others in the world than thou and I?"

He turned round to her and clasped her strongly in his arms again, and
kissed her many times and said:

   "Lo, here art thou forgiven; and here I say farewell!
   Here the token of my wonder which my words may never tell;
   The wonder past all thinking, that my love and thine should blend;
   That thus our lives should mingle, and sunder in the end!
   Lo, this, for the last remembrance of the mighty man I was,
   Of thy love and thy forbearing, and all that came to pass!
   Night wanes, and heaven dights her for the kiss of sun and earth;
   Look up, look last upon me on this morn of the kindreds' mirth!"

Therewith he arose and lingered no minute longer, but departed, going as
straight towards the Thing-stead and the Folk-mote of his kindred as the
swallow goes to her nest in the hall-porch.  He looked not once behind
him, though a bitter wailing rang through the woods and filled his heart
with the bitterness of her woe and the anguish of the hour of sundering.




CHAPTER XXVII--THEY WEND TO THE MORNING BATTLE


Now when Thiodolf came back to the camp the signs of dawn were plain in
the sky, the moon was low and sinking behind the trees, and he saw at
once that the men were stirring and getting ready for departure.  He
looked gladly and blithely at the men he fell in with, and they at him,
and scarce could they refrain a shout when they beheld his face and the
brightness of it.  He went straight up to where the Hall-Sun was yet
sitting under her namesake, with Arinbiorn standing before her amidst of
a ring of leaders of hundreds and scores: but old Sorli sat by her side
clad in all his war-gear.

When Thiodolf first came into that ring of men they looked doubtfully at
him, as if they dreaded somewhat, but when they had well beheld him their
faces cleared, and they became joyous.

He went straight up to Arinbiorn and kissed the old warrior, and said to
him, "I give thee good morrow, O leader of the Bearings!  Here now is
come the War-duke! and meseems that we should get to work as speedily as
may be, for lo the dawning!"

"Hail to thine hand, War-duke!" said Arinbiorn joyously; "there is no
more to do but to take thy word concerning the order wherein we shall
wend; for all men are armed and ready."

Said Thiodolf; "Lo ye, I lack war-gear and weapons!  Is there a good
sword hereby, a helm, a byrny and a shield?  For hard will be the battle,
and we must fence ourselves all we may."

"Hard by," said Arinbiorn, "is the war-gear of Ivar of our House, who is
dead in the night of his hurts gotten in yesterday's battle: thou and he
are alike in stature, and with a good will doth he give them to thee, and
they are goodly things, for he comes of smithying blood.  Yet is it a
pity of Throng-plough that he lieth on the field of the slain."

But Thiodolf smiled and said: "Nay, Ivar's blade shall serve my turn to-
day; and thereafter shall it be seen to, for then will be time for many
things."

So they went to fetch him the weapons; but he said to Arinbiorn, "Hast
thou numbered the host?  What are the gleanings of the Roman sword?"

Said Arinbiorn: "Here have we more than three thousand three hundred
warriors of the host fit for battle: and besides this here are gathered
eighteen hundred of the Wolfings and the Bearings, and of the other
Houses, mostly from over the water, and of these nigh upon seven hundred
may bear sword or shoot shaft; neither shall ye hinder them from so doing
if the battle be joined."

Then said Thiodolf: "We shall order us into three battles; the Wolfings
and the Bearings to lead the first, for this is our business; but others
of the smaller Houses this side the water to be with us; and the Elkings
and Galtings and the other Houses of the Mid-mark on the further side of
the water to be in the second, and with them the more part of the Nether-
mark; but the men of Up-mark to be in the third, and the stay-at-homes to
follow on with them: and this third battle to let the wood cover them
till they be needed, which may not be till the day of fight draws to an
end, when all shall be needed: for no Roman man must be left alive or
untaken by this even, or else must we all go to the Gods together.
Hearken, Arinbiorn.  I am not called fore-sighted, and yet meseems I see
somewhat how this day shall go; and it is not to be hidden that I shall
not see another battle until the last of all battles is at hand.  But be
of good cheer, for I shall not die till the end of the fight, and once
more I shall be a man's help unto you.  Now the first of the Romans we
meet shall not be able to stand before us, for they shall be unready, and
when their men are gotten ready and are fighting with us grimly, ye of
the second battle shall hear the war-token, and shall fall on, and they
shall be dismayed when they see so many fresh men come into the fight;
yet shall they stand stoutly; for they are valiant men, and shall not all
be taken unawares.  Then, if they withstand us long enough, shall the
third battle come forth from the wood, and fall on either flank of them,
and the day shall be won.  But I think not that they shall withstand us
so long, but that the men of Up-mark and the stay-at-homes shall have the
chasing of them.  Now get me my war-gear, and let the first battle get
them to the outgate of the garth."

So they brought him his arms; and meanwhile the Hall-Sun spake to one of
the Captains, and he turned and went away a little space, and then came
back, having with him three strong warriors of the Wolfings, and he
brought them before the Hall-Sun, who said to them:

"Ye three, Steinulf, Athalulf, and Grani the Grey, I have sent for you
because ye are men both mighty in battle and deft wood-wrights and house-
smiths; ye shall follow Thiodolf closely, when he winneth into the Roman
garth, yet shall ye fight wisely, so that ye be not slain, or at least
not all; ye shall enter the Hall with Thiodolf, and when ye are therein,
if need be, ye shall run down the Hall at your swiftest, and mount up
into the loft betwixt the Middle-hearth and the Women's-Chamber, and
there shall ye find good store of water in vats and tubs, and this ye
shall use for quenching the fire of the Hall if the foemen fire it, as is
not unlike to be."

Then Grani spoke for the others and said he would pay all heed to her
words, and they departed to join their company.

Now was Thiodolf armed; and Arinbiorn, turning about before he went to
his place, beheld him and knit his brow, and said: "What is this,
Thiodolf?  Didst thou not swear to the Gods not to bear helm or shield in
the battles of this strife? yet hast thou Ivar's helm on thine head and
his shield ready beside thee: wilt thou forswear thyself? so doing shalt
thou bring woe upon the House."

"Arinbiorn," said Thiodolf, "where didst thou hear tell of me that I had
made myself the thrall of the Gods?  The oath that I sware was sworn when
mine heart was not whole towards our people; and now will I break it that
I may keep what of good intent there was in it, and cast away the rest.
Long is the story; but if we journey together to-night I will tell it
thee.  Likewise I will tell it to the Gods if they look sourly upon me
when I see them, and all shall be well."

He smiled as he spoke, and Arinbiorn smiled on him in turn and went his
ways to array the host.  But when he was gone Thiodolf was alone in that
place with the Hall-Sun, and he turned to her, and kissed her, and
caressed her fondly, and spake and said:

   "So fare we, O my daughter, to the sundering of the ways;
   Short is my journey henceforth to the door that ends my days,
   And long the road that lieth as yet before thy feet.
   How fain were I that thy journey from day to day were sweet
   With peace to thee and pleasure; that a noble warrior's hand
   In its early days might lead thee adown the flowery land,
   And thy children in its noon-tide cling round about thy gown,
   And the wise that thy womb has carried when the sun is going down,
   Be thy happy fellow-farers to tell the tale of Earth,
   But I wot that for no such sweetness did we bring thee unto birth,
   But to be the soul of the Wolfings till the other days should come,
   And the fruit of the kindreds' harvest with thee is garnered home.
   Yet if for no blithe faring thy life-day is ordained,
   Yet peace that long endureth maybe thy soul hath gained;
   And thy sorrow of this even thy latest grief shall be,
   The grief wherewith thou singest the death-song over me."

She looked up at him and smiled, though the tears were on her face; then
she said:

   "Though to-day the grief beginneth yet the bitterness is done.
   Though my body wendeth barren 'neath the beams of the quickening sun,
   Yet remembrance still abideth, and long after the days of my life
   Shall I live in the tale of the morning, when they tell of the ending
   of strife;
   And the deeds of this little hand, and the thought conceived in my
   heart,
   And never again henceforward from the folk shall I fare apart.
   And if of the Earth, my father, thou hast tidings in thy place
   Thou shalt hear how they call me the Ransom and the Mother of happy
   days."

Then she wept outright for a brief space, and thereafter she said:

   "Keep this in thine heart, O father, that I shall remember all
   Since thou liftedst the she-wolf's nursling in the oak-tree's leafy
   hall.
   Yea, every time I remember when hand in hand we went
   Amidst the shafts of the beech-trees, and down to the youngling bent
   The Folk-wolf in his glory when the eve of fight drew nigh;
   And every time I remember when we wandered joyfully
   Adown the sunny meadow and lived a while of life
   'Midst the herbs and the beasts and the waters so free from fear and
   strife,
   That thy years and thy might and thy wisdom, I had no part therein;
   But thou wert as the twin-born brother of the maiden slim and thin,
   The maiden shy in the feast-hall and blithe in wood and field.
   Thus have we fared, my father; and e'en now when thou bearest shield,
   On the last of thy days of mid-earth, twixt us 'tis even so
   That the heart of my like-aged brother is the heart of thee that I
   know."

Then the bitterness of tears stayed her speech, and he spake no word
more, but took her in his arms a while and soothed her and fondled her,
and then they parted, and he went with great strides towards the outgoing
of the Thing-stead.

There he found the warriors of his House and of the Bearings and the
lesser Houses of Mid-mark, all duly ordered for wending through the wood.
The dawn was coming on apace, but the wood was yet dark.  But whereas the
Wolfings led, and each man of them knew the wood like his own hand, there
was no straying or disarray, and in less than a half-hour's space
Thiodolf and the first battle were come to the wood behind the
hazel-trees at the back of the hall, and before them was the dawning
round about the Roof of the Kindred; the eastern heavens were
brightening, and they could see all things clear without the wood.




CHAPTER XXVIII--OF THE STORM OF DAWNING


Then Thiodolf bade Fox and two others steal forward, and see what of
foemen was before them; so they fell to creeping on towards the open: but
scarcely had they started, before all men could hear the tramp of men
drawing nigh; then Thiodolf himself took with him a score of his House
and went quietly toward the wood-edge till they were barely within the
shadow of the beech-wood; and he looked forth and saw men coming straight
towards their lurking-place.  And those he saw were a good many, and they
were mostly of the dastards of the Goths; but with them was a Captain of
an Hundred of the Romans, and some others of his kindred; and Thiodolf
deemed that the Goths had been bidden to gather up some of the
night-watchers and enter the wood and fall on the stay-at-homes.  So he
bade his men get them aback, and he himself abode still at the very
wood's edge listening intently with his sword bare in his hand.  And he
noted that those men of the foe stayed in the daylight outside the wood,
but a few yards from it, and, by command as it seemed, fell silent and
spake no word; and the morn was very still, and when the sound of their
tramp over the grass had ceased, Thiodolf could hear the tramp of more
men behind them.  And then he had another thought, to wit that the Romans
had sent scouts to see if the Goths yet abided on the vantage-ground by
the ford, and that when they had found them gone, they were minded to
fall on them unawares in the refuge of the Thing-stead and were about to
do so by the counsel and leading of the dastard Goths; and that this was
one body of the host led by those dastards, who knew somewhat of the
woods.  So he drew aback speedily, and catching hold of Fox by the
shoulder (for he had taken him alone with him) he bade him creep along
through the wood toward the Thing-stead, and bring back speedy word
whether there were any more foemen near the wood thereaway; and he
himself came to his men, and ordered them for onset, drawing them up in a
shallow half moon, with the bowmen at the horns thereof, with the word to
loose at the Romans as soon as they heard the war-horn blow: and all this
was done speedily and with little noise, for they were well nigh so
arrayed already.

Thus then they waited, and there was more than a glimmer of light even
under the beechen leaves, and the eastern sky was yellowing to sunrise.
The other warriors were like hounds in the leash eager to be slipped; but
Thiodolf stood calm and high-hearted turning over the memory of past
days, and the time he thought of seemed long to him, but happy.

Scarce had a score of minutes passed, and the Romans before them, who
were now gathered thick behind those dastards of the Goths, had not
moved, when back comes Fox and tells how he has come upon a great company
of the Romans led by their thralls of the Goths who were just entering
the wood, away there towards the Thing-stead.

"But, War-duke," says he, "I came also across our own folk of the second
battle duly ordered in the wood ready to meet them; and they shall be
well dealt with, and the sun shall rise for us and not for them."

Then turns Thiodolf round to those nighest to him and says, but still
softly:

   "Hear ye a word, O people, of the wisdom of the foe!
   Before us thick they gather, and unto the death they go.
   They fare as lads with their cur-dogs who have stopped a fox's earth,
   And standing round the spinny, now chuckle in their mirth,
   Till one puts by the leafage and trembling stands astare
   At the sight of the Wood wolf's father arising in his lair--
   They have come for our wives and our children, and our sword-edge
   shall they meet;
   And which of them is happy save he of the swiftest feet?"

Speedily then went that word along the ranks of the Kindred, and men were
merry with the restless joy of battle: but scarce had two minutes passed
ere suddenly the stillness of the dawn was broken by clamour and uproar;
by shouts and shrieks, and the clashing of weapons from the wood on their
left hand; and over all arose the roar of the Markmen's horn, for the
battle was joined with the second company of the Kindreds.  But a rumour
and murmur went from the foemen before Thiodolf's men; and then sprang
forth the loud sharp word of the captains commanding and rebuking, as if
the men were doubtful which way they should take.

Amidst all which Thiodolf brandished his sword, and cried out in a great
voice:

   "Now, now, ye War-sons!
   Now the Wolf waketh!
   Lo how the Wood-beast
   Wendeth in onset.
   E'en as his feet fare
   Fall on and follow!"

And he led forth joyously, and terrible rang the long refrained gathered
shout of his battle as his folk rushed on together devouring the little
space between their ambush and the hazel-beset greensward.

In the twinkling of an eye the half-moon had lapped around the
Roman-Goths and those that were with them; and the dastards made no stand
but turned about at once, crying out that the Gods of the Kindreds were
come to aid and none could withstand them.  But these fleers thrust
against the band of Romans who were next to them, and bore them aback,
and great was the turmoil; and when Thiodolf's storm fell full upon them,
as it failed not to do, so close were they driven together that scarce
could any man raise his hand for a stroke.  For behind them stood a great
company of those valiant spearmen of the Romans, who would not give way
if anywise they might hold it out: and their ranks were closely serried,
shield nigh touching shield, and their faces turned toward the foe; and
so arrayed, though they might die, they scarce knew how to flee.  As they
might these thrust and hewed at the fleers, and gave fierce words but few
to the Roman-Goths, driving them back against their foemen: but the
fleers had lost the cunning of their right hands, and they had cast away
their shields and could not defend their very bodies against the wrath of
the kindreds; and when they strove to flee to the right hand or to the
left, they were met by the horns of the half-moon, and the arrows began
to rain in upon them, and from so close were they shot at that no shaft
failed to smite home.

There then were the dastards slain; and their bodies served for a rampart
against the onrush of the Markmen to those Romans who had stood fast.  To
them were gathering more and more every minute, and they faced the Goths
steadily with their hard brown visages and gleaming eyes above their iron-
plated shields; not casting their spears, but standing closely together,
silent, but fierce.  The light was spread now over all the earth; the
eastern heavens were grown golden-red, flecked here and there with little
crimson clouds: this battle was fallen near silent, but to the North was
great uproar of shouts and cries, and the roaring of the war-horns, and
the shrill blasts of the brazen trumpets.

Now Thiodolf, as his wont was when he saw that all was going well, had
refrained himself of hand-strokes, but was here and there and everywhere
giving heart to his folk, and keeping them in due order, and close array,
lest the Romans should yet come among them.  But he watched the ranks of
the foe, and saw how presently they began to spread out beyond his, and
might, if it were not looked to, take them in flank; and he was about to
order his men anew to meet them, when he looked on his left hand and saw
how Roman men were pouring thick from the wood out of all array, followed
by a close throng of the kindreds: for on this side the Romans were
outnumbered and had stumbled unawares into the ambush of the Markmen, who
had fallen on them straightway and disarrayed them from the first.  This
flight of their folk the Romans saw also, and held their men together,
refraining from the onset, as men who deem that they will have enough to
do to stand fast.

But the second battle of the Markmen, (who were of the Nether-mark,
mingled with the Mid-mark) fought wisely, for they swept those fleers
from before them, slaying many and driving the rest scattering, yet held
the chase for no long way, but wheeling about came sidelong on toward the
battle of the Romans and Thiodolf.  And when Thiodolf saw that, he set up
the whoop of victory, he and his, and fell fiercely on the Romans,
casting everything that would fly, as they rushed on to the handplay; so
that there was many a Roman slain with the Roman spears that those who
had fallen had left among their foemen.

Now the Roman captains perceived that it availed not to tarry till the
men of the Mid and Nether-marks fell upon their flank; so they gave
command, and their ranks gave back little by little, facing their foes,
and striving to draw themselves within the dike and garth, which, after
their custom, they had already cast up about the Wolfing Roof, their
stronghold.

Now as fierce as was the onset of the Markmen, the main body of the
Romans could not be hindered from doing this much before the men of the
second battle were upon them; but Thiodolf and Arinbiorn with some of the
mightiest brake their array in two places and entered in amongst them.
And wrath so seized upon the soul of Arinbiorn for the slaying of Otter,
and his own fault towards him, that he cast away his shield, and heeding
no strokes, first brake his sword in the press, and then, getting hold of
a great axe, smote at all before him as though none smote at him in turn;
yea, as though he were smiting down tree-boles for a match against some
other mighty man; and all the while amidst the hurry, strokes of swords
and spears rained on him, some falling flatwise and some glancing
sideways, but some true and square, so that his helm was smitten off and
his hauberk rent adown, and point and edge reached his living flesh; and
he had thrust himself so far amidst the foe that none could follow to
shield him, so that at last he fell shattered and rent at the foot of the
new clayey wall cast up by the Romans, even as Thiodolf and a band with
him came cleaving the press, and the Romans closed the barriers against
friend and foe, and cast great beams adown, and masses of iron and lead
and copper taken from the smithying-booths of the Wolfings, to stay them
if it were but a little.

Then Thiodolf bestrode the fallen warrior, and men of his House were
close behind him, for wisely had he fought, cleaving the press like a
wedge, helping his friends that they might help him, so that they all
went forward together.  But when he saw Arinbiorn fall he cried out:

"Woe's me, Arinbiorn! that thou wouldest not wait for me; for the day is
young yet, and over-young!"

There then they cleared the space outside the gate, and lifted up the
Bearing Warrior, and bare him back from the rampart.  For so fierce had
been the fight and so eager the storm of those that had followed after
him that they must needs order their battle afresh, since Thiodolf's
wedge which he had driven into the Roman host was but of a few and the
foe had been many and the rampart and the shot-weapons were close anigh.
Wise therefore it seemed to abide them of the second battle and join with
them to swarm over the new-built slippery wall in the teeth of the Roman
shot.

In this, the first onset of the Morning Battle, some of the Markmen had
fallen, but not many, since but a few had entered outright into the Roman
ranks; and when they first rushed on from the wood but three of them were
slain, and the slaughter was all of the dastards and the Romans; and
afterwards not a few of the Romans were slain, what by Arinbiorn, what by
the others; for they were fighting fleeing, and before their eyes was the
image of the garth-gate which was behind them; and they stumbled against
each other as they were driven sideways against the onrush of the Goths,
nor were they now standing fair and square to them, and they were hurried
and confused with the dread of the onset of them of the two Marks.

As yet Thiodolf had gotten no great hurt, so that when he heard that
Arinbiorn's soul had passed away he smiled and said:

"Yea, yea, Arinbiorn might have abided the end, for ere then shall the
battle be hard."

So now the Wolfings and the Bearings met joyously the kindreds of the
Nether Mark and the others of the second battle, and they sang the song
of victory arrayed in good order hard by the Roman rampart, while
bowstrings twanged and arrows whistled, and sling-stones hummed from this
side and from that.

And of their song of victory thus much the tale telleth:

      "Now hearken and hear
      Of the day-dawn of fear,
      And how up rose the sun
      On the battle begun.
      All night lay a-hiding,
      Our anger abiding,
      Dark down in the wood
      The sharp seekers of blood;
   But ere red grew the heaven we bore them all bare,
   For against us undriven the foemen must fare;
   They sought and they found us, and sorrowed to find,
   For the tree-boles around us the story shall mind,
   How fast from the glooming they fled to the light,
   Yeasaying the dooming of Tyr of the fight.

      "Hearken yet and again
      How the night gan to wane,
      And the twilight stole on
      Till the world was well won!
      E'en in such wise was wending
      A great host for our ending;
      On our life-days e'en so
      Stole the host of the foe;
   Till the heavens grew lighter, and light grew the world,
   And the storm of the fighter upon them was hurled,
   Then some fled the stroke, and some died and some stood,
   Till the worst of the storm broke right out from the wood,
   And the war-shafts were singing the carol of fear,
   The tale of the bringing the sharp swords anear.

      "Come gather we now,
      For the day doth grow.
      Come, gather, ye bold,
      Lest the day wax old;
      Lest not till to-morrow
      We slake our sorrow,
      And heap the ground
      With many a mound.
   Come, war-children, gather, and clear we the land!
   In the tide of War-father the deed is to hand.
   Clad in gear that we gilded they shrink from our sword;
   In the House that we builded they sit at the board;
   Come, war-children, gather, come swarm o'er the wall
   For the feast of War-father to sweep out the Hall!"

Now amidst of their singing the sun rose upon the earth, and gleamed in
the arms of men, and lit the faces of the singing warriors as they stood
turned toward the east.

In this first onset of battle but twenty and three Markmen were slain in
all, besides Arinbiorn; for, as aforesaid, they had the foe at a
disadvantage.  And this onset is called in the tale the Storm of Dawning.




CHAPTER XXI--OF THIODOLF'S STORM


The Goths tarried not over their victory; they shot with all the bowmen
that they had against the Romans on the wall, and therewith arrayed
themselves to fall on once more.  And Thiodolf, now that the foe were
covered by a wall, though it was but a little one, sent a message to the
men of the third battle, them of Up-mark to wit, to come forward in good
array and help to make a ring around the Wolfing Stead, wherein they
should now take the Romans as a beast is taken in a trap.  Meanwhile,
until they came, he sent other men to the wood to bring tree-boles to
batter the gate, and to make bridges whereby to swarm over the wall,
which was but breast-high on the Roman side, though they had worked at it
ceaselessly since yesterday morning.

In a long half-hour, therefore, the horns of the men of Up-mark sounded,
and they came forth from the wood a very great company, for with them
also were the men of the stay-at-homes and the homeless, such of them as
were fit to bear arms.  Amongst these went the Hall-Sun surrounded by a
band of the warriors of Up-mark; and before her was borne her namesake
the Lamp as a sign of assured victory.  But these stay-at-homes with the
Hall-Sun were stayed by the command of Thiodolf on the crown of the slope
above the dwellings, and stood round about the Speech-Hill, on the
topmost of which stood the Hall-Sun, and the wondrous Lamp, and the men
who warded her and it.

When the Romans saw the new host come forth from the wood, they might
well think that they would have work enough to do that day; but when they
saw the Hall-Sun take her stand on the Speech-Hill with the men-at-arms
about her, and the Lamp before her, then dread of the Gods fell upon
them, and they knew that the doom had gone forth against them.
Nevertheless they were not men to faint and die because the Gods were
become their foes, but they were resolved rather to fight it out to the
end against whatsoever might come against them, as was well seen
afterwards.

Now they had made four gates to their garth according to their custom,
and at each gate within was there a company of their mightiest men, and
each was beset by the best of the Markmen.  Thiodolf and his men beset
the western gate where they had made that fierce onset.  And the northern
gate was beset by the Elkings and some of the kindreds of the
Nether-mark; and the eastern gate by the rest of the men of Nether-mark;
and the southern gate by the kindreds of Up-mark.

All this the Romans noted, and they saw how that the Markmen were now
very many, and they knew that they were men no less valiant than
themselves, and they perceived that Thiodolf was a wise Captain; and in
less than two hours' space from the Storm of Dawning they saw those men
coming from the wood with plenteous store of tree-trunks to bridge their
ditch and rampart; and they considered how the day was yet very young, so
that they might look for no shelter from the night-tide; and as for any
aid from their own folk at the war-garth aforesaid, they hoped not for
it, nor had they sent any messenger to the Captain of the garth; nor did
they know as yet of his overthrow on the Ridge.

Now therefore there seemed to be but two choices before them; either to
abide within the rampart they had cast up, or to break out like valiant
men, and either die in the storm, or cleave a way through, whereby they
might come to their kindred and their stronghold south-east of the Mark.

This last way then they chose; or, to say the truth, it was their chief
captain who chose it for them, though they were nothing loth thereto: for
this man was a mocker, yet hot-headed, unstable, and nought wise in war,
and heretofore had his greed minished his courage; yet now, being driven
into a corner, he had courage enough and to spare, but utterly lacked
patience; for it had been better for the Romans to have abided one or two
onsets from the Goths, whereby they who should make the onslaught would
at the least have lost more men than they on whom they should fall,
before they within stormed forth on them; but their pride took away from
the Romans their last chance.  But their captain, now that he perceived,
as he thought, that the game was lost and his life come to its last hour
wherein he would have to leave his treasure and pleasure behind him, grew
desperate and therewith most fierce and cruel.  So all the captives whom
they had taken (they were but two score and two, for the wounded men they
had slain) he caused to be bound on the chairs of the high-seat clad in
their war-gear with their swords or spears made fast to their right
hands, and their shields to their left hands; and he said that the Goths
should now hold a Thing wherein they should at last take counsel wisely,
and abstain from folly.  For he caused store of faggots and small wood
smeared with grease and oil to be cast into the hall that it might be
fired, so that it and the captives should burn up altogether; "So," said
he, "shall we have a fair torch for our funeral fire;" for it was the
custom of the Romans to burn their dead.

Thus, then, he did; and then he caused men to do away the barriers and
open all the four gates of the new-made garth, after he had manned the
wall with the slingers and bowmen, and slain the horses, so that the
woodland folk should have no gain of them.  Then he arrayed his men at
the gates and about them duly and wisely, and bade those valiant footmen
fall on the Goths who were getting ready to fall on them, and to do their
best.  But he himself armed at all points took his stand at the Man's-
door of the Hall, and swore by all the Gods of his kindred that he would
not move a foot's length from thence either for fire or for steel.

So fiercely on that fair morning burned the hatred of men about the
dwellings of the children of the Wolf of the Goths, wherein the children
of the Wolf of Rome were shut up as in a penfold of slaughter.

Meanwhile the Hall-Sun standing on the Hill of Speech beheld it all,
looking down into the garth of war; for the new wall was no hindrance to
her sight, because the Speech-Hill was high and but a little way from the
Great Roof; and indeed she was within shot of the Roman bowmen, though
they were not very deft in shooting.

So now she lifted up her voice and sang so that many heard her; for at
this moment of time there was a lull in the clamour of battle both within
the garth and without; even as it happens when the thunder-storm is just
about to break on the world, that the wind drops dead, and the voice of
the leaves is hushed before the first great and near flash of lightening
glares over the fields.

So she sang:

   "Now the latest hour cometh and the ending of the strife;
   And to-morrow and to-morrow shall we take the hand of life,
   And wend adown the meadows, and skirt the darkling wood,
   And reap the waving acres, and gather in the good.
   I see a wall before me built up of steel and fire,
   And hurts and heart-sick striving, and the war-wright's fierce desire;
   But there-amidst a door is, and windows are therein;
   And the fair sun-litten meadows and the Houses of the kin
   Smile on me through the terror my trembling life to stay,
   That at my mouth now flutters, as fain to flee away.
   Lo e'en as the little hammer and the blow-pipe of the wright
   About the flickering fire deals with the silver white,
   And the cup and its beauty groweth that shall be for the people's
   feast,
   And all men are glad to see it from the greatest to the least;
   E'en so is the tale now fashioned, that many a time and oft
   Shall be told on the acre's edges, when the summer eve is soft;
   Shall be hearkened round the hall-blaze when the mid-winter night
   The kindreds' mirth besetteth, and quickeneth man's delight,
   And we that have lived in the story shall be born again and again
   As men feast on the bread of our earning, and praise the grief-born
   grain."

As she made an end of singing, those about her understood her words, that
she was foretelling victory, and the peace of the Mark, and for joy they
raised a shrill cry; and the warriors who were nighest to her took it up,
and it spread through the whole host round about the garth, and went up
into the breath of the summer morning and went down the wind along the
meadow of the Wolfings, so that they of the wain-burg, who were now
drawing somewhat near to Wolf-stead heard it and were glad.

But the Romans when they heard it knew that the heart of the battle was
reached, and they cast back that shout wrathfully and fiercely, and made
toward the foe.

Therewithal those mighty men fell on each other in the narrow passes of
the garth; for fear was dead and buried in that Battle of the Morning.

On the North gate Hiarandi of the Elkings was the point of the Markmen's
wedge, and first clave the Roman press.  In the Eastern gate it was
Valtyr, Otter's brother's son, a young man and most mighty.  In the South
gate it was Geirbald of the Shieldings, the Messenger.

In the west gate Thiodolf the War-duke gave one mighty cry like the roar
of an angry lion, and cleared a space before him for the wielding of
Ivar's blade; for at that moment he had looked up to the Roof of the
Kindred and had beheld a little stream of smoke curling blue out of a
window thereof, and he knew what had betided, and how short was the time
before them.  But his wrathful cry was taken up by some who had beheld
that same sight, and by others who saw nought but the Roman press, and
terribly it rang over the swaying struggling crowd.

Then fell the first rank of the Romans before those stark men and mighty
warriors; and they fell even where they stood, for on neither side could
any give back but for a little space, so close the press was, and the men
so eager to smite.  Neither did any crave peace if he were hurt or
disarmed; for to the Goths it was but a little thing to fall in hot blood
in that hour of love of the kindred, and longing for the days to be.  And
for the Romans, they had had no mercy, and now looked for none: and they
remembered their dealings with the Goths, and saw before them, as it
were, once more, yea, as in a picture, their slayings and quellings, and
lashings, and cold mockings which they had dealt out to the conquered
foemen without mercy, and now they longed sore for the quiet of the dark,
when their hard lives should be over, and all these deeds forgotten, and
they and their bitter foes should be at rest for ever.

Most valiantly they fought; but the fury of their despair could not deal
with the fearless hope of the Goths, and as rank after rank of them took
the place of those who were hewn down by Thiodolf and the Kindred, they
fell in their turn, and slowly the Goths cleared a space within the
gates, and then began to spread along the wall within, and grew thicker
and thicker.  Nor did they fight only at the gates; but made them bridges
of those tree-trunks, and fell to swarming over the rampart, till they
had cleared it of the bowmen and slingers, and then they leaped down and
fell upon the flanks of the Romans; and the host of the dead grew, and
the host of the living lessened.

Moreover the stay-at-homes round about the Speech-Hill, and that band of
the warriors of Up-mark who were with them, beheld the Great Roof and saw
the smoke come gushing out of the windows, and at last saw the red flames
creep out amidst it and waver round the window jambs like little banners
of scarlet cloth.  Then they could no longer refrain themselves, but ran
down from the Speech-Hill and the slope about it with great and fierce
cries, and clomb the wall where it was unmanned, helping each other with
hand and back, both stark warriors, and old men and lads and women: and
thus they gat them into the garth and fell upon the lessening band of the
Romans, who now began to give way hither and thither about the garth, as
they best might.

Thus it befell at the West-gate, but at the other gates it was no worser,
for there was no diversity of valour between the Houses; nay, whereas the
more part and the best part of the Romans faced the onset of Thiodolf,
which seemed to them the main onset, they were somewhat easier to deal
with elsewhere than at the West gate; and at the East gate was the place
first won, so that Valtyr and his folk were the first to clear a space
within the gate, and to tell the tale shortly (for can this that and the
other sword-stroke be told of in such a medley?) they drew the death-ring
around the Romans that were before them, and slew them all to the last
man, and then fell fiercely on the rearward of them of the North gate,
who still stood before Hiarandi's onset.  There again was no long tale to
tell of, for Hiarandi was just winning the gate, and the wall was cleared
of the Roman shot-fighters, and the Markmen were standing on the top
thereof, and casting down on the Romans spears and baulks of wood and
whatsoever would fly.  There again were the Romans all slain or put out
of the fight, and the two bands of the kindred joined together, and with
what voices the battle-rage had left them cried out for joy and fared on
together to help to bind the sheaves of war which Thiodolf's sickle had
reaped.  And now it was mere slaying, and the Romans, though they still
fought in knots of less than a score, yet fought on and hewed and thrust
without more thought or will than the stone has when it leaps adown the
hill-side after it has first been set agoing.

But now the garth was fairly won and Thiodolf saw that there was no hope
for the Romans drawing together again; so while the kindreds were busied
in hewing down those knots of desperate men, he gathered to him some of
the wisest of his warriors, amongst whom were Steinulf and Grani the
Grey, the deft wood-wrights (but Athalulf had been grievously hurt by a
spear and was out of the battle), and drave a way through the confused
turmoil which still boiled in the garth there, and made straight for the
Man's-door of the Hall.  Soon he was close thereto, having hewn away all
fleers that hindered him, and the doorway was before him.  But on the
threshold, the fire and flames of the kindled hall behind him, stood the
Roman Captain clad in gold-adorned armour and surcoat of sea-born purple;
the man was cool and calm and proud, and a mocking smile was on his face:
and he bore his bright blade unbloodied in his hand.

Thiodolf stayed a moment of time, and their eyes met; it had gone hard
with the War-duke, and those eyes glittered in his pale face, and his
teeth were close set together; though he had fought wisely, and for life,
as he who is most valiant ever will do, till he is driven to bay like the
lone wood-wolf by the hounds, yet had he been sore mishandled.  His helm
and shield were gone, his hauberk rent; for it was no dwarf-wrought coat,
but the work of Ivar's hand: the blood was running down from his left
arm, and he was hurt in many places: he had broken Ivar's sword in the
medley, and now bore in his hand a strong Roman short-sword, and his feet
stood bloody on the worn earth anigh the Man's-door.

He looked into the scornful eyes of the Roman lord for a little minute
and then laughed aloud, and therewithal, leaping on him with one spring,
turned sideways, and dealt him a great buffet on his ear with his unarmed
left hand, just as the Roman thrust at him with his sword, so that the
Captain staggered forward on to the next man following, which was
Wolfkettle the eager warrior, who thrust him through with his sword and
shoved him aside as they all strode into the hall together.  Howbeit no
sword fell from the Roman Captain as he fell, for Thiodolf's side bore it
into the Hall of the Wolfings.

Most wrathful were those men, and went hastily, for their Roof was full
of smoke, and the flames flickered about the pillars and the wall here
and there, and crept up to the windows aloft; yet was it not wholly or
fiercely burning; for the Roman fire-raisers had been hurried and hasty
in their work.  Straightway then Steinulf and Grani led the others off at
a run towards the loft and the water; but Thiodolf, who went slowly and
painfully, looked and beheld on the dais those men bound for the burning,
and he went quietly, and as a man who has been sick, and is weak, up on
to the dais, and said:

"Be of good cheer, O brothers, for the kindreds have vanquished the
foemen, and the end of strife is come."

His voice sounded strange and sweet to them amidst the turmoil of the
fight without; he laid down his sword on the table, and drew a little
sharp knife from his girdle and cut their bonds one by one and loosed
them with his blood-stained hands; and each one as he loosed him he
kissed and said to him, "Brother, go help those who are quenching the
fire; this is the bidding of the War-duke."

But as he loosed one after other he was longer and longer about it, and
his words were slower.  At last he came to the man who was bound in his
own high-seat close under the place of the wondrous Lamp, the Hall-Sun,
and he was the only one left bound; that man was of the Wormings and was
named Elfric; he loosed him and was long about it; and when he was done
he smiled on him and kissed him, and said to him:

"Arise, brother! go help the quenchers of the fire, and leave to me this
my chair, for I am weary: and if thou wilt, thou mayst bring me of that
water to drink, for this morning men have forgotten the mead of the
reapers!"

Then Elfric arose, and Thiodolf sat in his chair, and leaned back his
head; but Elfric looked at him for a moment as one scared, and then ran
his ways down the hall, which now was growing noisy with the hurry and
bustle of the quenchers of the fire, to whom had divers others joined
themselves.

There then from a bucket which was still for a moment he filled a wooden
bowl, which he caught up from the base of one of the hall-pillars, and
hastened up the Hall again; and there was no man nigh the dais, and
Thiodolf yet sat in his chair, and the hall was dim with the rolling
smoke, and Elfric saw not well what the War-duke was doing.  So he
hastened on, and when he was close to Thiodolf he trod in something wet,
and his heart sank for he knew that it was blood; his foot slipped
therewith and as he put out his hand to save himself the more part of the
water was spilled, and mingled with the blood.  But he went up to
Thiodolf and said to him, "Drink, War-duke! here hath come a mouthful of
water."

But Thiodolf moved not for his word, and Elfric touched him, and he moved
none the more.

Then Elfric's heart failed him and he laid his hand on the War-duke's
hand, and looked closely into his face; and the hand was cold and the
face ashen-pale; and Elfric laid his hand on his side, and he felt the
short-sword of the Roman leader thrust deep therein, besides his many
other hurts.

So Elfric knew that he was dead, and he cast the bowl to the earth, and
lifted up his hands and wailed out aloud, like a woman who hath come
suddenly on her dead child, and cried out in a great voice:

"Hither, hither, O men in this hall, for the War-duke of the Markmen is
dead!  O ye people, Hearken!  Thiodolf the Mighty, the Wolfing is dead!"

And he was a young man, and weak with the binding and the waiting for
death, and he bowed himself adown and crouched on the ground and wept
aloud.

But even as he cried that cry, the sunlight outside the Man's-door was
darkened, and the Hall-Sun came over the threshold in her ancient gold-
embroidered raiment, holding in her hand her namesake the wondrous Lamp;
and the spears and the war-gear of warriors gleamed behind her; but the
men tarried on the threshold till she turned about and beckoned to them,
and then they poured in through the Man's-door, their war-gear rent and
they all befouled and disarrayed with the battle, but with proud and
happy faces: as they entered she waved her hand to them to bid them go
join the quenchers of the fire; so they went their ways.

But she went with unfaltering steps up to the dais, and the place where
the chain of the Lamp hung down from amidst the smoke-cloud wavering a
little in the gusts of the hall.  Straightway she made the Lamp fast to
its chain, and dealt with its pulleys with a deft hand often practised
therein, and then let it run up toward the smoke-hidden Roof till it
gleamed in its due place once more, a token of the salvation of the
Wolfings and the welfare of all the kindreds.

Then she turned toward Thiodolf with a calm and solemn face, though it
was very pale and looked as if she would not smile again.  Elfric had
risen up and was standing by the board speechless and the passion of sobs
still struggling in his bosom.  She put him aside gently, and went up to
Thiodolf and stood above him, and looked down on his face a while: then
she put forth her hand and closed his eyes, and stooped down and kissed
his face.  Then she stood up again and faced the Hall and looked and saw
that many were streaming in, and that though the smoke was still eddying
overhead, the fire was well nigh quenched within; and without the sound
of battle had sunk and died away.  For indeed the Markmen had ended their
day's work before noon-tide that day, and the more part of the Romans
were slain, and to the rest they had given peace till the Folk-mote
should give Doom concerning them; for pity of these valiant men was
growing in the hearts of the valiant men who had vanquished them, now
that they feared them no more.

And this second part of the Morning Battle is called Thiodolf's Storm.

So now when the Hall-Sun looked and beheld that the battle was done and
the fire quenched, and when she saw how every man that came into the Hall
looked up and beheld the wondrous Lamp and his face quickened into joy at
the sight of it; and how most looked up at the high-seat and Thiodolf
lying leaned back therein, her heart nigh broke between the thought of
her grief and of the grief of the Folk that their mighty friend was dead,
and the thought of the joy of the days to be and all the glory that his
latter days had won.  But she gathered heart, and casting back the dark
tresses of her hair, she lifted up her voice and cried out till its clear
shrillness sounded throughout all the Roof:

"O men in this Hall the War-duke is dead!  O people hearken! for Thiodolf
the Mighty hath changed his life: Come hither, O men, Come hither, for
this is true, that Thiodolf is dead!"




CHAPTER XXX--THIODOLF IS BORNE OUT OF THE HALL AND OTTER IS LAID BESIDE
HIM


So when they heard her voice they came thither flockmeal, and a great
throng mingled of many kindreds was in the Hall, but with one consent
they made way for the Children of the Wolf to stand nearest to the dais.
So there they stood, the warriors mingled with the women, the swains with
the old men, the freemen with the thralls: for now the stay-at-homes of
the House were all gotten into the garth, and the more part of them had
flowed into the feast-hall when they knew that the fire was slackening.

All these now had heard the clear voice of the Hall-Sun, or others had
told them what had befallen; and the wave of grief had swept coldly over
them amidst their joy of the recoverance of their dwelling-place; yet
they would not wail nor cry aloud, even to ease their sorrow, till they
had heard the words of the Hall-Sun, as she stood facing them beside
their dead War-duke.

Then she spake: "O Sorli the Old, come up hither! thou hast been my
fellow in arms this long while."

So the old man came forth, and went slowly in his clashing war-gear up on
to the dais.  But his attire gleamed and glittered, since over-old was he
to thrust deep into the press that day, howbeit he was wise in war.  So
he stood beside her on the dais holding his head high, and proud he
looked, for all his thin white locks and sunken eyes.

But again said the Hall-Sun: "Canst thou hear me, Wolfkettle, when I bid
thee stand beside me, or art thou, too, gone on the road to Valhall?"

Forth then strode that mighty warrior and went toward the dais: nought
fair was his array to look on; for point and edge had rent it and stained
it red, and the flaring of the hall-flames had blackened it; his face was
streaked with black withal, and his hands were as the hands of a smith
among the thralls who hath wrought unwashen in the haste and hurry when
men look to see the war-arrow abroad.  But he went up on to the dais and
held up his head proudly, and looked forth on to the hall-crowd with eyes
that gleamed fiercely from his stained and blackened face.

Again the Hall-Sun said: "Art thou also alive, O Egil the messenger?
Swift are thy feet, but not to flee from the foe: Come up and stand with
us!"

Therewith Egil clave the throng; he was not so roughly dealt with as was
Wolfkettle, for he was a bowman, and had this while past shot down on the
Romans from aloof; and he yet held his bended bow in his hand.  He also
came up on to the dais and stood beside Wolfkettle glancing down on the
hall-crowd, looking eagerly from side to side.

Yet again the Hall-Sun spake: "No aliens now are dwelling in the Mark;
come hither, ye men of the kindreds!  Come thou, our brother Hiarandi of
the Elkings, for thy sisters, our wives, are fain of thee.  Come thou,
Valtyr of the Laxings, brother's son of Otter; do thou for the War-duke
what thy father's brother had done, had he not been faring afar.  Come
thou, Geirbald of the Shieldings the messenger!  Now know we the deeds of
others and thy deeds.  Come, stand beside us for a little!"

Forth then they came in their rent and battered war-gear: and the tall
Hiarandi bore but the broken truncheon of his sword; and Valtyr a
woodman's axe notched and dull with work; and Geirbald a Roman
cast-spear, for his own weapons had been broken in the medley; and he
came the last of the three, going as a belated reaper from the acres.
There they stood by the others and gazed adown the hall-throng.

But the Hall-Sun spake again: "Agni of the Daylings, I see thee now.  How
camest thou into the hard handplay, old man?  Come hither and stand with
us, for we love thee.  Angantyr of the Bearings, fair was thy riding on
the day of the Battle on the Ridge!  Come thou, be with us.  Shall the
Beamings whose daughters we marry fail the House of the Wolf to-day?
Geirodd, thou hast no longer a weapon, but the fight is over, and this
hour thou needest it not.  Come to us, brother!  Gunbald of the Vallings,
the Falcon on thy shield is dim with the dint of point and edge, but it
hath done its work to ward thy valiant heart: Come hither, friend!  Come
all ye and stand with us!"

As she named them so they came, and they went up on to the dais and stood
altogether; and a terrible band of warriors they looked had the fight
been to begin over again, and they to meet death once more.  And again
spake the Hall-Sun:

"Steinulf and Grani, deft are your hands!  Take ye the stalks of the war
blossoms, the spears of the kindreds, and knit them together to make a
bier for our War-duke, for he is weary and may not go afoot.  Thou Ali,
son of Grey; thou hast gone errands for me before; go forth now from the
garth, and wend thy ways toward the water, and tell me when thou comest
back what thou hast seen of the coming of the wain-burg.  For by this
time it should be drawing anigh."

So Ali went forth, and there was silence of words for a while in the
Hall; but there arose the sound of the wood-wrights busy with the wimble
and the hammer about the bier.  No long space had gone by when Ali came
back into the hall panting with his swift running; and he cried out:

"O Hall-Sun, they are coming; the last wain hath crossed the ford, and
the first is hard at hand: bright are their banners in the sun."

Then said the Hall-Sun: "O warriors, it is fitting that we go to meet our
banners returning from the field, and that we do the Gods to wit what
deeds we have done; fitting is it also that Thiodolf our War-duke wend
with us.  Now get ye into your ordered bands, and go we forth from the
fire-scorched hall, and out into the sunlight, that the very earth and
the heavens may look upon the face of our War-duke, and bear witness that
he hath played his part as a man."

Then without more words the folk began to stream out of the Hall, and
within the garth which the Romans had made they arrayed their companies.
But when they were all gone from the Hall save they who were on the dais,
the Hall-Sun took the waxen torch which she had litten and quenched at
the departure of the host to battle, and now she once more kindled it at
the flame of the wondrous Lamp, the Hall-Sun.  But the wood-wrights
brought the bier which they had made of the spear-shafts of the kindred,
and they laid thereon a purple cloak gold-embroidered of the treasure of
the Wolfings, and thereon was Thiodolf laid.

Then those men took him up; to wit, Sorli the Old, and Wolfkettle and
Egil, all these were of the Wolfing House; Hiarandi of the Elkings also,
and Valtyr of the Laxings, Geirbald of the Shieldings, Agni of the
Daylings, Angantyr of the Bearings, Geirodd of the Beamings, Gunbald of
the Vallings: all these, with the two valiant wood-wrights, Steinulf and
Grani, laid hand to the bier.

So they bore it down from the dais, and out at the Man's-door into the
sunlight, and the Hall-Sun followed close after it, holding in her hand
the Candle of Returning.  It was an hour after high-noon of a bright
midsummer day when she came out into the garth; and the smoke from the
fire-scorched hall yet hung about the trees of the wood-edge.  She looked
neither down towards her feet nor on the right side or the left, but
straight before her.  The ordered companies of the kindreds hid the sight
of many fearful things from her eyes; though indeed the thralls and women
had mostly gleaned the dead from the living both of friend and foe, and
were tending the hurt of either host.  Through an opening in the ranks
moreover could they by the bier behold the scanty band of Roman captives,
some standing up, looking dully around them, some sitting or lying on the
grass talking quietly together, and it seemed by their faces that for
them the bitterness of death was passed.

Forth then fared the host by the West gate, where Thiodolf had done so
valiantly that day, and out on to the green amidst the booths and lesser
dwellings.  Sore then was the heart of the Hall-Sun, as she looked forth
over dwelling, and acre, and meadow, and the blue line of the woods
beyond the water, and bethought her of all the familiar things that were
within the compass of her eyesight, and remembered the many days of her
father's loving-kindness, and the fair words wherewith he had solaced her
life-days.  But of the sorrow that wrung her heart nothing showed in her
face, nor was she paler now than her wont was.  For high was her courage,
and she would in no wise mar that fair day and victory of the kindreds
with grief for what was gone, whereas so much of what once was, yet
abided and should abide for ever.

Then fared they down through the acres, where what was yet left of the
wheat was yellowing toward harvest, and the rye hung grey and heavy; for
bright and hot had the weather been all through these tidings.  Howbeit
much of the corn was spoiled by the trampling of the Roman bands.

So came they into the fair open meadow and saw before them the wains
coming to meet them with their folk; to wit a throng of stout carles of
the thrall-folk led by the war-wise and ripe men of the Steerings.  Bright
was the gleaming of the banner-wains, though for the lack of wind the
banners hung down about their staves; the sound of the lowing of the
bulls and the oxen, the neighing of horses and bleating of the flocks
came up to the ears of the host as they wended over the meadow.

They made stay at last on the rising ground, all trampled and in parts
bloody, where yesterday Thiodolf had come on the fight between the
remnant of Otter's men and the Romans: there they opened their ranks, and
made a ring round about a space, amidmost of which was a little mound
whereon was set the bier of Thiodolf.  The wains and their warders came
up with them and drew a garth of the wains round about the ring of men
with the banners of the kindreds in their due places.

There was the Wolf and the Elk, the Falcon, the Swan, the Boar, the Bear,
and the Green-tree: the Willow-bush, the Gedd, the Water-bank and the
Wood-Ousel, the Steer, the Mallard and the Roe-deer: all these were of
the Mid-mark.  But of the Upper-mark were the Horse and the Spear, and
the Shield, and the Daybreak, and the Dale, and the Mountain, and the
Brook, and the Weasel, and the Cloud, and the Hart.

Of the Nether-mark were the Salmon, and the Lynx, and the Ling worm, the
Seal, the Stone, and the Sea-mew; the Buck-goat, the Apple-tree, the
Bull, the Adder, and the Crane.

There they stood in the hot sunshine three hours after noon; and a little
wind came out of the west and raised the pictured cloths upon the banner-
staves, so that the men could now see the images of the tokens of their
Houses and the Fathers of old time.

Now was there silence in the ring of men; but it opened presently and
through it came all-armed warriors bearing another bier, and lo, Otter
upon it, dead in his war-gear with many a grievous wound upon his body.
For men had found him in an ingle of the wall of the Great Roof, where he
had been laid yesterday by the Romans when his company and the Bearings
with the Wormings made their onset: for the Romans had noted his
exceeding valour, and when they had driven off the Goths some of them
brought him dead inside their garth, for they would know the name and
dignity of so valorous a man.

So now they bore him to the mound where Thiodolf lay and set the bier
down beside Thiodolf's, and the two War-dukes of the Markmen lay there
together: and when the warriors beheld that sight, they could not
forbear, but some groaned aloud, and some wept great tears, and they
clashed their swords on their shields and the sound of their sorrow and
their praise went up to the summer heavens.

Now the Hall-Sun holding aloft the waxen torch lifted up her voice and
said:

   "O warriors of the Wolfings, by the token of the flame
   That here in my right hand flickers, ye are back at the House of the
   Name,
   And there yet burneth the Hall-Sun beneath the Wolfing Roof,
   And the flame that the foemen quickened hath died out far aloof.
   Ye gleanings of the battle, lift up your hearts on high,
   For the House of the War-wise Wolfings and the Folk undoomed to die.
   But ye kindreds of the Markmen, the Wolfing guests are ye,
   And to-night we hold the high-tide, and great shall the feasting be,
   For to-day by the road that we know not a many wend their ways
   To the Gods and the ancient Fathers, and the hope of the latter days.
   And how shall their feet be cumbered if we tangle them with woe,
   And the heavy rain of sorrow drift o'er the road they go?
   They have toiled, and their toil was troublous to make the days to
   come;
   Use ye their gifts in gladness, lest they grieve for the Ancient Home!
   Now are our maids arraying that fire-scorched Hall of ours
   With the treasure of the Wolfings and the wealth of summer flowers,
   And this eve the work before you will be the Hall to throng
   And purge its walls of sorrow and quench its scathe and wrong."

She looked on the dead Thiodolf a moment, and then glanced from him to
Otter and spake again:

   "O kindreds, here before you two mighty bodies lie;
   Henceforth no man shall see them in house and field go by
   As we were used to behold them, familiar to us then
   As the wind beneath the heavens and the sun that shines on men;
   Now soon shall there be nothing of their dwelling-place to tell,
   Save the billow of the meadows, the flower-grown grassy swell!
   Now therefore, O ye kindreds, if amidst you there be one
   Who hath known the heart of the War-dukes, and the deeds their hands
   have done,
   Will not the word be with him, while yet your hearts are hot,
   Of our praise and long remembrance, and our love that dieth not?
   Then let him come up hither and speak the latest word
   O'er the limbs of the battle-weary and the hearts outworn with the
   sword."

She held her peace, and there was a stir in the ring of men: for they who
were anigh the Dayling banner saw an old warrior sitting on a great black
horse and fully armed.  He got slowly off his horse and walked toward the
ring of warriors, which opened before him; for all knew him for Asmund
the old, the war-wise warrior of the Daylings, even he who had lamented
over the Hauberk of Thiodolf.  He had taken horse the day before, and had
ridden toward the battle, but was belated, and had come up with them of
the wain-burg just as they had crossed the water.




CHAPTER XXXI--OLD ASMUND SPEAKETH OVER THE WAR-DUKES: THE DEAD ARE LAID
IN MOUND


Now while all looked on, he went to the place where lay the bodies of the
War-dukes, and looked down on the face of Otter and said:

   "O Otter, there thou liest! and thou that I knew of old,
   When my beard began to whiten, as the best of the keen and the bold,
   And thou wert as my youngest brother, and thou didst lead my sons
   When we fared forth over the mountains to meet the arrowy Huns,
   And I smiled to see thee teaching the lore that I learned thee erst.
   O Otter, dost thou remember how the Goth-folk came by the worst,
   And with thee in mine arms I waded the wide shaft-harrowed flood
   That lapped the feet of the mountains with its water blent with blood;
   And how in the hollow places of the mountains hidden away
   We abode the kindreds' coming as the wet night bideth day?
   Dost thou remember, Otter, how many a joy we had,
   How many a grief remembered has made our high-tide glad?
   O fellow of the hall-glee!  O fellow of the field!
   Why then hast thou departed and left me under shield?
   I the ancient, I the childless, while yet in the Laxing hall
   Are thy brother's sons abiding and their children on thee call.

   "O kindreds of the people! the soul that dwelt herein,
   This goodly way-worn body, was keen for you to win
   Good days and long endurance.  Who knoweth of his deed
   What things for you it hath fashioned from the flame of the fire of
   need?
   But of this at least well wot we, that forth from your hearts it came
   And back to your hearts returneth for the seed of thriving and fame.
   In the ground wherein ye lay it, the body of this man,
   No deed of his abideth, no glory that he wan,
   But evermore the Markmen shall bear his deeds o'er earth,
   With the joy of the deeds that are coming, the garland of his worth."

He was silent a little as he stood looking down on Otter's face with
grievous sorrow, for all that his words were stout.  For indeed, as he
had said, Otter had been his battle-fellow and his hall-fellow, though he
was much younger than Asmund; and they had been standing foot to foot in
that battle wherein old Asmund's sons were slain by his side.

After a while he turned slowly from looking at Otter to gaze upon
Thiodolf, and his body trembled as he looked, and he opened his mouth to
speak; but no word came from it; and he sat down upon the edge of the
bier, and the tears began to gush out of his old eyes, and he wept aloud.
Then they that saw him wondered; for all knew the stoutness of his heart,
and how he had borne more burdens than that of eld, and had not cowered
down under them.  But at last he arose again, and stood firmly on his
feet, and faced the folk-mote, and in a voice more like the voice of a
man in his prime than of an old man, he sang:

      "Wild the storm is abroad
      Of the edge of the sword!
      Far on runneth the path
      Of the war-stride of wrath!
      The Gods hearken and hear
      The long rumour of fear
      From the meadows beneath
      Running fierce o'er the heath,
   Till it beats round their dwelling-place builded aloof
   And at last all up-swelling breaks wild o'er their roof,
   And quencheth their laughter and crieth on all,
   As it rolleth round rafter and beam of the Hall,
   Like the speech of the thunder-cloud tangled on high,
   When the mountain-halls sunder as dread goeth by.

      "So they throw the door wide
      Of the Hall where they bide,
      And to murmuring song
      Turns that voice of the wrong,
      And the Gods wait a-gaze
      For that Wearer of Ways:
      For they know he hath gone
      A long journey alone.
   Now his feet are they hearkening, and now is he come,
   With his battle-wounds darkening the door of his home,
   Unbyrnied, unshielded, and lonely he stands,
   And the sword that he wielded is gone from his hands--
   Hands outstretched and bearing no spoil of the fight,
   As speechless, unfearing, he stands in their sight.

      "War-father gleams
      Where the white light streams
      Round kings of old
      All red with gold,
      And the Gods of the name
      With joy aflame.
      All the ancient of men
      Grown glorious again:
   Till the Slains-father crieth aloud at the last:
   'Here is one that belieth no hope of the past!
   No weapon, no treasure of earth doth he bear,
   No gift for the pleasure of Godhome to share;
   But life his hand bringeth, well cherished, most sweet;
   And hark! the Hall singeth the Folk-wolf to greet!'

      "As the rain of May
      On earth's happiest day,
      So the fair flowers fall
      On the sun-bright Hall
      As the Gods rise up
      With the greeting-cup,
      And the welcoming crowd
      Falls to murmur aloud.
   Then the God of Earth speaketh; sweet-worded he saith,
   'Lo, the Sun ever seeketh Life fashioned of death;
   And to-day as he turneth the wide world about
   On Wolf-stead he yearneth; for there without doubt
   Dwells the death-fashioned story, the flower of all fame.
   Come hither new Glory, come Crown of the Name!'"

All men's hearts rose high as he sang, and when he had ended arose the
clang of sword and shield and went ringing down the meadow, and the
mighty shout of the Markmen's joy rent the heavens: for in sooth at that
moment they saw Thiodolf, their champion, sitting among the Gods on his
golden chair, sweet savours around him, and sweet sound of singing, and
he himself bright-faced and merry as no man on earth had seen him, for as
joyous a man as he was.

But when the sound of their exultation sank down, the Hall-Sun spake
again:

   "Now wendeth the sun westward, and weary grows the Earth
   Of all the long day's doings in sorrow and in mirth;
   And as the great sun waneth, so doth my candle wane,
   And its flickering flame desireth to rest and die again.
   Therefore across the meadows wend we aback once more
   To the holy Roof of the Wolfings, the shrine of peace and war.
   And these that once have loved us, these warriors images,
   Shall sit amidst our feasting, and see, as the Father sees
   The works that men-folk fashion and the rest of toiling hands,
   When his eyes look down from the mountains and the heavens above all
   lands,
   And up from the flowery meadows and the rolling deeps of the sea.
   There then at the feast with our champions familiar shall we be
   As oft we are with the Godfolk, when in story-rhymes and lays
   We laugh as we tell of their laughter, and their deeds of other days.

   "Come then, ye sons of the kindreds who hither bore these twain!
   Take up their beds of glory, and fare we home again,
   And feast as men delivered from toil unmeet to bear,
   Who through the night are looking to the dawn-tide fresh and fair
   And the morn and the noon to follow, and the eve and its morrow morn,
   All the life of our deliv'rance and the fair days yet unborn."

So she spoke, and a murmur arose as those valiant men came forth again.
But lo, now were they dight in fresh and fair raiment and gleaming war-
array.  For while all this was a-doing and a-saying, they had gotten them
by the Hall-Sun's bidding unto the wains of their Houses, and had arrayed
them from the store therein.

So now they took up the biers, and the Hall-Sun led them, and they went
over the meadow before the throng of the kindreds, who followed them duly
ordered, each House about its banner; and when they were come through the
garth which the Romans had made to the Man's-door of the Hall, there were
the women of the House freshly attired, who cast flowers on the living
men of the host, and on the dead War-dukes, while they wept for pity of
them.  So went the freemen of the Houses into the Hall, following the
Hall-Sun, and the bearers of the War-dukes; but the banners abode without
in the garth made by the Romans; and the thralls arrayed a feast for
themselves about the wains of the kindreds in the open place before their
cots and the smithying booths and the byres.

And as the Hall-Sun went into the Hall, she thrust down the candle
against the threshold of the Man's-door, and so quenched it.

Long were the kindreds entering, and when they were under the Roof of the
Wolfings, they looked and beheld Thiodolf set in his chair once more, and
Otter set beside him; and the chiefs and leaders of the House took their
places on the dais, those to whom it was due, and the Hall-Sun sat under
the wondrous Lamp her namesake.

Now was the glooming falling upon the earth; but the Hall was bright
within even as the Hall-Sun had promised.  Therein was set forth the
Treasure of the Wolfings; fair cloths were hung on the walls, goodly
broidered garments on the pillars: goodly brazen cauldrons and
fair-carven chests were set down in nooks where men could see them well,
and vessels of gold and silver were set all up and down the tables of the
feast.  The pillars also were wreathed with flowers, and flowers hung
garlanded from the walls over the precious hangings; sweet gums and
spices were burning in fair-wrought censers of brass, and so many candles
were alight under the Roof, that scarce had it looked more ablaze when
the Romans had litten the faggots therein for its burning amidst the
hurry of the Morning Battle.

There then they fell to feasting, hallowing in the high-tide of their
return with victory in their hands: and the dead corpses of Thiodolf and
Otter, clad in precious glistering raiment, looked down on them from the
High-seat, and the kindreds worshipped them and were glad; and they drank
the Cup to them before any others, were they Gods or men.

But before the feast was hallowed in, came Ali the son of Grey up to the
High-seat, bearing something in his hand: and lo! it was Throng-plough,
which he had sought all over the field where the Markmen had been
overcome by the Romans, and had found it at last.  All men saw him how he
held it in his hand now as he went up to the Hall-Sun and spake to her.
But she kissed the lad on the forehead, and took Throng-plough, and wound
the peace-strings round him and laid him on the board before Thiodolf;
and then she spake softly as if to herself, yet so that some heard her:

"O father, no more shalt thou draw Throng-plough from the sheath till the
battle is pitched in the last field of fight, and the sons of the
fruitful Earth and the sons of Day meet Swart and his children at last,
when the change of the World is at hand.  Maybe I shall be with thee
then: but now and in meanwhile, farewell, O mighty hand of my father!"

Thus then the Houses of the Mark held their High-tide of Returning under
the Wolfing Roof with none to blame them or make them afraid: and the
moon rose and the summer night wore on towards dawn, and within the Roof
and without was there feasting and singing and harping and the voice of
abundant joyance: for without the Roof feasted the thralls and the
strangers, and the Roman war-captives.

But on the morrow the kindreds laid their dead men in mound betwixt the
Great Roof and the Wild-wood.  In one mound they laid them with the War-
dukes in their midst, and Arinbiorn by Otter's right side; and Thiodolf
bore Throng-plough to mound with him.

But a little way from the mound of their own dead, toward the south they
laid the Romans, a great company, with their Captain in the midst: and
they heaped a long mound over them not right high; so that as years wore,
and the feet of men and beasts trod it down, it seemed a mere swelling of
the earth not made by men's hands; and belike men knew not how many bones
of valiant men lay beneath; yet it had a name which endured for long, to
wit, the Battle-toft.

But the mound whereunder the Markmen were laid was called Thiodolf's Howe
for many generations of men, and many are the tales told of him; for men
were loth to lose him and forget him: and in the latter days men deemed
of him that he sits in that Howe not dead but sleeping, with
Throng-plough laid before him on the board; and that when the sons of the
Goths are at their sorest need and the falcons cease to sit on the ridge
of the Great Roof of the Wolfings, he will wake and come forth from the
Howe for their helping.  But none have dared to break open that Howe and
behold what is therein.

But that swelling of the meadow where the Goths had their overthrow at
the hands of the Romans, and Thiodolf fell to earth unwounded, got a name
also, and was called the Swooning Knowe; and it kept that name long after
men had forgotten wherefore it was so called.

Now when all this was done, and the warriors of the kindreds were
departed each to his own stead, the Wolfings gathered in wheat-harvest,
and set themselves to make good all that the Romans had undone; and they
cleansed and mended their Great Roof and made it fairer than before, and
took from it all signs of the burning, save that they left the charring
and marks of the flames on one tie-beam, the second from the dais, for a
token of the past tidings.  Also when Harvest was over the Wolfings, the
Beamings, the Galtings, and the Elkings, set to work with the Bearings to
rebuild their Great Roof and the other dwellings and booths which the
Romans had burned; and right fair was that house.

But the Wolfings throve in field and fold, and they begat children who
grew up to be mighty men and deft of hand, and the House grew more
glorious year by year.

The tale tells not that the Romans ever fell on the Mark again; for about
this time they began to stay the spreading of their dominion, or even to
draw in its boundaries somewhat.

AND THIS IS ALL THAT THE TALE HAS TO TELL CONCERNING THE HOUSE OF THE
WOLFINGS AND THE KINDREDS OF THE MARK.





CHAPTER I: DISCUSSION AND BED


Up at the League, says a friend, there had been one night a brisk
conversational discussion, as to what would happen on the Morrow of the
Revolution, finally shading off into a vigorous statement by various
friends of their views on the future of the fully-developed new society.

Says our friend: Considering the subject, the discussion was
good-tempered; for those present being used to public meetings and after-
lecture debates, if they did not listen to each others' opinions (which
could scarcely be expected of them), at all events did not always attempt
to speak all together, as is the custom of people in ordinary polite
society when conversing on a subject which interests them.  For the rest,
there were six persons present, and consequently six sections of the
party were represented, four of which had strong but divergent Anarchist
opinions.  One of the sections, says our friend, a man whom he knows very
well indeed, sat almost silent at the beginning of the discussion, but at
last got drawn into it, and finished by roaring out very loud, and
damning all the rest for fools; after which befel a period of noise, and
then a lull, during which the aforesaid section, having said good-night
very amicably, took his way home by himself to a western suburb, using
the means of travelling which civilisation has forced upon us like a
habit.  As he sat in that vapour-bath of hurried and discontented
humanity, a carriage of the underground railway, he, like others, stewed
discontentedly, while in self-reproachful mood he turned over the many
excellent and conclusive arguments which, though they lay at his fingers'
ends, he had forgotten in the just past discussion.  But this frame of
mind he was so used to, that it didn't last him long, and after a brief
discomfort, caused by disgust with himself for having lost his temper
(which he was also well used to), he found himself musing on the subject-
matter of discussion, but still discontentedly and unhappily.  "If I
could but see a day of it," he said to himself; "if I could but see it!"

As he formed the words, the train stopped at his station, five minutes'
walk from his own house, which stood on the banks of the Thames, a little
way above an ugly suspension bridge.  He went out of the station, still
discontented and unhappy, muttering "If I could but see it! if I could
but see it!" but had not gone many steps towards the river before (says
our friend who tells the story) all that discontent and trouble seemed to
slip off him.

It was a beautiful night of early winter, the air just sharp enough to be
refreshing after the hot room and the stinking railway carriage.  The
wind, which had lately turned a point or two north of west, had blown the
sky clear of all cloud save a light fleck or two which went swiftly down
the heavens.  There was a young moon halfway up the sky, and as the home-
farer caught sight of it, tangled in the branches of a tall old elm, he
could scarce bring to his mind the shabby London suburb where he was, and
he felt as if he were in a pleasant country place--pleasanter, indeed,
than the deep country was as he had known it.

He came right down to the river-side, and lingered a little, looking over
the low wall to note the moonlit river, near upon high water, go swirling
and glittering up to Chiswick Eyot: as for the ugly bridge below, he did
not notice it or think of it, except when for a moment (says our friend)
it struck him that he missed the row of lights down stream.  Then he
turned to his house door and let himself in; and even as he shut the door
to, disappeared all remembrance of that brilliant logic and foresight
which had so illuminated the recent discussion; and of the discussion
itself there remained no trace, save a vague hope, that was now become a
pleasure, for days of peace and rest, and cleanness and smiling goodwill.

In this mood he tumbled into bed, and fell asleep after his wont, in two
minutes' time; but (contrary to his wont) woke up again not long after in
that curiously wide-awake condition which sometimes surprises even good
sleepers; a condition under which we feel all our wits preternaturally
sharpened, while all the miserable muddles we have ever got into, all the
disgraces and losses of our lives, will insist on thrusting themselves
forward for the consideration of those sharpened wits.

In this state he lay (says our friend) till he had almost begun to enjoy
it: till the tale of his stupidities amused him, and the entanglements
before him, which he saw so clearly, began to shape themselves into an
amusing story for him.

He heard one o'clock strike, then two and then three; after which he fell
asleep again.  Our friend says that from that sleep he awoke once more,
and afterwards went through such surprising adventures that he thinks
that they should be told to our comrades, and indeed the public in
general, and therefore proposes to tell them now.  But, says he, I think
it would be better if I told them in the first person, as if it were
myself who had gone through them; which, indeed, will be the easier and
more natural to me, since I understand the feelings and desires of the
comrade of whom I am telling better than any one else in the world does.




CHAPTER II: A MORNING BATH


Well, I awoke, and found that I had kicked my bedclothes off; and no
wonder, for it was hot and the sun shining brightly.  I jumped up and
washed and hurried on my clothes, but in a hazy and half-awake condition,
as if I had slept for a long, long while, and could not shake off the
weight of slumber.  In fact, I rather took it for granted that I was at
home in my own room than saw that it was so.

When I was dressed, I felt the place so hot that I made haste to get out
of the room and out of the house; and my first feeling was a delicious
relief caused by the fresh air and pleasant breeze; my second, as I began
to gather my wits together, mere measureless wonder: for it was winter
when I went to bed the last night, and now, by witness of the river-side
trees, it was summer, a beautiful bright morning seemingly of early June.
However, there was still the Thames sparkling under the sun, and near
high water, as last night I had seen it gleaming under the moon.

I had by no means shaken off the feeling of oppression, and wherever I
might have been should scarce have been quite conscious of the place; so
it was no wonder that I felt rather puzzled in despite of the familiar
face of the Thames.  Withal I felt dizzy and queer; and remembering that
people often got a boat and had a swim in mid-stream, I thought I would
do no less.  It seems very early, quoth I to myself, but I daresay I
shall find someone at Biffin's to take me.  However, I didn't get as far
as Biffin's, or even turn to my left thitherward, because just then I
began to see that there was a landing-stage right before me in front of
my house: in fact, on the place where my next-door neighbour had rigged
one up, though somehow it didn't look like that either.  Down I went on
to it, and sure enough among the empty boats moored to it lay a man on
his sculls in a solid-looking tub of a boat clearly meant for bathers.  He
nodded to me, and bade me good-morning as if he expected me, so I jumped
in without any words, and he paddled away quietly as I peeled for my
swim.  As we went, I looked down on the water, and couldn't help saying--

"How clear the water is this morning!"

"Is it?" said he; "I didn't notice it.  You know the flood-tide always
thickens it a bit."

"H'm," said I, "I have seen it pretty muddy even at half-ebb."

He said nothing in answer, but seemed rather astonished; and as he now
lay just stemming the tide, and I had my clothes off, I jumped in without
more ado.  Of course when I had my head above water again I turned
towards the tide, and my eyes naturally sought for the bridge, and so
utterly astonished was I by what I saw, that I forgot to strike out, and
went spluttering under water again, and when I came up made straight for
the boat; for I felt that I must ask some questions of my waterman, so
bewildering had been the half-sight I had seen from the face of the river
with the water hardly out of my eyes; though by this time I was quit of
the slumbrous and dizzy feeling, and was wide-awake and clear-headed.

As I got in up the steps which he had lowered, and he held out his hand
to help me, we went drifting speedily up towards Chiswick; but now he
caught up the sculls and brought her head round again, and said--"A short
swim, neighbour; but perhaps you find the water cold this morning, after
your journey.  Shall I put you ashore at once, or would you like to go
down to Putney before breakfast?"

He spoke in a way so unlike what I should have expected from a
Hammersmith waterman, that I stared at him, as I answered, "Please to
hold her a little; I want to look about me a bit."

"All right," he said; "it's no less pretty in its way here than it is off
Barn Elms; it's jolly everywhere this time in the morning.  I'm glad you
got up early; it's barely five o'clock yet."

If I was astonished with my sight of the river banks, I was no less
astonished at my waterman, now that I had time to look at him and see him
with my head and eyes clear.

He was a handsome young fellow, with a peculiarly pleasant and friendly
look about his eyes,--an expression which was quite new to me then,
though I soon became familiar with it.  For the rest, he was dark-haired
and berry-brown of skin, well-knit and strong, and obviously used to
exercising his muscles, but with nothing rough or coarse about him, and
clean as might be.  His dress was not like any modern work-a-day clothes
I had seen, but would have served very well as a costume for a picture of
fourteenth century life: it was of dark blue cloth, simple enough, but of
fine web, and without a stain on it.  He had a brown leather belt round
his waist, and I noticed that its clasp was of damascened steel
beautifully wrought.  In short, he seemed to be like some specially manly
and refined young gentleman, playing waterman for a spree, and I
concluded that this was the case.

I felt that I must make some conversation; so I pointed to the Surrey
bank, where I noticed some light plank stages running down the foreshore,
with windlasses at the landward end of them, and said, "What are they
doing with those things here?  If we were on the Tay, I should have said
that they were for drawing the salmon nets; but here--"

"Well," said he, smiling, "of course that is what they _are_ for.  Where
there are salmon, there are likely to be salmon-nets, Tay or Thames; but
of course they are not always in use; we don't want salmon _every_ day of
the season."

I was going to say, "But is this the Thames?" but held my peace in my
wonder, and turned my bewildered eyes eastward to look at the bridge
again, and thence to the shores of the London river; and surely there was
enough to astonish me.  For though there was a bridge across the stream
and houses on its banks, how all was changed from last night!  The soap-
works with their smoke-vomiting chimneys were gone; the engineer's works
gone; the lead-works gone; and no sound of rivetting and hammering came
down the west wind from Thorneycroft's.  Then the bridge!  I had perhaps
dreamed of such a bridge, but never seen such an one out of an
illuminated manuscript; for not even the Ponte Vecchio at Florence came
anywhere near it.  It was of stone arches, splendidly solid, and as
graceful as they were strong; high enough also to let ordinary river
traffic through easily.  Over the parapet showed quaint and fanciful
little buildings, which I supposed to be booths or shops, beset with
painted and gilded vanes and spirelets.  The stone was a little
weathered, but showed no marks of the grimy sootiness which I was used to
on every London building more than a year old.  In short, to me a wonder
of a bridge.

The sculler noted my eager astonished look, and said, as if in answer to
my thoughts--

"Yes, it _is_ a pretty bridge, isn't it?  Even the up-stream bridges,
which are so much smaller, are scarcely daintier, and the down-stream
ones are scarcely more dignified and stately."

I found myself saying, almost against my will, "How old is it?"

"Oh, not very old," he said; "it was built or at least opened, in 2003.
There used to be a rather plain timber bridge before then."

The date shut my mouth as if a key had been turned in a padlock fixed to
my lips; for I saw that something inexplicable had happened, and that if
I said much, I should be mixed up in a game of cross questions and
crooked answers.  So I tried to look unconcerned, and to glance in a
matter-of-course way at the banks of the river, though this is what I saw
up to the bridge and a little beyond; say as far as the site of the soap-
works.  Both shores had a line of very pretty houses, low and not large,
standing back a little way from the river; they were mostly built of red
brick and roofed with tiles, and looked, above all, comfortable, and as
if they were, so to say, alive, and sympathetic with the life of the
dwellers in them.  There was a continuous garden in front of them, going
down to the water's edge, in which the flowers were now blooming
luxuriantly, and sending delicious waves of summer scent over the eddying
stream.  Behind the houses, I could see great trees rising, mostly
planes, and looking down the water there were the reaches towards Putney
almost as if they were a lake with a forest shore, so thick were the big
trees; and I said aloud, but as if to myself--

"Well, I'm glad that they have not built over Barn Elms."

I blushed for my fatuity as the words slipped out of my mouth, and my
companion looked at me with a half smile which I thought I understood; so
to hide my confusion I said, "Please take me ashore now: I want to get my
breakfast."

He nodded, and brought her head round with a sharp stroke, and in a trice
we were at the landing-stage again.  He jumped out and I followed him;
and of course I was not surprised to see him wait, as if for the
inevitable after-piece that follows the doing of a service to a fellow-
citizen.  So I put my hand into my waistcoat-pocket, and said, "How
much?" though still with the uncomfortable feeling that perhaps I was
offering money to a gentleman.

He looked puzzled, and said, "How much?  I don't quite understand what
you are asking about.  Do you mean the tide?  If so, it is close on the
turn now."

I blushed, and said, stammering, "Please don't take it amiss if I ask
you; I mean no offence: but what ought I to pay you?  You see I am a
stranger, and don't know your customs--or your coins."

And therewith I took a handful of money out of my pocket, as one does in
a foreign country.  And by the way, I saw that the silver had oxydised,
and was like a blackleaded stove in colour.

He still seemed puzzled, but not at all offended; and he looked at the
coins with some curiosity.  I thought, Well after all, he _is_ a
waterman, and is considering what he may venture to take.  He seems such
a nice fellow that I'm sure I don't grudge him a little over-payment.  I
wonder, by the way, whether I couldn't hire him as a guide for a day or
two, since he is so intelligent.

Therewith my new friend said thoughtfully:

"I think I know what you mean.  You think that I have done you a service;
so you feel yourself bound to give me something which I am not to give to
a neighbour, unless he has done something special for me.  I have heard
of this kind of thing; but pardon me for saying, that it seems to us a
troublesome and roundabout custom; and we don't know how to manage it.
And you see this ferrying and giving people casts about the water is my
_business_, which I would do for anybody; so to take gifts in connection
with it would look very queer.  Besides, if one person gave me something,
then another might, and another, and so on; and I hope you won't think me
rude if I say that I shouldn't know where to stow away so many mementos
of friendship."

And he laughed loud and merrily, as if the idea of being paid for his
work was a very funny joke.  I confess I began to be afraid that the man
was mad, though he looked sane enough; and I was rather glad to think
that I was a good swimmer, since we were so close to a deep swift stream.
However, he went on by no means like a madman:

"As to your coins, they are curious, but not very old; they seem to be
all of the reign of Victoria; you might give them to some
scantily-furnished museum.  Ours has enough of such coins, besides a fair
number of earlier ones, many of which are beautiful, whereas these
nineteenth century ones are so beastly ugly, ain't they?  We have a piece
of Edward III., with the king in a ship, and little leopards and fleurs-
de-lys all along the gunwale, so delicately worked.  You see," he said,
with something of a smirk, "I am fond of working in gold and fine metals;
this buckle here is an early piece of mine."

No doubt I looked a little shy of him under the influence of that doubt
as to his sanity.  So he broke off short, and said in a kind voice:

"But I see that I am boring you, and I ask your pardon.  For, not to
mince matters, I can tell that you _are_ a stranger, and must come from a
place very unlike England.  But also it is clear that it won't do to
overdose you with information about this place, and that you had best
suck it in little by little.  Further, I should take it as very kind in
you if you would allow me to be the showman of our new world to you,
since you have stumbled on me first.  Though indeed it will be a mere
kindness on your part, for almost anybody would make as good a guide, and
many much better."

There certainly seemed no flavour in him of Colney Hatch; and besides I
thought I could easily shake him off if it turned out that he really was
mad; so I said:

"It is a very kind offer, but it is difficult for me to accept it,
unless--"  I was going to say, Unless you will let me pay you properly;
but fearing to stir up Colney Hatch again, I changed the sentence into,
"I fear I shall be taking you away from your work--or your amusement."

"O," he said, "don't trouble about that, because it will give me an
opportunity of doing a good turn to a friend of mine, who wants to take
my work here.  He is a weaver from Yorkshire, who has rather overdone
himself between his weaving and his mathematics, both indoor work, you
see; and being a great friend of mine, he naturally came to me to get him
some outdoor work.  If you think you can put up with me, pray take me as
your guide."

He added presently: "It is true that I have promised to go up-stream to
some special friends of mine, for the hay-harvest; but they won't be
ready for us for more than a week: and besides, you might go with me, you
know, and see some very nice people, besides making notes of our ways in
Oxfordshire.  You could hardly do better if you want to see the country."

I felt myself obliged to thank him, whatever might come of it; and he
added eagerly:

"Well, then, that's settled.  I will give my friend a call; he is living in
the Guest House like you, and if he isn't up yet, he ought to be this
fine summer morning."

Therewith he took a little silver bugle-horn from his girdle and blew two
or three sharp but agreeable notes on it; and presently from the house
which stood on the site of my old dwelling (of which more hereafter)
another young man came sauntering towards us.  He was not so well-looking
or so strongly made as my sculler friend, being sandy-haired, rather
pale, and not stout-built; but his face was not wanting in that happy and
friendly expression which I had noticed in his friend.  As he came up
smiling towards us, I saw with pleasure that I must give up the Colney
Hatch theory as to the waterman, for no two madmen ever behaved as they
did before a sane man.  His dress also was of the same cut as the first
man's, though somewhat gayer, the surcoat being light green with a golden
spray embroidered on the breast, and his belt being of filagree silver-
work.

He gave me good-day very civilly, and greeting his friend joyously, said:

"Well, Dick, what is it this morning?  Am I to have my work, or rather
your work?  I dreamed last night that we were off up the river fishing."

"All right, Bob," said my sculler; "you will drop into my place, and if
you find it too much, there is George Brightling on the look out for a
stroke of work, and he lives close handy to you.  But see, here is a
stranger who is willing to amuse me to-day by taking me as his guide
about our country-side, and you may imagine I don't want to lose the
opportunity; so you had better take to the boat at once.  But in any case
I shouldn't have kept you out of it for long, since I am due in the hay-
fields in a few days."

The newcomer rubbed his hands with glee, but turning to me, said in a
friendly voice:

"Neighbour, both you and friend Dick are lucky, and will have a good time
to-day, as indeed I shall too.  But you had better both come in with me
at once and get something to eat, lest you should forget your dinner in
your amusement.  I suppose you came into the Guest House after I had gone
to bed last night?"

I nodded, not caring to enter into a long explanation which would have
led to nothing, and which in truth by this time I should have begun to
doubt myself.  And we all three turned toward the door of the Guest
House.




CHAPTER III: THE GUEST HOUSE AND BREAKFAST THEREIN


I lingered a little behind the others to have a stare at this house,
which, as I have told you, stood on the site of my old dwelling.

It was a longish building with its gable ends turned away from the road,
and long traceried windows coming rather low down set in the wall that
faced us.  It was very handsomely built of red brick with a lead roof;
and high up above the windows there ran a frieze of figure subjects in
baked clay, very well executed, and designed with a force and directness
which I had never noticed in modern work before.  The subjects I
recognised at once, and indeed was very particularly familiar with them.

However, all this I took in in a minute; for we were presently within
doors, and standing in a hall with a floor of marble mosaic and an open
timber roof.  There were no windows on the side opposite to the river,
but arches below leading into chambers, one of which showed a glimpse of
a garden beyond, and above them a long space of wall gaily painted (in
fresco, I thought) with similar subjects to those of the frieze outside;
everything about the place was handsome and generously solid as to
material; and though it was not very large (somewhat smaller than Crosby
Hall perhaps), one felt in it that exhilarating sense of space and
freedom which satisfactory architecture always gives to an unanxious man
who is in the habit of using his eyes.

In this pleasant place, which of course I knew to be the hall of the
Guest House, three young women were flitting to and fro.  As they were
the first of the sex I had seen on this eventful morning, I naturally
looked at them very attentively, and found them at least as good as the
gardens, the architecture, and the male men.  As to their dress, which of
course I took note of, I should say that they were decently veiled with
drapery, and not bundled up with millinery; that they were clothed like
women, not upholstered like armchairs, as most women of our time are.  In
short, their dress was somewhat between that of the ancient classical
costume and the simpler forms of the fourteenth century garments, though
it was clearly not an imitation of either: the materials were light and
gay to suit the season.  As to the women themselves, it was pleasant
indeed to see them, they were so kind and happy-looking in expression of
face, so shapely and well-knit of body, and thoroughly healthy-looking
and strong.  All were at least comely, and one of them very handsome and
regular of feature.  They came up to us at once merrily and without the
least affectation of shyness, and all three shook hands with me as if I
were a friend newly come back from a long journey: though I could not
help noticing that they looked askance at my garments; for I had on my
clothes of last night, and at the best was never a dressy person.

A word or two from Robert the weaver, and they bustled about on our
behoof, and presently came and took us by the hands and led us to a table
in the pleasantest corner of the hall, where our breakfast was spread for
us; and, as we sat down, one of them hurried out by the chambers
aforesaid, and came back again in a little while with a great bunch of
roses, very different in size and quality to what Hammersmith had been
wont to grow, but very like the produce of an old country garden.  She
hurried back thence into the buttery, and came back once more with a
delicately made glass, into which she put the flowers and set them down
in the midst of our table.  One of the others, who had run off also, then
came back with a big cabbage-leaf filled with strawberries, some of them
barely ripe, and said as she set them on the table, "There, now; I
thought of that before I got up this morning; but looking at the stranger
here getting into your boat, Dick, put it out of my head; so that I was
not before _all_ the blackbirds: however, there are a few about as good
as you will get them anywhere in Hammersmith this morning."

Robert patted her on the head in a friendly manner; and we fell to on our
breakfast, which was simple enough, but most delicately cooked, and set
on the table with much daintiness.  The bread was particularly good, and
was of several different kinds, from the big, rather close,
dark-coloured, sweet-tasting farmhouse loaf, which was most to my liking,
to the thin pipe-stems of wheaten crust, such as I have eaten in Turin.

As I was putting the first mouthfuls into my mouth my eye caught a carved
and gilded inscription on the panelling, behind what we should have
called the High Table in an Oxford college hall, and a familiar name in
it forced me to read it through.  Thus it ran:

   "_Guests and neighbours_, _on the site of this Guest-hall once stood
   the lecture-room of the Hammersmith Socialists_.  _Drink a glass to
   the memory_!  _May 1962_."

It is difficult to tell you how I felt as I read these words, and I
suppose my face showed how much I was moved, for both my friends looked
curiously at me, and there was silence between us for a little while.

Presently the weaver, who was scarcely so well mannered a man as the
ferryman, said to me rather awkwardly:

"Guest, we don't know what to call you: is there any indiscretion in
asking you your name?"

"Well," said I, "I have some doubts about it myself; so suppose you call
me Guest, which is a family name, you know, and add William to it if you
please."

Dick nodded kindly to me; but a shade of anxiousness passed over the
weaver's face, and he said--"I hope you don't mind my asking, but would
you tell me where you come from?  I am curious about such things for good
reasons, literary reasons."

Dick was clearly kicking him underneath the table; but he was not much
abashed, and awaited my answer somewhat eagerly.  As for me, I was just
going to blurt out "Hammersmith," when I bethought me what an
entanglement of cross purposes that would lead us into; so I took time to
invent a lie with circumstance, guarded by a little truth, and said:

"You see, I have been such a long time away from Europe that things seem
strange to me now; but I was born and bred on the edge of Epping Forest;
Walthamstow and Woodford, to wit."

"A pretty place, too," broke in Dick; "a very jolly place, now that the
trees have had time to grow again since the great clearing of houses in
1955."

Quoth the irrepressible weaver: "Dear neighbour, since you knew the
Forest some time ago, could you tell me what truth there is in the rumour
that in the nineteenth century the trees were all pollards?"

This was catching me on my archaeological natural-history side, and I
fell into the trap without any thought of where and when I was; so I
began on it, while one of the girls, the handsome one, who had been
scattering little twigs of lavender and other sweet-smelling herbs about
the floor, came near to listen, and stood behind me with her hand on my
shoulder, in which she held some of the plant that I used to call balm:
its strong sweet smell brought back to my mind my very early days in the
kitchen-garden at Woodford, and the large blue plums which grew on the
wall beyond the sweet-herb patch,--a connection of memories which all
boys will see at once.

I started off: "When I was a boy, and for long after, except for a piece
about Queen Elizabeth's Lodge, and for the part about High Beech, the
Forest was almost wholly made up of pollard hornbeams mixed with holly
thickets.  But when the Corporation of London took it over about twenty-
five years ago, the topping and lopping, which was a part of the old
commoners' rights, came to an end, and the trees were let to grow.  But I
have not seen the place now for many years, except once, when we Leaguers
went a pleasuring to High Beech.  I was very much shocked then to see how
it was built-over and altered; and the other day we heard that the
philistines were going to landscape-garden it.  But what you were saying
about the building being stopped and the trees growing is only too good
news;--only you know--"

At that point I suddenly remembered Dick's date, and stopped short rather
confused.  The eager weaver didn't notice my confusion, but said hastily,
as if he were almost aware of his breach of good manners, "But, I say,
how old are you?"

Dick and the pretty girl both burst out laughing, as if Robert's conduct
were excusable on the grounds of eccentricity; and Dick said amidst his
laughter:

"Hold hard, Bob; this questioning of guests won't do.  Why, much learning
is spoiling you.  You remind me of the radical cobblers in the silly old
novels, who, according to the authors, were prepared to trample down all
good manners in the pursuit of utilitarian knowledge.  The fact is, I
begin to think that you have so muddled your head with mathematics, and
with grubbing into those idiotic old books about political economy (he
he!), that you scarcely know how to behave.  Really, it is about time for
you to take to some open-air work, so that you may clear away the cobwebs
from your brain."

The weaver only laughed good-humouredly; and the girl went up to him and
patted his cheek and said laughingly, "Poor fellow! he was born so."

As for me, I was a little puzzled, but I laughed also, partly for
company's sake, and partly with pleasure at their unanxious happiness and
good temper; and before Robert could make the excuse to me which he was
getting ready, I said:

"But neighbours" (I had caught up that word), "I don't in the least mind
answering questions, when I can do so: ask me as many as you please; it's
fun for me.  I will tell you all about Epping Forest when I was a boy, if
you please; and as to my age, I'm not a fine lady, you know, so why
shouldn't I tell you?  I'm hard on fifty-six."

In spite of the recent lecture on good manners, the weaver could not help
giving a long "whew" of astonishment, and the others were so amused by
his _naivete_ that the merriment flitted all over their faces, though for
courtesy's sake they forbore actual laughter; while I looked from one to
the other in a puzzled manner, and at last said:

"Tell me, please, what is amiss: you know I want to learn from you.  And
please laugh; only tell me."

Well, they _did_ laugh, and I joined them again, for the above-stated
reasons.  But at last the pretty woman said coaxingly--

"Well, well, he _is_ rude, poor fellow! but you see I may as well tell
you what he is thinking about: he means that you look rather old for your
age.  But surely there need be no wonder in that, since you have been
travelling; and clearly from all you have been saying, in unsocial
countries.  It has often been said, and no doubt truly, that one ages
very quickly if one lives amongst unhappy people.  Also they say that
southern England is a good place for keeping good looks."  She blushed
and said: "How old am I, do you think?"

"Well," quoth I, "I have always been told that a woman is as old as she
looks, so without offence or flattery, I should say that you were
twenty."

She laughed merrily, and said, "I am well served out for fishing for
compliments, since I have to tell you the truth, to wit, that I am forty-
two."

I stared at her, and drew musical laughter from her again; but I might
well stare, for there was not a careful line on her face; her skin was as
smooth as ivory, her cheeks full and round, her lips as red as the roses
she had brought in; her beautiful arms, which she had bared for her work,
firm and well-knit from shoulder to wrist.  She blushed a little under my
gaze, though it was clear that she had taken me for a man of eighty; so
to pass it off I said--

"Well, you see, the old saw is proved right again, and I ought not to
have let you tempt me into asking you a rude question."

She laughed again, and said: "Well, lads, old and young, I must get to my
work now.  We shall be rather busy here presently; and I want to clear it
off soon, for I began to read a pretty old book yesterday, and I want to
get on with it this morning: so good-bye for the present."

She waved a hand to us, and stepped lightly down the hall, taking (as
Scott says) at least part of the sun from our table as she went.

When she was gone, Dick said "Now guest, won't you ask a question or two
of our friend here?  It is only fair that you should have your turn."

"I shall be very glad to answer them," said the weaver.

"If I ask you any questions, sir," said I, "they will not be very severe;
but since I hear that you are a weaver, I should like to ask you
something about that craft, as I am--or was--interested in it."

"Oh," said he, "I shall not be of much use to you there, I'm afraid.  I
only do the most mechanical kind of weaving, and am in fact but a poor
craftsman, unlike Dick here.  Then besides the weaving, I do a little
with machine printing and composing, though I am little use at the finer
kinds of printing; and moreover machine printing is beginning to die out,
along with the waning of the plague of book-making, so I have had to turn
to other things that I have a taste for, and have taken to mathematics;
and also I am writing a sort of antiquarian book about the peaceable and
private history, so to say, of the end of the nineteenth century,--more
for the sake of giving a picture of the country before the fighting began
than for anything else.  That was why I asked you those questions about
Epping Forest.  You have rather puzzled me, I confess, though your
information was so interesting.  But later on, I hope, we may have some
more talk together, when our friend Dick isn't here.  I know he thinks me
rather a grinder, and despises me for not being very deft with my hands:
that's the way nowadays.  From what I have read of the nineteenth century
literature (and I have read a good deal), it is clear to me that this is
a kind of revenge for the stupidity of that day, which despised everybody
who _could_ use his hands.  But Dick, old fellow, _Ne quid nimis_!  Don't
overdo it!"

"Come now," said Dick, "am I likely to?  Am I not the most tolerant man
in the world?  Am I not quite contented so long as you don't make me
learn mathematics, or go into your new science of aesthetics, and let me
do a little practical aesthetics with my gold and steel, and the blowpipe
and the nice little hammer?  But, hillo! here comes another questioner
for you, my poor guest.  I say, Bob, you must help me to defend him now."

"Here, Boffin," he cried out, after a pause; "here we are, if you must
have it!"

I looked over my shoulder, and saw something flash and gleam in the
sunlight that lay across the hall; so I turned round, and at my ease saw
a splendid figure slowly sauntering over the pavement; a man whose
surcoat was embroidered most copiously as well as elegantly, so that the
sun flashed back from him as if he had been clad in golden armour.  The
man himself was tall, dark-haired, and exceedingly handsome, and though
his face was no less kindly in expression than that of the others, he
moved with that somewhat haughty mien which great beauty is apt to give
to both men and women.  He came and sat down at our table with a smiling
face, stretching out his long legs and hanging his arm over the chair in
the slowly graceful way which tall and well-built people may use without
affectation.  He was a man in the prime of life, but looked as happy as a
child who has just got a new toy.  He bowed gracefully to me and said--

"I see clearly that you are the guest, of whom Annie has just told me,
who have come from some distant country that does not know of us, or our
ways of life.  So I daresay you would not mind answering me a few
questions; for you see--"

Here Dick broke in: "No, please, Boffin! let it alone for the present.  Of
course you want the guest to be happy and comfortable; and how can that
be if he has to trouble himself with answering all sorts of questions
while he is still confused with the new customs and people about him?  No,
no: I am going to take him where he can ask questions himself, and have
them answered; that is, to my great-grandfather in Bloomsbury: and I am
sure you can't have anything to say against that.  So instead of
bothering, you had much better go out to James Allen's and get a carriage
for me, as I shall drive him up myself; and please tell Jim to let me
have the old grey, for I can drive a wherry much better than a carriage.
Jump up, old fellow, and don't be disappointed; our guest will keep
himself for you and your stories."

I stared at Dick; for I wondered at his speaking to such a
dignified-looking personage so familiarly, not to say curtly; for I
thought that this Mr. Boffin, in spite of his well-known name out of
Dickens, must be at the least a senator of these strange people.  However,
he got up and said, "All right, old oar-wearer, whatever you like; this
is not one of my busy days; and though" (with a condescending bow to me)
"my pleasure of a talk with this learned guest is put off, I admit that
he ought to see your worthy kinsman as soon as possible.  Besides,
perhaps he will be the better able to answer _my_ questions after his own
have been answered."

And therewith he turned and swung himself out of the hall.

When he was well gone, I said: "Is it wrong to ask what Mr. Boffin is?
whose name, by the way, reminds me of many pleasant hours passed in
reading Dickens."

Dick laughed.  "Yes, yes," said he, "as it does us.  I see you take the
allusion.  Of course his real name is not Boffin, but Henry Johnson; we
only call him Boffin as a joke, partly because he is a dustman, and
partly because he will dress so showily, and get as much gold on him as a
baron of the Middle Ages.  As why should he not if he likes? only we are
his special friends, you know, so of course we jest with him."

I held my tongue for some time after that; but Dick went on:

"He is a capital fellow, and you can't help liking him; but he has a
weakness: he will spend his time in writing reactionary novels, and is
very proud of getting the local colour right, as he calls it; and as he
thinks you come from some forgotten corner of the earth, where people are
unhappy, and consequently interesting to a story-teller, he thinks he
might get some information out of you.  O, he will be quite
straightforward with you, for that matter.  Only for your own comfort
beware of him!"

"Well, Dick," said the weaver, doggedly, "I think his novels are very
good."

"Of course you do," said Dick; "birds of a feather flock together;
mathematics and antiquarian novels stand on much the same footing.  But
here he comes again."

And in effect the Golden Dustman hailed us from the hall-door; so we all
got up and went into the porch, before which, with a strong grey horse in
the shafts, stood a carriage ready for us which I could not help
noticing.  It was light and handy, but had none of that sickening
vulgarity which I had known as inseparable from the carriages of our
time, especially the "elegant" ones, but was as graceful and pleasant in
line as a Wessex waggon.  We got in, Dick and I.  The girls, who had come
into the porch to see us off, waved their hands to us; the weaver nodded
kindly; the dustman bowed as gracefully as a troubadour; Dick shook the
reins, and we were off.




CHAPTER IV: A MARKET BY THE WAY


We turned away from the river at once, and were soon in the main road
that runs through Hammersmith.  But I should have had no guess as to
where I was, if I had not started from the waterside; for King Street was
gone, and the highway ran through wide sunny meadows and garden-like
tillage.  The Creek, which we crossed at once, had been rescued from its
culvert, and as we went over its pretty bridge we saw its waters, yet
swollen by the tide, covered with gay boats of different sizes.  There
were houses about, some on the road, some amongst the fields with
pleasant lanes leading down to them, and each surrounded by a teeming
garden.  They were all pretty in design, and as solid as might be, but
countryfied in appearance, like yeomen's dwellings; some of them of red
brick like those by the river, but more of timber and plaster, which were
by the necessity of their construction so like mediaeval houses of the
same materials that I fairly felt as if I were alive in the fourteenth
century; a sensation helped out by the costume of the people that we met
or passed, in whose dress there was nothing "modern."  Almost everybody
was gaily dressed, but especially the women, who were so well-looking, or
even so handsome, that I could scarcely refrain my tongue from calling my
companion's attention to the fact.  Some faces I saw that were
thoughtful, and in these I noticed great nobility of expression, but none
that had a glimmer of unhappiness, and the greater part (we came upon a
good many people) were frankly and openly joyous.

I thought I knew the Broadway by the lie of the roads that still met
there.  On the north side of the road was a range of buildings and
courts, low, but very handsomely built and ornamented, and in that way
forming a great contrast to the unpretentiousness of the houses round
about; while above this lower building rose the steep lead-covered roof
and the buttresses and higher part of the wall of a great hall, of a
splendid and exuberant style of architecture, of which one can say little
more than that it seemed to me to embrace the best qualities of the
Gothic of northern Europe with those of the Saracenic and Byzantine,
though there was no copying of any one of these styles.  On the other,
the south side, of the road was an octagonal building with a high roof,
not unlike the Baptistry at Florence in outline, except that it was
surrounded by a lean-to that clearly made an arcade or cloisters to it:
it also was most delicately ornamented.

This whole mass of architecture which we had come upon so suddenly from
amidst the pleasant fields was not only exquisitely beautiful in itself,
but it bore upon it the expression of such generosity and abundance of
life that I was exhilarated to a pitch that I had never yet reached.  I
fairly chuckled for pleasure.  My friend seemed to understand it, and sat
looking on me with a pleased and affectionate interest.  We had pulled up
amongst a crowd of carts, wherein sat handsome healthy-looking people,
men, women, and children very gaily dressed, and which were clearly
market carts, as they were full of very tempting-looking country produce.

I said, "I need not ask if this is a market, for I see clearly that it
is; but what market is it that it is so splendid?  And what is the
glorious hall there, and what is the building on the south side?"

"O," said he, "it is just our Hammersmith market; and I am glad you like
it so much, for we are really proud of it.  Of course the hall inside is
our winter Mote-House; for in summer we mostly meet in the fields down by
the river opposite Barn Elms.  The building on our right hand is our
theatre: I hope you like it."

"I should be a fool if I didn't," said I.

He blushed a little as he said: "I am glad of that, too, because I had a
hand in it; I made the great doors, which are of damascened bronze.  We
will look at them later in the day, perhaps: but we ought to be getting
on now.  As to the market, this is not one of our busy days; so we shall
do better with it another time, because you will see more people."

I thanked him, and said: "Are these the regular country people?  What
very pretty girls there are amongst them."

As I spoke, my eye caught the face of a beautiful woman, tall,
dark-haired, and white-skinned, dressed in a pretty light-green dress in
honour of the season and the hot day, who smiled kindly on me, and more
kindly still, I thought on Dick; so I stopped a minute, but presently
went on:

"I ask because I do not see any of the country-looking people I should
have expected to see at a market--I mean selling things there."

"I don't understand," said he, "what kind of people you would expect to
see; nor quite what you mean by 'country' people.  These are the
neighbours, and that like they run in the Thames valley.  There are parts
of these islands which are rougher and rainier than we are here, and
there people are rougher in their dress; and they themselves are tougher
and more hard-bitten than we are to look at.  But some people like their
looks better than ours; they say they have more character in them--that's
the word.  Well, it's a matter of taste.--Anyhow, the cross between us
and them generally turns out well," added he, thoughtfully.

I heard him, though my eyes were turned away from him, for that pretty
girl was just disappearing through the gate with her big basket of early
peas, and I felt that disappointed kind of feeling which overtakes one
when one has seen an interesting or lovely face in the streets which one
is never likely to see again; and I was silent a little.  At last I said:
"What I mean is, that I haven't seen any poor people about--not one."

He knit his brows, looked puzzled, and said: "No, naturally; if anybody
is poorly, he is likely to be within doors, or at best crawling about the
garden: but I don't know of any one sick at present.  Why should you
expect to see poorly people on the road?"

"No, no," I said; "I don't mean sick people.  I mean poor people, you
know; rough people."

"No," said he, smiling merrily, "I really do not know.  The fact is, you
must come along quick to my great-grandfather, who will understand you
better than I do.  Come on, Greylocks!"  Therewith he shook the reins,
and we jogged along merrily eastward.




CHAPTER V: CHILDREN ON THE ROAD


Past the Broadway there were fewer houses on either side.  We presently
crossed a pretty little brook that ran across a piece of land dotted over
with trees, and awhile after came to another market and town-hall, as we
should call it.  Although there was nothing familiar to me in its
surroundings, I knew pretty well where we were, and was not surprised
when my guide said briefly, "Kensington Market."

Just after this we came into a short street of houses: or rather, one
long house on either side of the way, built of timber and plaster, and
with a pretty arcade over the footway before it.

Quoth Dick: "This is Kensington proper.  People are apt to gather here
rather thick, for they like the romance of the wood; and naturalists
haunt it, too; for it is a wild spot even here, what there is of it; for
it does not go far to the south: it goes from here northward and west
right over Paddington and a little way down Notting Hill: thence it runs
north-east to Primrose Hill, and so on; rather a narrow strip of it gets
through Kingsland to Stoke-Newington and Clapton, where it spreads out
along the heights above the Lea marshes; on the other side of which, as
you know, is Epping Forest holding out a hand to it.  This part we are
just coming to is called Kensington Gardens; though why 'gardens' I don't
know."

I rather longed to say, "Well, _I_ know"; but there were so many things
about me which I did _not_ know, in spite of his assumptions, that I
thought it better to hold my tongue.

The road plunged at once into a beautiful wood spreading out on either
side, but obviously much further on the north side, where even the oaks
and sweet chestnuts were of a good growth; while the quicker-growing
trees (amongst which I thought the planes and sycamores too numerous)
were very big and fine-grown.

It was exceedingly pleasant in the dappled shadow, for the day was
growing as hot as need be, and the coolness and shade soothed my excited
mind into a condition of dreamy pleasure, so that I felt as if I should
like to go on for ever through that balmy freshness.  My companion seemed
to share in my feelings, and let the horse go slower and slower as he sat
inhaling the green forest scents, chief amongst which was the smell of
the trodden bracken near the wayside.

Romantic as this Kensington wood was, however, it was not lonely.  We
came on many groups both coming and going, or wandering in the edges of
the wood.  Amongst these were many children from six or eight years old
up to sixteen or seventeen.  They seemed to me to be especially fine
specimens of their race, and enjoying themselves to the utmost; some of
them were hanging about little tents pitched on the greensward, and by
some of these fires were burning, with pots hanging over them gipsy
fashion.  Dick explained to me that there were scattered houses in the
forest, and indeed we caught a glimpse of one or two.  He said they were
mostly quite small, such as used to be called cottages when there were
slaves in the land, but they were pleasant enough and fitting for the
wood.

"They must be pretty well stocked with children," said I, pointing to the
many youngsters about the way.

"O," said he, "these children do not all come from the near houses, the
woodland houses, but from the country-side generally.  They often make up
parties, and come to play in the woods for weeks together in summer-time,
living in tents, as you see.  We rather encourage them to it; they learn
to do things for themselves, and get to notice the wild creatures; and,
you see, the less they stew inside houses the better for them.  Indeed, I
must tell you that many grown people will go to live in the forests
through the summer; though they for the most part go to the bigger ones,
like Windsor, or the Forest of Dean, or the northern wastes.  Apart from
the other pleasures of it, it gives them a little rough work, which I am
sorry to say is getting somewhat scarce for these last fifty years."

He broke off, and then said, "I tell you all this, because I see that if
I talk I must be answering questions, which you are thinking, even if you
are not speaking them out; but my kinsman will tell you more about it."

I saw that I was likely to get out of my depth again, and so merely for
the sake of tiding over an awkwardness and to say something, I said--

"Well, the youngsters here will be all the fresher for school when the
summer gets over and they have to go back again."

"School?" he said; "yes, what do you mean by that word?  I don't see how
it can have anything to do with children.  We talk, indeed, of a school
of herring, and a school of painting, and in the former sense we might
talk of a school of children--but otherwise," said he, laughing, "I must
own myself beaten."

Hang it! thought I, I can't open my mouth without digging up some new
complexity.  I wouldn't try to set my friend right in his etymology; and
I thought I had best say nothing about the boy-farms which I had been
used to call schools, as I saw pretty clearly that they had disappeared;
so I said after a little fumbling, "I was using the word in the sense of
a system of education."

"Education?" said he, meditatively, "I know enough Latin to know that the
word must come from _educere_, to lead out; and I have heard it used; but
I have never met anybody who could give me a clear explanation of what it
means."

You may imagine how my new friends fell in my esteem when I heard this
frank avowal; and I said, rather contemptuously, "Well, education means a
system of teaching young people."

"Why not old people also?" said he with a twinkle in his eye.  "But," he
went on, "I can assure you our children learn, whether they go through a
'system of teaching' or not.  Why, you will not find one of these
children about here, boy or girl, who cannot swim; and every one of them
has been used to tumbling about the little forest ponies--there's one of
them now!  They all of them know how to cook; the bigger lads can mow;
many can thatch and do odd jobs at carpentering; or they know how to keep
shop.  I can tell you they know plenty of things."

"Yes, but their mental education, the teaching of their minds," said I,
kindly translating my phrase.

"Guest," said he, "perhaps you have not learned to do these things I have
been speaking about; and if that's the case, don't you run away with the
idea that it doesn't take some skill to do them, and doesn't give plenty
of work for one's mind: you would change your opinion if you saw a
Dorsetshire lad thatching, for instance.  But, however, I understand you
to be speaking of book-learning; and as to that, it is a simple affair.
Most children, seeing books lying about, manage to read by the time they
are four years old; though I am told it has not always been so.  As to
writing, we do not encourage them to scrawl too early (though scrawl a
little they will), because it gets them into a habit of ugly writing; and
what's the use of a lot of ugly writing being done, when rough printing
can be done so easily.  You understand that handsome writing we like, and
many people will write their books out when they make them, or get them
written; I mean books of which only a few copies are needed--poems, and
such like, you know.  However, I am wandering from my lambs; but you must
excuse me, for I am interested in this matter of writing, being myself a
fair-writer."

"Well," said I, "about the children; when they know how to read and
write, don't they learn something else--languages, for instance?"

"Of course," he said; "sometimes even before they can read, they can talk
French, which is the nearest language talked on the other side of the
water; and they soon get to know German also, which is talked by a huge
number of communes and colleges on the mainland.  These are the principal
languages we speak in these islands, along with English or Welsh, or
Irish, which is another form of Welsh; and children pick them up very
quickly, because their elders all know them; and besides our guests from
over sea often bring their children with them, and the little ones get
together, and rub their speech into one another."

"And the older languages?" said I.

"O, yes," said he, "they mostly learn Latin and Greek along with the
modern ones, when they do anything more than merely pick up the latter."

"And history?" said I; "how do you teach history?"

"Well," said he, "when a person can read, of course he reads what he
likes to; and he can easily get someone to tell him what are the best
books to read on such or such a subject, or to explain what he doesn't
understand in the books when he is reading them."

"Well," said I, "what else do they learn?  I suppose they don't all learn
history?"

"No, no," said he; "some don't care about it; in fact, I don't think many
do.  I have heard my great-grandfather say that it is mostly in periods
of turmoil and strife and confusion that people care much about history;
and you know," said my friend, with an amiable smile, "we are not like
that now.  No; many people study facts about the make of things and the
matters of cause and effect, so that knowledge increases on us, if that
be good; and some, as you heard about friend Bob yonder, will spend time
over mathematics.  'Tis no use forcing people's tastes."

Said I: "But you don't mean that children learn all these things?"

Said he: "That depends on what you mean by children; and also you must
remember how much they differ.  As a rule, they don't do much reading,
except for a few story-books, till they are about fifteen years old; we
don't encourage early bookishness: though you will find some children who
_will_ take to books very early; which perhaps is not good for them; but
it's no use thwarting them; and very often it doesn't last long with
them, and they find their level before they are twenty years old.  You
see, children are mostly given to imitating their elders, and when they
see most people about them engaged in genuinely amusing work, like house-
building and street-paving, and gardening, and the like, that is what
they want to be doing; so I don't think we need fear having too many book-
learned men."

What could I say?  I sat and held my peace, for fear of fresh
entanglements.  Besides, I was using my eyes with all my might, wondering
as the old horse jogged on, when I should come into London proper, and
what it would be like now.

But my companion couldn't let his subject quite drop, and went on
meditatively:

"After all, I don't know that it does them much harm, even if they do
grow up book-students.  Such people as that, 'tis a great pleasure seeing
them so happy over work which is not much sought for.  And besides, these
students are generally such pleasant people; so kind and sweet tempered;
so humble, and at the same time so anxious to teach everybody all that
they know.  Really, I like those that I have met prodigiously."

This seemed to me such very queer talk that I was on the point of asking
him another question; when just as we came to the top of a rising ground,
down a long glade of the wood on my right I caught sight of a stately
building whose outline was familiar to me, and I cried out, "Westminster
Abbey!"

"Yes," said Dick, "Westminster Abbey--what there is left of it."

"Why, what have you done with it?" quoth I in terror.

"What have _we_ done with it?" said he; "nothing much, save clean it.  But
you know the whole outside was spoiled centuries ago: as to the inside,
that remains in its beauty after the great clearance, which took place
over a hundred years ago, of the beastly monuments to fools and knaves,
which once blocked it up, as great-grandfather says."

We went on a little further, and I looked to the right again, and said,
in rather a doubtful tone of voice, "Why, there are the Houses of
Parliament!  Do you still use them?"

He burst out laughing, and was some time before he could control himself;
then he clapped me on the back and said:

"I take you, neighbour; you may well wonder at our keeping them standing,
and I know something about that, and my old kinsman has given me books to
read about the strange game that they played there.  Use them!  Well,
yes, they are used for a sort of subsidiary market, and a storage place
for manure, and they are handy for that, being on the waterside.  I
believe it was intended to pull them down quite at the beginning of our
days; but there was, I am told, a queer antiquarian society, which had
done some service in past times, and which straightway set up its pipe
against their destruction, as it has done with many other buildings,
which most people looked upon as worthless, and public nuisances; and it
was so energetic, and had such good reasons to give, that it generally
gained its point; and I must say that when all is said I am glad of it:
because you know at the worst these silly old buildings serve as a kind
of foil to the beautiful ones which we build now.  You will see several
others in these parts; the place my great-grandfather lives in, for
instance, and a big building called St. Paul's.  And you see, in this
matter we need not grudge a few poorish buildings standing, because we
can always build elsewhere; nor need we be anxious as to the breeding of
pleasant work in such matters, for there is always room for more and more
work in a new building, even without making it pretentious.  For
instance, elbow-room _within_ doors is to me so delightful that if I were
driven to it I would most sacrifice outdoor space to it.  Then, of
course, there is the ornament, which, as we must all allow, may easily be
overdone in mere living houses, but can hardly be in mote-halls and
markets, and so forth.  I must tell you, though, that my
great-grandfather sometimes tells me I am a little cracked on this
subject of fine building; and indeed I _do_ think that the energies of
mankind are chiefly of use to them for such work; for in that direction I
can see no end to the work, while in many others a limit does seem
possible."




CHAPTER VI: A LITTLE SHOPPING


As he spoke, we came suddenly out of the woodland into a short street of
handsomely built houses, which my companion named to me at once as
Piccadilly: the lower part of these I should have called shops, if it had
not been that, as far as I could see, the people were ignorant of the
arts of buying and selling.  Wares were displayed in their finely
designed fronts, as if to tempt people in, and people stood and looked at
them, or went in and came out with parcels under their arms, just like
the real thing.  On each side of the street ran an elegant arcade to
protect foot-passengers, as in some of the old Italian cities.  About
halfway down, a huge building of the kind I was now prepared to expect
told me that this also was a centre of some kind, and had its special
public buildings.

Said Dick: "Here, you see, is another market on a different plan from
most others: the upper stories of these houses are used for guest-houses;
for people from all about the country are apt to drift up hither from
time to time, as folk are very thick upon the ground, which you will see
evidence of presently, and there are people who are fond of crowds,
though I can't say that I am."

I couldn't help smiling to see how long a tradition would last.  Here was
the ghost of London still asserting itself as a centre,--an intellectual
centre, for aught I knew.  However, I said nothing, except that I asked
him to drive very slowly, as the things in the booths looked exceedingly
pretty.

"Yes," said he, "this is a very good market for pretty things, and is
mostly kept for the handsomer goods, as the Houses-of-Parliament market,
where they set out cabbages and turnips and such like things, along with
beer and the rougher kind of wine, is so near."

Then he looked at me curiously, and said, "Perhaps you would like to do a
little shopping, as 'tis called."

I looked at what I could see of my rough blue duds, which I had plenty of
opportunity of contrasting with the gay attire of the citizens we had
come across; and I thought that if, as seemed likely, I should presently
be shown about as a curiosity for the amusement of this most
unbusinesslike people, I should like to look a little less like a
discharged ship's purser.  But in spite of all that had happened, my hand
went down into my pocket again, where to my dismay it met nothing
metallic except two rusty old keys, and I remembered that amidst our talk
in the guest-hall at Hammersmith I had taken the cash out of my pocket to
show to the pretty Annie, and had left it lying there.  My face fell
fifty per cent., and Dick, beholding me, said rather sharply--

"Hilloa, Guest! what's the matter now?  Is it a wasp?"

"No," said I, "but I've left it behind."

"Well," said he, "whatever you have left behind, you can get in this
market again, so don't trouble yourself about it."

I had come to my senses by this time, and remembering the astounding
customs of this country, had no mind for another lecture on social
economy and the Edwardian coinage; so I said only--

"My clothes--Couldn't I?  You see--What do think could be done about
them?"

He didn't seem in the least inclined to laugh, but said quite gravely:

"O don't get new clothes yet.  You see, my great-grandfather is an
antiquarian, and he will want to see you just as you are.  And, you know,
I mustn't preach to you, but surely it wouldn't be right for you to take
away people's pleasure of studying your attire, by just going and making
yourself like everybody else.  You feel that, don't you?" said he,
earnestly.

I did _not_ feel it my duty to set myself up for a scarecrow amidst this
beauty-loving people, but I saw I had got across some ineradicable
prejudice, and that it wouldn't do to quarrel with my new friend.  So I
merely said, "O certainly, certainly."

"Well," said he, pleasantly, "you may as well see what the inside of
these booths is like: think of something you want."

Said I: "Could I get some tobacco and a pipe?"

"Of course," said he; "what was I thinking of, not asking you before?
Well, Bob is always telling me that we non-smokers are a selfish lot, and
I'm afraid he is right.  But come along; here is a place just handy."

Therewith he drew rein and jumped down, and I followed.  A very handsome
woman, splendidly clad in figured silk, was slowly passing by, looking
into the windows as she went.  To her quoth Dick: "Maiden, would you
kindly hold our horse while we go in for a little?"  She nodded to us
with a kind smile, and fell to patting the horse with her pretty hand.

"What a beautiful creature!" said I to Dick as we entered.

"What, old Greylocks?" said he, with a sly grin.

"No, no," said I; "Goldylocks,--the lady."

"Well, so she is," said he.  "'Tis a good job there are so many of them
that every Jack may have his Jill: else I fear that we should get
fighting for them.  Indeed," said he, becoming very grave, "I don't say
that it does not happen even now, sometimes.  For you know love is not a
very reasonable thing, and perversity and self-will are commoner than
some of our moralists think."  He added, in a still more sombre tone:
"Yes, only a month ago there was a mishap down by us, that in the end
cost the lives of two men and a woman, and, as it were, put out the
sunlight for us for a while.  Don't ask me about it just now; I may tell
you about it later on."

By this time we were within the shop or booth, which had a counter, and
shelves on the walls, all very neat, though without any pretence of
showiness, but otherwise not very different to what I had been used to.
Within were a couple of children--a brown-skinned boy of about twelve,
who sat reading a book, and a pretty little girl of about a year older,
who was sitting also reading behind the counter; they were obviously
brother and sister.

"Good morning, little neighbours," said Dick.  "My friend here wants
tobacco and a pipe; can you help him?"

"O yes, certainly," said the girl with a sort of demure alertness which
was somewhat amusing.  The boy looked up, and fell to staring at my
outlandish attire, but presently reddened and turned his head, as if he
knew that he was not behaving prettily.

"Dear neighbour," said the girl, with the most solemn countenance of a
child playing at keeping shop, "what tobacco is it you would like?"

"Latakia," quoth I, feeling as if I were assisting at a child's game, and
wondering whether I should get anything but make-believe.

But the girl took a dainty little basket from a shelf beside her, went to
a jar, and took out a lot of tobacco and put the filled basket down on
the counter before me, where I could both smell and see that it was
excellent Latakia.

"But you haven't weighed it," said I, "and--and how much am I to take?"

"Why," she said, "I advise you to cram your bag, because you may be going
where you can't get Latakia.  Where is your bag?"

I fumbled about, and at last pulled out my piece of cotton print which
does duty with me for a tobacco pouch.  But the girl looked at it with
some disdain, and said--

"Dear neighbour, I can give you something much better than that cotton
rag."  And she tripped up the shop and came back presently, and as she
passed the boy whispered something in his ear, and he nodded and got up
and went out.  The girl held up in her finger and thumb a red morocco
bag, gaily embroidered, and said, "There, I have chosen one for you, and
you are to have it: it is pretty, and will hold a lot."

Therewith she fell to cramming it with the tobacco, and laid it down by
me and said, "Now for the pipe: that also you must let me choose for you;
there are three pretty ones just come in."

She disappeared again, and came back with a big-bowled pipe in her hand,
carved out of some hard wood very elaborately, and mounted in gold
sprinkled with little gems.  It was, in short, as pretty and gay a toy as
I had ever seen; something like the best kind of Japanese work, but
better.

"Dear me!" said I, when I set eyes on it, "this is altogether too grand
for me, or for anybody but the Emperor of the World.  Besides, I shall
lose it: I always lose my pipes."

The child seemed rather dashed, and said, "Don't you like it, neighbour?"

"O yes," I said, "of course I like it."

"Well, then, take it," said she, "and don't trouble about losing it.  What
will it matter if you do?  Somebody is sure to find it, and he will use
it, and you can get another."

I took it out of her hand to look at it, and while I did so, forgot my
caution, and said, "But however am I to pay for such a thing as this?"

Dick laid his hand on my shoulder as I spoke, and turning I met his eyes
with a comical expression in them, which warned me against another
exhibition of extinct commercial morality; so I reddened and held my
tongue, while the girl simply looked at me with the deepest gravity, as
if I were a foreigner blundering in my speech, for she clearly didn't
understand me a bit.

"Thank you so very much," I said at last, effusively, as I put the pipe
in my pocket, not without a qualm of doubt as to whether I shouldn't find
myself before a magistrate presently.

"O, you are so very welcome," said the little lass, with an affectation
of grown-up manners at their best which was very quaint.  "It is such a
pleasure to serve dear old gentlemen like you; especially when one can
see at once that you have come from far over sea."

"Yes, my dear," quoth I, "I have been a great traveller."

As I told this lie from pure politeness, in came the lad again, with a
tray in his hands, on which I saw a long flask and two beautiful glasses.
"Neighbours," said the girl (who did all the talking, her brother being
very shy, clearly) "please to drink a glass to us before you go, since we
do not have guests like this every day."

Therewith the boy put the tray on the counter and solemnly poured out a
straw-coloured wine into the long bowls.  Nothing loth, I drank, for I
was thirsty with the hot day; and thinks I, I am yet in the world, and
the grapes of the Rhine have not yet lost their flavour; for if ever I
drank good Steinberg, I drank it that morning; and I made a mental note
to ask Dick how they managed to make fine wine when there were no longer
labourers compelled to drink rot-gut instead of the fine wine which they
themselves made.

"Don't you drink a glass to us, dear little neighbours?" said I.

"I don't drink wine," said the lass; "I like lemonade better: but I wish
your health!"

"And I like ginger-beer better," said the little lad.

Well, well, thought I, neither have children's tastes changed much.  And
therewith we gave them good day and went out of the booth.

To my disappointment, like a change in a dream, a tall old man was
holding our horse instead of the beautiful woman.  He explained to us
that the maiden could not wait, and that he had taken her place; and he
winked at us and laughed when he saw how our faces fell, so that we had
nothing for it but to laugh also--

"Where are you going?" said he to Dick.

"To Bloomsbury," said Dick.

"If you two don't want to be alone, I'll come with you," said the old
man.

"All right," said Dick, "tell me when you want to get down and I'll stop
for you.  Let's get on."

So we got under way again; and I asked if children generally waited on
people in the markets.  "Often enough," said he, "when it isn't a matter
of dealing with heavy weights, but by no means always.  The children like
to amuse themselves with it, and it is good for them, because they handle
a lot of diverse wares and get to learn about them, how they are made,
and where they come from, and so on.  Besides, it is such very easy work
that anybody can do it.  It is said that in the early days of our epoch
there were a good many people who were hereditarily afflicted with a
disease called Idleness, because they were the direct descendants of
those who in the bad times used to force other people to work for
them--the people, you know, who are called slave-holders or employers of
labour in the history books.  Well, these Idleness-stricken people used
to serve booths _all_ their time, because they were fit for so little.
Indeed, I believe that at one time they were actually _compelled_ to do
some such work, because they, especially the women, got so ugly and
produced such ugly children if their disease was not treated sharply,
that the neighbours couldn't stand it.  However, I'm happy to say that
all that is gone by now; the disease is either extinct, or exists in such
a mild form that a short course of aperient medicine carries it off.  It
is sometimes called the Blue-devils now, or the Mulleygrubs.  Queer
names, ain't they?"

"Yes," said I, pondering much.  But the old man broke in:

"Yes, all that is true, neighbour; and I have seen some of those poor
women grown old.  But my father used to know some of them when they were
young; and he said that they were as little like young women as might be:
they had hands like bunches of skewers, and wretched little arms like
sticks; and waists like hour-glasses, and thin lips and peaked noses and
pale cheeks; and they were always pretending to be offended at anything
you said or did to them.  No wonder they bore ugly children, for no one
except men like them could be in love with them--poor things!"

He stopped, and seemed to be musing on his past life, and then said:

"And do you know, neighbours, that once on a time people were still
anxious about that disease of Idleness: at one time we gave ourselves a
great deal of trouble in trying to cure people of it.  Have you not read
any of the medical books on the subject?"

"No," said I; for the old man was speaking to me.

"Well," said he, "it was thought at the time that it was the survival of
the old mediaeval disease of leprosy: it seems it was very catching, for
many of the people afflicted by it were much secluded, and were waited
upon by a special class of diseased persons queerly dressed up, so that
they might be known.  They wore amongst other garments, breeches made of
worsted velvet, that stuff which used to be called plush some years ago."

All this seemed very interesting to me, and I should like to have made
the old man talk more.  But Dick got rather restive under so much ancient
history: besides, I suspect he wanted to keep me as fresh as he could for
his great-grandfather.  So he burst out laughing at last, and said:
"Excuse me, neighbours, but I can't help it.  Fancy people not liking to
work!--it's too ridiculous.  Why, even you like to work, old
fellow--sometimes," said he, affectionately patting the old horse with
the whip.  "What a queer disease! it may well be called Mulleygrubs!"

And he laughed out again most boisterously; rather too much so, I
thought, for his usual good manners; and I laughed with him for company's
sake, but from the teeth outward only; for _I_ saw nothing funny in
people not liking to work, as you may well imagine.




CHAPTER VII: TRAFALGAR SQUARE


And now again I was busy looking about me, for we were quite clear of
Piccadilly Market, and were in a region of elegantly-built much
ornamented houses, which I should have called villas if they had been
ugly and pretentious, which was very far from being the case.  Each house
stood in a garden carefully cultivated, and running over with flowers.
The blackbirds were singing their best amidst the garden-trees, which,
except for a bay here and there, and occasional groups of limes, seemed
to be all fruit-trees: there were a great many cherry-trees, now all
laden with fruit; and several times as we passed by a garden we were
offered baskets of fine fruit by children and young girls.  Amidst all
these gardens and houses it was of course impossible to trace the sites
of the old streets: but it seemed to me that the main roadways were the
same as of old.

We came presently into a large open space, sloping somewhat toward the
south, the sunny site of which had been taken advantage of for planting
an orchard, mainly, as I could see, of apricot-trees, in the midst of
which was a pretty gay little structure of wood, painted and gilded, that
looked like a refreshment-stall.  From the southern side of the said
orchard ran a long road, chequered over with the shadow of tall old pear
trees, at the end of which showed the high tower of the Parliament House,
or Dung Market.

A strange sensation came over me; I shut my eyes to keep out the sight of
the sun glittering on this fair abode of gardens, and for a moment there
passed before them a phantasmagoria of another day.  A great space
surrounded by tall ugly houses, with an ugly church at the corner and a
nondescript ugly cupolaed building at my back; the roadway thronged with
a sweltering and excited crowd, dominated by omnibuses crowded with
spectators.  In the midst a paved be-fountained square, populated only by
a few men dressed in blue, and a good many singularly ugly bronze images
(one on the top of a tall column).  The said square guarded up to the
edge of the roadway by a four-fold line of big men clad in blue, and
across the southern roadway the helmets of a band of horse-soldiers, dead
white in the greyness of the chilly November afternoon--I opened my eyes
to the sunlight again and looked round me, and cried out among the
whispering trees and odorous blossoms, "Trafalgar Square!"

"Yes," said Dick, who had drawn rein again, "so it is.  I don't wonder at
your finding the name ridiculous: but after all, it was nobody's business
to alter it, since the name of a dead folly doesn't bite.  Yet sometimes
I think we might have given it a name which would have commemorated the
great battle which was fought on the spot itself in 1952,--that was
important enough, if the historians don't lie."

"Which they generally do, or at least did," said the old man.  "For
instance, what can you make of this, neighbours?  I have read a muddled
account in a book--O a stupid book--called James' Social Democratic
History, of a fight which took place here in or about the year 1887 (I am
bad at dates).  Some people, says this story, were going to hold a ward-
mote here, or some such thing, and the Government of London, or the
Council, or the Commission, or what not other barbarous half-hatched body
of fools, fell upon these citizens (as they were then called) with the
armed hand.  That seems too ridiculous to be true; but according to this
version of the story, nothing much came of it, which certainly _is_ too
ridiculous to be true."

"Well," quoth I, "but after all your Mr. James is right so far, and it
_is_ true; except that there was no fighting, merely unarmed and
peaceable people attacked by ruffians armed with bludgeons."

"And they put up with that?" said Dick, with the first unpleasant
expression I had seen on his good-tempered face.

Said I, reddening: "We _had_ to put up with it; we couldn't help it."

The old man looked at me keenly, and said: "You seem to know a great deal
about it, neighbour!  And is it really true that nothing came of it?"

"This came of it," said I, "that a good many people were sent to prison
because of it."

"What, of the bludgeoners?" said the old man.  "Poor devils!"

"No, no," said I, "of the bludgeoned."

Said the old man rather severely: "Friend, I expect that you have been
reading some rotten collection of lies, and have been taken in by it too
easily."

"I assure you," said I, "what I have been saying is true."

"Well, well, I am sure you think so, neighbour," said the old man, "but I
don't see why you should be so cocksure."

As I couldn't explain why, I held my tongue.  Meanwhile Dick, who had
been sitting with knit brows, cogitating, spoke at last, and said gently
and rather sadly:

"How strange to think that there have been men like ourselves, and living
in this beautiful and happy country, who I suppose had feelings and
affections like ourselves, who could yet do such dreadful things."

"Yes," said I, in a didactic tone; "yet after all, even those days were a
great improvement on the days that had gone before them.  Have you not
read of the Mediaeval period, and the ferocity of its criminal laws; and
how in those days men fairly seemed to have enjoyed tormenting their
fellow men?--nay, for the matter of that, they made their God a tormentor
and a jailer rather than anything else."

"Yes," said Dick, "there are good books on that period also, some of
which I have read.  But as to the great improvement of the nineteenth
century, I don't see it.  After all, the Mediaeval folk acted after their
conscience, as your remark about their God (which is true) shows, and
they were ready to bear what they inflicted on others; whereas the
nineteenth century ones were hypocrites, and pretended to be humane, and
yet went on tormenting those whom they dared to treat so by shutting them
up in prison, for no reason at all, except that they were what they
themselves, the prison-masters, had forced them to be.  O, it's horrible
to think of!"

"But perhaps," said I, "they did not know what the prisons were like."

Dick seemed roused, and even angry.  "More shame for them," said he,
"when you and I know it all these years afterwards.  Look you, neighbour,
they couldn't fail to know what a disgrace a prison is to the
Commonwealth at the best, and that their prisons were a good step on
towards being at the worst."

Quoth I: "But have you no prisons at all now?"

As soon as the words were out of my mouth, I felt that I had made a
mistake, for Dick flushed red and frowned, and the old man looked
surprised and pained; and presently Dick said angrily, yet as if
restraining himself somewhat--

"Man alive! how can you ask such a question?  Have I not told you that we
know what a prison means by the undoubted evidence of really trustworthy
books, helped out by our own imaginations?  And haven't you specially
called me to notice that the people about the roads and streets look
happy? and how could they look happy if they knew that their neighbours
were shut up in prison, while they bore such things quietly?  And if
there were people in prison, you couldn't hide it from folk, like you may
an occasional man-slaying; because that isn't done of set purpose, with a
lot of people backing up the slayer in cold blood, as this prison
business is.  Prisons, indeed!  O no, no, no!"

He stopped, and began to cool down, and said in a kind voice: "But
forgive me!  I needn't be so hot about it, since there are _not_ any
prisons: I'm afraid you will think the worse of me for losing my temper.
Of course, you, coming from the outlands, cannot be expected to know
about these things.  And now I'm afraid I have made you feel
uncomfortable."

In a way he had; but he was so generous in his heat, that I liked him the
better for it, and I said:

"No, really 'tis all my fault for being so stupid.  Let me change the
subject, and ask you what the stately building is on our left just
showing at the end of that grove of plane-trees?"

"Ah," he said, "that is an old building built before the middle of the
twentieth century, and as you see, in a queer fantastic style not over
beautiful; but there are some fine things inside it, too, mostly
pictures, some very old.  It is called the National Gallery; I have
sometimes puzzled as to what the name means: anyhow, nowadays wherever
there is a place where pictures are kept as curiosities permanently it is
called a National Gallery, perhaps after this one.  Of course there are a
good many of them up and down the country."

I didn't try to enlighten him, feeling the task too heavy; but I pulled
out my magnificent pipe and fell a-smoking, and the old horse jogged on
again.  As we went, I said:

"This pipe is a very elaborate toy, and you seem so reasonable in this
country, and your architecture is so good, that I rather wonder at your
turning out such trivialities."

It struck me as I spoke that this was rather ungrateful of me, after
having received such a fine present; but Dick didn't seem to notice my
bad manners, but said:

"Well, I don't know; it is a pretty thing, and since nobody need make
such things unless they like, I don't see why they shouldn't make them,
if they like.  Of course, if carvers were scarce they would all be busy
on the architecture, as you call it, and then these 'toys' (a good word)
would not be made; but since there are plenty of people who can carve--in
fact, almost everybody, and as work is somewhat scarce, or we are afraid
it may be, folk do not discourage this kind of petty work."

He mused a little, and seemed somewhat perturbed; but presently his face
cleared, and he said: "After all, you must admit that the pipe is a very
pretty thing, with the little people under the trees all cut so clean and
sweet;--too elaborate for a pipe, perhaps, but--well, it is very pretty."

"Too valuable for its use, perhaps," said I.

"What's that?" said he; "I don't understand."

I was just going in a helpless way to try to make him understand, when we
came by the gates of a big rambling building, in which work of some sort
seemed going on.  "What building is that?" said I, eagerly; for it was a
pleasure amidst all these strange things to see something a little like
what I was used to: "it seems to be a factory."

"Yes," he said, "I think I know what you mean, and that's what it is; but
we don't call them factories now, but Banded-workshops: that is, places
where people collect who want to work together."

"I suppose," said I, "power of some sort is used there?"

"No, no," said he.  "Why should people collect together to use power,
when they can have it at the places where they live, or hard by, any two
or three of them; or any one, for the matter of that?  No; folk collect
in these Banded-workshops to do hand-work in which working together is
necessary or convenient; such work is often very pleasant.  In there, for
instance, they make pottery and glass,--there, you can see the tops of
the furnaces.  Well, of course it's handy to have fair-sized ovens and
kilns and glass-pots, and a good lot of things to use them for: though of
course there are a good many such places, as it would be ridiculous if a
man had a liking for pot-making or glass-blowing that he should have to
live in one place or be obliged to forego the work he liked."

"I see no smoke coming from the furnaces," said I.

"Smoke?" said Dick; "why should you see smoke?"

I held my tongue, and he went on: "It's a nice place inside, though as
plain as you see outside.  As to the crafts, throwing the clay must be
jolly work: the glass-blowing is rather a sweltering job; but some folk
like it very much indeed; and I don't much wonder: there is such a sense
of power, when you have got deft in it, in dealing with the hot metal.  It
makes a lot of pleasant work," said he, smiling, "for however much care
you take of such goods, break they will, one day or another, so there is
always plenty to do."

I held my tongue and pondered.

We came just here on a gang of men road-mending which delayed us a
little; but I was not sorry for it; for all I had seen hitherto seemed a
mere part of a summer holiday; and I wanted to see how this folk would
set to on a piece of real necessary work.  They had been resting, and had
only just begun work again as we came up; so that the rattle of the picks
was what woke me from my musing.  There were about a dozen of them,
strong young men, looking much like a boating party at Oxford would have
looked in the days I remembered, and not more troubled with their work:
their outer raiment lay on the road-side in an orderly pile under the
guardianship of a six-year-old boy, who had his arm thrown over the neck
of a big mastiff, who was as happily lazy as if the summer-day had been
made for him alone.  As I eyed the pile of clothes, I could see the gleam
of gold and silk embroidery on it, and judged that some of these workmen
had tastes akin to those of the Golden Dustman of Hammersmith.  Beside
them lay a good big basket that had hints about it of cold pie and wine:
a half dozen of young women stood by watching the work or the workers,
both of which were worth watching, for the latter smote great strokes and
were very deft in their labour, and as handsome clean-built fellows as
you might find a dozen of in a summer day.  They were laughing and
talking merrily with each other and the women, but presently their
foreman looked up and saw our way stopped.  So he stayed his pick and
sang out, "Spell ho, mates! here are neighbours want to get past."
Whereon the others stopped also, and, drawing around us, helped the old
horse by easing our wheels over the half undone road, and then, like men
with a pleasant task on hand, hurried back to their work, only stopping
to give us a smiling good-day; so that the sound of the picks broke out
again before Greylocks had taken to his jog-trot.  Dick looked back over
his shoulder at them and said:

"They are in luck to-day: it's right down good sport trying how much pick-
work one can get into an hour; and I can see those neighbours know their
business well.  It is not a mere matter of strength getting on quickly
with such work; is it, guest?"

"I should think not," said I, "but to tell you the truth, I have never
tried my hand at it."

"Really?" said he gravely, "that seems a pity; it is good work for
hardening the muscles, and I like it; though I admit it is pleasanter the
second week than the first.  Not that I am a good hand at it: the fellows
used to chaff me at one job where I was working, I remember, and sing out
to me, 'Well rowed, stroke!'  'Put your back into it, bow!'"

"Not much of a joke," quoth I.

"Well," said Dick, "everything seems like a joke when we have a pleasant
spell of work on, and good fellows merry about us; we feels so happy, you
know."  Again I pondered silently.




CHAPTER VIII: AN OLD FRIEND


We now turned into a pleasant lane where the branches of great
plane-trees nearly met overhead, but behind them lay low houses standing
rather close together.

"This is Long Acre," quoth Dick; "so there must once have been a
cornfield here.  How curious it is that places change so, and yet keep
their old names!  Just look how thick the houses stand! and they are
still going on building, look you!"

"Yes," said the old man, "but I think the cornfields must have been built
over before the middle of the nineteenth century.  I have heard that
about here was one of the thickest parts of the town.  But I must get
down here, neighbours; I have got to call on a friend who lives in the
gardens behind this Long Acre.  Good-bye and good luck, Guest!"

And he jumped down and strode away vigorously, like a young man.

"How old should you say that neighbour will be?" said I to Dick as we
lost sight of him; for I saw that he was old, and yet he looked dry and
sturdy like a piece of old oak; a type of old man I was not used to
seeing.

"O, about ninety, I should say," said Dick.

"How long-lived your people must be!" said I.

"Yes," said Dick, "certainly we have beaten the threescore-and-ten of the
old Jewish proverb-book.  But then you see that was written of Syria, a
hot dry country, where people live faster than in our temperate climate.
However, I don't think it matters much, so long as a man is healthy and
happy while he _is_ alive.  But now, Guest, we are so near to my old
kinsman's dwelling-place that I think you had better keep all future
questions for him."

I nodded a yes; and therewith we turned to the left, and went down a
gentle slope through some beautiful rose-gardens, laid out on what I took
to be the site of Endell Street.  We passed on, and Dick drew rein an
instant as we came across a long straightish road with houses scantily
scattered up and down it.  He waved his hand right and left, and said,
"Holborn that side, Oxford Road that.  This was once a very important
part of the crowded city outside the ancient walls of the Roman and
Mediaeval burg: many of the feudal nobles of the Middle Ages, we are
told, had big houses on either side of Holborn.  I daresay you remember
that the Bishop of Ely's house is mentioned in Shakespeare's play of King
Richard III.; and there are some remains of that still left.  However,
this road is not of the same importance, now that the ancient city is
gone, walls and all."

He drove on again, while I smiled faintly to think how the nineteenth
century, of which such big words have been said, counted for nothing in
the memory of this man, who read Shakespeare and had not forgotten the
Middle Ages.

We crossed the road into a short narrow lane between the gardens, and
came out again into a wide road, on one side of which was a great and
long building, turning its gables away from the highway, which I saw at
once was another public group.  Opposite to it was a wide space of
greenery, without any wall or fence of any kind.  I looked through the
trees and saw beyond them a pillared portico quite familiar to me--no
less old a friend, in fact, than the British Museum.  It rather took my
breath away, amidst all the strange things I had seen; but I held my
tongue and let Dick speak.  Said he:

"Yonder is the British Museum, where my great-grandfather mostly lives;
so I won't say much about it.  The building on the left is the Museum
Market, and I think we had better turn in there for a minute or two; for
Greylocks will be wanting his rest and his oats; and I suppose you will
stay with my kinsman the greater part of the day; and to say the truth,
there may be some one there whom I particularly want to see, and perhaps
have a long talk with."

He blushed and sighed, not altogether with pleasure, I thought; so of
course I said nothing, and he turned the horse under an archway which
brought us into a very large paved quadrangle, with a big sycamore tree
in each corner and a plashing fountain in the midst.  Near the fountain
were a few market stalls, with awnings over them of gay striped linen
cloth, about which some people, mostly women and children, were moving
quietly, looking at the goods exposed there.  The ground floor of the
building round the quadrangle was occupied by a wide arcade or cloister,
whose fanciful but strong architecture I could not enough admire.  Here
also a few people were sauntering or sitting reading on the benches.

Dick said to me apologetically: "Here as elsewhere there is little doing
to-day; on a Friday you would see it thronged, and gay with people, and
in the afternoon there is generally music about the fountain.  However, I
daresay we shall have a pretty good gathering at our mid-day meal."

We drove through the quadrangle and by an archway, into a large handsome
stable on the other side, where we speedily stalled the old nag and made
him happy with horse-meat, and then turned and walked back again through
the market, Dick looking rather thoughtful, as it seemed to me.

I noticed that people couldn't help looking at me rather hard, and
considering my clothes and theirs, I didn't wonder; but whenever they
caught my eye they made me a very friendly sign of greeting.

We walked straight into the forecourt of the Museum, where, except that
the railings were gone, and the whispering boughs of the trees were all
about, nothing seemed changed; the very pigeons were wheeling about the
building and clinging to the ornaments of the pediment as I had seen them
of old.

Dick seemed grown a little absent, but he could not forbear giving me an
architectural note, and said:

"It is rather an ugly old building, isn't it?  Many people have wanted to
pull it down and rebuild it: and perhaps if work does really get scarce
we may yet do so.  But, as my great grandfather will tell you, it would
not be quite a straightforward job; for there are wonderful collections
in there of all kinds of antiquities, besides an enormous library with
many exceedingly beautiful books in it, and many most useful ones as
genuine records, texts of ancient works and the like; and the worry and
anxiety, and even risk, there would be in moving all this has saved the
buildings themselves.  Besides, as we said before, it is not a bad thing
to have some record of what our forefathers thought a handsome building.
For there is plenty of labour and material in it."

"I see there is," said I, "and I quite agree with you.  But now hadn't we
better make haste to see your great-grandfather?"

In fact, I could not help seeing that he was rather dallying with the
time.  He said, "Yes, we will go into the house in a minute.  My kinsman
is too old to do much work in the Museum, where he was a custodian of the
books for many years; but he still lives here a good deal; indeed I
think," said he, smiling, "that he looks upon himself as a part of the
books, or the books a part of him, I don't know which."

He hesitated a little longer, then flushing up, took my hand, and saying,
"Come along, then!" led me toward the door of one of the old official
dwellings.




CHAPTER IX: CONCERNING LOVE


"Your kinsman doesn't much care for beautiful building, then," said I, as
we entered the rather dreary classical house; which indeed was as bare as
need be, except for some big pots of the June flowers which stood about
here and there; though it was very clean and nicely whitewashed.

"O I don't know," said Dick, rather absently.  "He is getting old,
certainly, for he is over a hundred and five, and no doubt he doesn't
care about moving.  But of course he could live in a prettier house if he
liked: he is not obliged to live in one place any more than any one else.
This way, Guest."

And he led the way upstairs, and opening a door we went into a fair-sized
room of the old type, as plain as the rest of the house, with a few
necessary pieces of furniture, and those very simple and even rude, but
solid and with a good deal of carving about them, well designed but
rather crudely executed.  At the furthest corner of the room, at a desk
near the window, sat a little old man in a roomy oak chair, well
becushioned.  He was dressed in a sort of Norfolk jacket of blue serge
worn threadbare, with breeches of the same, and grey worsted stockings.
He jumped up from his chair, and cried out in a voice of considerable
volume for such an old man, "Welcome, Dick, my lad; Clara is here, and
will be more than glad to see you; so keep your heart up."

"Clara here?" quoth Dick; "if I had known, I would not have brought--At
least, I mean I would--"

He was stuttering and confused, clearly because he was anxious to say
nothing to make me feel one too many.  But the old man, who had not seen
me at first, helped him out by coming forward and saying to me in a kind
tone:

"Pray pardon me, for I did not notice that Dick, who is big enough to
hide anybody, you know, had brought a friend with him.  A most hearty
welcome to you!  All the more, as I almost hope that you are going to
amuse an old man by giving him news from over sea, for I can see that you
are come from over the water and far off countries."

He looked at me thoughtfully, almost anxiously, as he said in a changed
voice, "Might I ask you where you come from, as you are so clearly a
stranger?"

I said in an absent way: "I used to live in England, and now I am come
back again; and I slept last night at the Hammersmith Guest House."

He bowed gravely, but seemed, I thought, a little disappointed with my
answer.  As for me, I was now looking at him harder than good manners
allowed of; perhaps; for in truth his face, dried-apple-like as it was,
seemed strangely familiar to me; as if I had seen it before--in a looking-
glass it might be, said I to myself.

"Well," said the old man, "wherever you come from, you are come among
friends.  And I see my kinsman Richard Hammond has an air about him as if
he had brought you here for me to do something for you.  Is that so,
Dick?"

Dick, who was getting still more absent-minded and kept looking uneasily
at the door, managed to say, "Well, yes, kinsman: our guest finds things
much altered, and cannot understand it; nor can I; so I thought I would
bring him to you, since you know more of all that has happened within the
last two hundred years than any body else does.--What's that?"

And he turned toward the door again.  We heard footsteps outside; the
door opened, and in came a very beautiful young woman, who stopped short
on seeing Dick, and flushed as red as a rose, but faced him nevertheless.
Dick looked at her hard, and half reached out his hand toward her, and
his whole face quivered with emotion.

The old man did not leave them long in this shy discomfort, but said,
smiling with an old man's mirth:

"Dick, my lad, and you, my dear Clara, I rather think that we two
oldsters are in your way; for I think you will have plenty to say to each
other.  You had better go into Nelson's room up above; I know he has gone
out; and he has just been covering the walls all over with mediaeval
books, so it will be pretty enough even for you two and your renewed
pleasure."

The girl reached out her hand to Dick, and taking his led him out of the
room, looking straight before her; but it was easy to see that her
blushes came from happiness, not anger; as, indeed, love is far more self-
conscious than wrath.

When the door had shut on them the old man turned to me, still smiling,
and said:

"Frankly, my dear guest, you will do me a great service if you are come
to set my old tongue wagging.  My love of talk still abides with me, or
rather grows on me; and though it is pleasant enough to see these
youngsters moving about and playing together so seriously, as if the
whole world depended on their kisses (as indeed it does somewhat), yet I
don't think my tales of the past interest them much.  The last harvest,
the last baby, the last knot of carving in the market-place, is history
enough for them.  It was different, I think, when I was a lad, when we
were not so assured of peace and continuous plenty as we are now--Well,
well!  Without putting you to the question, let me ask you this: Am I to
consider you as an enquirer who knows a little of our modern ways of
life, or as one who comes from some place where the very foundations of
life are different from ours,--do you know anything or nothing about us?"

He looked at me keenly and with growing wonder in his eyes as he spoke;
and I answered in a low voice:

"I know only so much of your modern life as I could gather from using my
eyes on the way here from Hammersmith, and from asking some questions of
Richard Hammond, most of which he could hardly understand."

The old man smiled at this.  "Then," said he, "I am to speak to you as--"

"As if I were a being from another planet," said I.

The old man, whose name, by the bye, like his kinsman's, was Hammond,
smiled and nodded, and wheeling his seat round to me, bade me sit in a
heavy oak chair, and said, as he saw my eyes fix on its curious carving:

"Yes, I am much tied to the past, my past, you understand.  These very
pieces of furniture belong to a time before my early days; it was my
father who got them made; if they had been done within the last fifty
years they would have been much cleverer in execution; but I don't think
I should have liked them the better.  We were almost beginning again in
those days: and they were brisk, hot-headed times.  But you hear how
garrulous I am: ask me questions, ask me questions about anything, dear
guest; since I must talk, make my talk profitable to you."

I was silent for a minute, and then I said, somewhat nervously: "Excuse
me if I am rude; but I am so much interested in Richard, since he has
been so kind to me, a perfect stranger, that I should like to ask a
question about him."

"Well," said old Hammond, "if he were not 'kind', as you call it, to a
perfect stranger he would be thought a strange person, and people would
be apt to shun him.  But ask on, ask on! don't be shy of asking."

Said I: "That beautiful girl, is he going to be married to her?"

"Well," said he, "yes, he is.  He has been married to her once already,
and now I should say it is pretty clear that he will be married to her
again."

"Indeed," quoth I, wondering what that meant.

"Here is the whole tale," said old Hammond; "a short one enough; and now
I hope a happy one: they lived together two years the first time; were
both very young; and then she got it into her head that she was in love
with somebody else.  So she left poor Dick; I say _poor_ Dick, because he
had not found any one else.  But it did not last long, only about a year.
Then she came to me, as she was in the habit of bringing her troubles to
the old carle, and asked me how Dick was, and whether he was happy, and
all the rest of it.  So I saw how the land lay, and said that he was very
unhappy, and not at all well; which last at any rate was a lie.  There,
you can guess the rest.  Clara came to have a long talk with me to-day,
but Dick will serve her turn much better.  Indeed, if he hadn't chanced
in upon me to-day I should have had to have sent for him to-morrow."

"Dear me," said I.  "Have they any children?"

"Yes," said he, "two; they are staying with one of my daughters at
present, where, indeed, Clara has mostly been.  I wouldn't lose sight of
her, as I felt sure they would come together again: and Dick, who is the
best of good fellows, really took the matter to heart.  You see, he had
no other love to run to, as she had.  So I managed it all; as I have done
with such-like matters before."

"Ah," said I, "no doubt you wanted to keep them out of the Divorce Court:
but I suppose it often has to settle such matters."

"Then you suppose nonsense," said he.  "I know that there used to be such
lunatic affairs as divorce-courts: but just consider; all the cases that
came into them were matters of property quarrels: and I think, dear
guest," said he, smiling, "that though you do come from another planet,
you can see from the mere outside look of our world that quarrels about
private property could not go on amongst us in our days."

Indeed, my drive from Hammersmith to Bloomsbury, and all the quiet happy
life I had seen so many hints of; even apart from my shopping, would have
been enough to tell me that "the sacred rights of property," as we used
to think of them, were now no more.  So I sat silent while the old man
took up the thread of the discourse again, and said:

"Well, then, property quarrels being no longer possible, what remains in
these matters that a court of law could deal with?  Fancy a court for
enforcing a contract of passion or sentiment!  If such a thing were
needed as a _reductio ad absurdum_ of the enforcement of contract, such a
folly would do that for us."

He was silent again a little, and then said: "You must understand once
for all that we have changed these matters; or rather, that our way of
looking at them has changed, as we have changed within the last two
hundred years.  We do not deceive ourselves, indeed, or believe that we
can get rid of all the trouble that besets the dealings between the
sexes.  We know that we must face the unhappiness that comes of man and
woman confusing the relations between natural passion, and sentiment, and
the friendship which, when things go well, softens the awakening from
passing illusions: but we are not so mad as to pile up degradation on
that unhappiness by engaging in sordid squabbles about livelihood and
position, and the power of tyrannising over the children who have been
the results of love or lust."

Again he paused awhile, and again went on: "Calf love, mistaken for a
heroism that shall be lifelong, yet early waning into disappointment; the
inexplicable desire that comes on a man of riper years to be the all-in-
all to some one woman, whose ordinary human kindness and human beauty he
has idealised into superhuman perfection, and made the one object of his
desire; or lastly the reasonable longing of a strong and thoughtful man
to become the most intimate friend of some beautiful and wise woman, the
very type of the beauty and glory of the world which we love so well,--as
we exult in all the pleasure and exaltation of spirit which goes with
these things, so we set ourselves to bear the sorrow which not unseldom
goes with them also; remembering those lines of the ancient poet (I quote
roughly from memory one of the many translations of the nineteenth
century):

   'For this the Gods have fashioned man's grief and evil day
   That still for man hereafter might be the tale and the lay.'

Well, well, 'tis little likely anyhow that all tales shall be lacking, or
all sorrow cured."

He was silent for some time, and I would not interrupt him.  At last he
began again: "But you must know that we of these generations are strong
and healthy of body, and live easily; we pass our lives in reasonable
strife with nature, exercising not one side of ourselves only, but all
sides, taking the keenest pleasure in all the life of the world.  So it
is a point of honour with us not to be self-centred; not to suppose that
the world must cease because one man is sorry; therefore we should think
it foolish, or if you will, criminal, to exaggerate these matters of
sentiment and sensibility: we are no more inclined to eke out our
sentimental sorrows than to cherish our bodily pains; and we recognise
that there are other pleasures besides love-making.  You must remember,
also, that we are long-lived, and that therefore beauty both in man and
woman is not so fleeting as it was in the days when we were burdened so
heavily by self-inflicted diseases.  So we shake off these griefs in a
way which perhaps the sentimentalists of other times would think
contemptible and unheroic, but which we think necessary and manlike.  As
on the other hand, therefore, we have ceased to be commercial in our love-
matters, so also we have ceased to be _artificially_ foolish.  The folly
which comes by nature, the unwisdom of the immature man, or the older man
caught in a trap, we must put up with that, nor are we much ashamed of
it; but to be conventionally sensitive or sentimental--my friend, I am
old and perhaps disappointed, but at least I think we have cast off
_some_ of the follies of the older world."

He paused, as if for some words of mine; but I held my peace: then he
went on: "At least, if we suffer from the tyranny and fickleness of
nature or our own want of experience, we neither grimace about it, nor
lie.  If there must be sundering betwixt those who meant never to sunder,
so it must be: but there need be no pretext of unity when the reality of
it is gone: nor do we drive those who well know that they are incapable
of it to profess an undying sentiment which they cannot really feel: thus
it is that as that monstrosity of venal lust is no longer possible, so
also it is no longer needed.  Don't misunderstand me.  You did not seemed
shocked when I told you that there were no law-courts to enforce
contracts of sentiment or passion; but so curiously are men made, that
perhaps you will be shocked when I tell you that there is no code of
public opinion which takes the place of such courts, and which might be
as tyrannical and unreasonable as they were.  I do not say that people
don't judge their neighbours' conduct, sometimes, doubtless, unfairly.
But I do say that there is no unvarying conventional set of rules by
which people are judged; no bed of Procrustes to stretch or cramp their
minds and lives; no hypocritical excommunication which people are
_forced_ to pronounce, either by unconsidered habit, or by the
unexpressed threat of the lesser interdict if they are lax in their
hypocrisy.  Are you shocked now?"

"N-o--no," said I, with some hesitation.  "It is all so different."

"At any rate," said he, "one thing I think I can answer for: whatever
sentiment there is, it is real--and general; it is not confined to people
very specially refined.  I am also pretty sure, as I hinted to you just
now, that there is not by a great way as much suffering involved in these
matters either to men or to women as there used to be.  But excuse me for
being so prolix on this question!  You know you asked to be treated like
a being from another planet."

"Indeed I thank you very much," said I.  "Now may I ask you about the
position of women in your society?"

He laughed very heartily for a man of his years, and said: "It is not
without reason that I have got a reputation as a careful student of
history.  I believe I really do understand 'the Emancipation of Women
movement' of the nineteenth century.  I doubt if any other man now alive
does."

"Well?" said I, a little bit nettled by his merriment.

"Well," said he, "of course you will see that all that is a dead
controversy now.  The men have no longer any opportunity of tyrannising
over the women, or the women over the men; both of which things took
place in those old times.  The women do what they can do best, and what
they like best, and the men are neither jealous of it or injured by it.
This is such a commonplace that I am almost ashamed to state it."

I said, "O; and legislation? do they take any part in that?"

Hammond smiled and said: "I think you may wait for an answer to that
question till we get on to the subject of legislation.  There may be
novelties to you in that subject also."

"Very well," I said; "but about this woman question?  I saw at the Guest
House that the women were waiting on the men: that seems a little like
reaction doesn't it?"

"Does it?" said the old man; "perhaps you think housekeeping an
unimportant occupation, not deserving of respect.  I believe that was the
opinion of the 'advanced' women of the nineteenth century, and their male
backers.  If it is yours, I recommend to your notice an old Norwegian
folk-lore tale called How the Man minded the House, or some such title;
the result of which minding was that, after various tribulations, the man
and the family cow balanced each other at the end of a rope, the man
hanging halfway up the chimney, the cow dangling from the roof, which,
after the fashion of the country, was of turf and sloping down low to the
ground.  Hard on the cow, _I_ think.  Of course no such mishap could
happen to such a superior person as yourself," he added, chuckling.

I sat somewhat uneasy under this dry gibe.  Indeed, his manner of
treating this latter part of the question seemed to me a little
disrespectful.

"Come, now, my friend," quoth he, "don't you know that it is a great
pleasure to a clever woman to manage a house skilfully, and to do it so
that all the house-mates about her look pleased, and are grateful to her?
And then, you know, everybody likes to be ordered about by a pretty
woman: why, it is one of the pleasantest forms of flirtation.  You are
not so old that you cannot remember that.  Why, I remember it well."

And the old fellow chuckled again, and at last fairly burst out laughing.

"Excuse me," said he, after a while; "I am not laughing at anything you
could be thinking of; but at that silly nineteenth-century fashion,
current amongst rich so-called cultivated people, of ignoring all the
steps by which their daily dinner was reached, as matters too low for
their lofty intelligence.  Useless idiots!  Come, now, I am a 'literary
man,' as we queer animals used to be called, yet I am a pretty good cook
myself."

"So am I," said I.

"Well, then," said he, "I really think you can understand me better than
you would seem to do, judging by your words and your silence."

Said I: "Perhaps that is so; but people putting in practice commonly this
sense of interest in the ordinary occupations of life rather startles me.
I will ask you a question or two presently about that.  But I want to
return to the position of women amongst you.  You have studied the
'emancipation of women' business of the nineteenth century: don't you
remember that some of the 'superior' women wanted to emancipate the more
intelligent part of their sex from the bearing of children?"

The old man grew quite serious again.  Said he: "I _do_ remember about
that strange piece of baseless folly, the result, like all other follies
of the period, of the hideous class tyranny which then obtained.  What do
we think of it now? you would say.  My friend, that is a question easy to
answer.  How could it possibly be but that maternity should be highly
honoured amongst us?  Surely it is a matter of course that the natural
and necessary pains which the mother must go through form a bond of union
between man and woman, an extra stimulus to love and affection between
them, and that this is universally recognised.  For the rest, remember
that all the _artificial_ burdens of motherhood are now done away with.  A
mother has no longer any mere sordid anxieties for the future of her
children.  They may indeed turn out better or worse; they may disappoint
her highest hopes; such anxieties as these are a part of the mingled
pleasure and pain which goes to make up the life of mankind.  But at
least she is spared the fear (it was most commonly the certainty) that
artificial disabilities would make her children something less than men
and women: she knows that they will live and act according to the measure
of their own faculties.  In times past, it is clear that the 'Society' of
the day helped its Judaic god, and the 'Man of Science' of the time, in
visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children.  How to reverse this
process, how to take the sting out of heredity, has for long been one of
the most constant cares of the thoughtful men amongst us.  So that, you
see, the ordinarily healthy woman (and almost all our women are both
healthy and at least comely), respected as a child-bearer and rearer of
children, desired as a woman, loved as a companion, unanxious for the
future of her children, has far more instinct for maternity than the poor
drudge and mother of drudges of past days could ever have had; or than
her sister of the upper classes, brought up in affected ignorance of
natural facts, reared in an atmosphere of mingled prudery and prurience."

"You speak warmly," I said, "but I can see that you are right."

"Yes," he said, "and I will point out to you a token of all the benefits
which we have gained by our freedom.  What did you think of the looks of
the people whom you have come across to-day?"

Said I: "I could hardly have believed that there could be so many good-
looking people in any civilised country."

He crowed a little, like the old bird he was.  "What! are we still
civilised?" said he.  "Well, as to our looks, the English and Jutish
blood, which on the whole is predominant here, used not to produce much
beauty.  But I think we have improved it.  I know a man who has a large
collection of portraits printed from photographs of the nineteenth
century, and going over those and comparing them with the everyday faces
in these times, puts the improvement in our good looks beyond a doubt.
Now, there are some people who think it not too fantastic to connect this
increase of beauty directly with our freedom and good sense in the
matters we have been speaking of: they believe that a child born from the
natural and healthy love between a man and a woman, even if that be
transient, is likely to turn out better in all ways, and especially in
bodily beauty, than the birth of the respectable commercial marriage bed,
or of the dull despair of the drudge of that system.  They say, Pleasure
begets pleasure.  What do you think?"

"I am much of that mind," said I.




CHAPTER X: QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS


"Well," said the old man, shifting in his chair, "you must get on with
your questions, Guest; I have been some time answering this first one."

Said I: "I want an extra word or two about your ideas of education;
although I gathered from Dick that you let your children run wild and
didn't teach them anything; and in short, that you have so refined your
education, that now you have none."

"Then you gathered left-handed," quoth he.  "But of course I understand
your point of view about education, which is that of times past, when
'the struggle for life,' as men used to phrase it (_i.e._, the struggle
for a slave's rations on one side, and for a bouncing share of the slave-
holders' privilege on the other), pinched 'education' for most people
into a niggardly dole of not very accurate information; something to be
swallowed by the beginner in the art of living whether he liked it or
not, and was hungry for it or not: and which had been chewed and digested
over and over again by people who didn't care about it in order to serve
it out to other people who didn't care about it."

I stopped the old man's rising wrath by a laugh, and said: "Well, _you_
were not taught that way, at any rate, so you may let your anger run off
you a little."

"True, true," said he, smiling.  "I thank you for correcting my
ill-temper: I always fancy myself as living in any period of which we may
be speaking.  But, however, to put it in a cooler way: you expected to
see children thrust into schools when they had reached an age
conventionally supposed to be the due age, whatever their varying
faculties and dispositions might be, and when there, with like disregard
to facts to be subjected to a certain conventional course of 'learning.'
My friend, can't you see that such a proceeding means ignoring the fact
of _growth_, bodily and mental?  No one could come out of such a mill
uninjured; and those only would avoid being crushed by it who would have
the spirit of rebellion strong in them.  Fortunately most children have
had that at all times, or I do not know that we should ever have reached
our present position.  Now you see what it all comes to.  In the old
times all this was the result of _poverty_.  In the nineteenth century,
society was so miserably poor, owing to the systematised robbery on which
it was founded, that real education was impossible for anybody.  The
whole theory of their so-called education was that it was necessary to
shove a little information into a child, even if it were by means of
torture, and accompanied by twaddle which it was well known was of no
use, or else he would lack information lifelong: the hurry of poverty
forbade anything else.  All that is past; we are no longer hurried, and
the information lies ready to each one's hand when his own inclinations
impel him to seek it.  In this as in other matters we have become
wealthy: we can afford to give ourselves time to grow."

"Yes," said I, "but suppose the child, youth, man, never wants the
information, never grows in the direction you might hope him to do:
suppose, for instance, he objects to learning arithmetic or mathematics;
you can't force him when he _is_ grown; can't you force him while he is
growing, and oughtn't you to do so?"

"Well," said he, "were you forced to learn arithmetic and mathematics?"

"A little," said I.

"And how old are you now?"

"Say fifty-six," said I.

"And how much arithmetic and mathematics do you know now?" quoth the old
man, smiling rather mockingly.

Said I: "None whatever, I am sorry to say."

Hammond laughed quietly, but made no other comment on my admission, and I
dropped the subject of education, perceiving him to be hopeless on that
side.

I thought a little, and said: "You were speaking just now of households:
that sounded to me a little like the customs of past times; I should have
thought you would have lived more in public."

"Phalangsteries, eh?" said he.  "Well, we live as we like, and we like to
live as a rule with certain house-mates that we have got used to.
Remember, again, that poverty is extinct, and that the Fourierist
phalangsteries and all their kind, as was but natural at the time,
implied nothing but a refuge from mere destitution.  Such a way of life
as that, could only have been conceived of by people surrounded by the
worst form of poverty.  But you must understand therewith, that though
separate households are the rule amongst us, and though they differ in
their habits more or less, yet no door is shut to any good-tempered
person who is content to live as the other house-mates do: only of course
it would be unreasonable for one man to drop into a household and bid the
folk of it to alter their habits to please him, since he can go elsewhere
and live as he pleases.  However, I need not say much about all this, as
you are going up the river with Dick, and will find out for yourself by
experience how these matters are managed."

After a pause, I said: "Your big towns, now; how about them?  London,
which--which I have read about as the modern Babylon of civilization,
seems to have disappeared."

"Well, well," said old Hammond, "perhaps after all it is more like
ancient Babylon now than the 'modern Babylon' of the nineteenth century
was.  But let that pass.  After all, there is a good deal of population
in places between here and Hammersmith; nor have you seen the most
populous part of the town yet."

"Tell me, then," said I, "how is it towards the east?"

Said he: "Time was when if you mounted a good horse and rode straight
away from my door here at a round trot for an hour and a half; you would
still be in the thick of London, and the greater part of that would be
'slums,' as they were called; that is to say, places of torture for
innocent men and women; or worse, stews for rearing and breeding men and
women in such degradation that that torture should seem to them mere
ordinary and natural life."

"I know, I know," I said, rather impatiently.  "That was what was; tell
me something of what is.  Is any of that left?"

"Not an inch," said he; "but some memory of it abides with us, and I am
glad of it.  Once a year, on May-day, we hold a solemn feast in those
easterly communes of London to commemorate The Clearing of Misery, as it
is called.  On that day we have music and dancing, and merry games and
happy feasting on the site of some of the worst of the old slums, the
traditional memory of which we have kept.  On that occasion the custom is
for the prettiest girls to sing some of the old revolutionary songs, and
those which were the groans of the discontent, once so hopeless, on the
very spots where those terrible crimes of class-murder were committed day
by day for so many years.  To a man like me, who have studied the past so
diligently, it is a curious and touching sight to see some beautiful
girl, daintily clad, and crowned with flowers from the neighbouring
meadows, standing amongst the happy people, on some mound where of old
time stood the wretched apology for a house, a den in which men and women
lived packed amongst the filth like pilchards in a cask; lived in such a
way that they could only have endured it, as I said just now, by being
degraded out of humanity--to hear the terrible words of threatening and
lamentation coming from her sweet and beautiful lips, and she unconscious
of their real meaning: to hear her, for instance, singing Hood's Song of
the Shirt, and to think that all the time she does not understand what it
is all about--a tragedy grown inconceivable to her and her listeners.
Think of that, if you can, and of how glorious life is grown!"

"Indeed," said I, "it is difficult for me to think of it."

And I sat watching how his eyes glittered, and how the fresh life seemed
to glow in his face, and I wondered how at his age he should think of the
happiness of the world, or indeed anything but his coming dinner.

"Tell me in detail," said I, "what lies east of Bloomsbury now?"

Said he: "There are but few houses between this and the outer part of the
old city; but in the city we have a thickly-dwelling population.  Our
forefathers, in the first clearing of the slums, were not in a hurry to
pull down the houses in what was called at the end of the nineteenth
century the business quarter of the town, and what later got to be known
as the Swindling Kens.  You see, these houses, though they stood
hideously thick on the ground, were roomy and fairly solid in building,
and clean, because they were not used for living in, but as mere gambling
booths; so the poor people from the cleared slums took them for lodgings
and dwelt there, till the folk of those days had time to think of
something better for them; so the buildings were pulled down so gradually
that people got used to living thicker on the ground there than in most
places; therefore it remains the most populous part of London, or perhaps
of all these islands.  But it is very pleasant there, partly because of
the splendour of the architecture, which goes further than what you will
see elsewhere.  However, this crowding, if it may be called so, does not
go further than a street called Aldgate, a name which perhaps you may
have heard of.  Beyond that the houses are scattered wide about the
meadows there, which are very beautiful, especially when you get on to
the lovely river Lea (where old Isaak Walton used to fish, you know)
about the places called Stratford and Old Ford, names which of course you
will not have heard of, though the Romans were busy there once upon a
time."

Not heard of them! thought I to myself.  How strange! that I who had seen
the very last remnant of the pleasantness of the meadows by the Lea
destroyed, should have heard them spoken of with pleasantness come back
to them in full measure.

Hammond went on: "When you get down to the Thames side you come on the
Docks, which are works of the nineteenth century, and are still in use,
although not so thronged as they once were, since we discourage
centralisation all we can, and we have long ago dropped the pretension to
be the market of the world.  About these Docks are a good few houses,
which, however, are not inhabited by many people permanently; I mean,
those who use them come and go a good deal, the place being too low and
marshy for pleasant dwelling.  Past the Docks eastward and landward it is
all flat pasture, once marsh, except for a few gardens, and there are
very few permanent dwellings there: scarcely anything but a few sheds,
and cots for the men who come to look after the great herds of cattle
pasturing there.  But however, what with the beasts and the men, and the
scattered red-tiled roofs and the big hayricks, it does not make a bad
holiday to get a quiet pony and ride about there on a sunny afternoon of
autumn, and look over the river and the craft passing up and down, and on
to Shooters' Hill and the Kentish uplands, and then turn round to the
wide green sea of the Essex marsh-land, with the great domed line of the
sky, and the sun shining down in one flood of peaceful light over the
long distance.  There is a place called Canning's Town, and further out,
Silvertown, where the pleasant meadows are at their pleasantest:
doubtless they were once slums, and wretched enough."

The names grated on my ear, but I could not explain why to him.  So I
said: "And south of the river, what is it like?"

He said: "You would find it much the same as the land about Hammersmith.
North, again, the land runs up high, and there is an agreeable and well-
built town called Hampstead, which fitly ends London on that side.  It
looks down on the north-western end of the forest you passed through."

I smiled.  "So much for what was once London," said I.  "Now tell me
about the other towns of the country."

He said: "As to the big murky places which were once, as we know, the
centres of manufacture, they have, like the brick and mortar desert of
London, disappeared; only, since they were centres of nothing but
'manufacture,' and served no purpose but that of the gambling market,
they have left less signs of their existence than London.  Of course, the
great change in the use of mechanical force made this an easy matter, and
some approach to their break-up as centres would probably have taken
place, even if we had not changed our habits so much: but they being such
as they were, no sacrifice would have seemed too great a price to pay for
getting rid of the 'manufacturing districts,' as they used to be called.
For the rest, whatever coal or mineral we need is brought to grass and
sent whither it is needed with as little as possible of dirt, confusion,
and the distressing of quiet people's lives.  One is tempted to believe
from what one has read of the condition of those districts in the
nineteenth century, that those who had them under their power worried,
befouled, and degraded men out of malice prepense: but it was not so;
like the mis-education of which we were talking just now, it came of
their dreadful poverty.  They were obliged to put up with everything, and
even pretend that they liked it; whereas we can now deal with things
reasonably, and refuse to be saddled with what we do not want."

I confess I was not sorry to cut short with a question his glorifications
of the age he lived in.  Said I: "How about the smaller towns?  I suppose
you have swept those away entirely?"

"No, no," said he, "it hasn't gone that way.  On the contrary, there has
been but little clearance, though much rebuilding, in the smaller towns.
Their suburbs, indeed, when they had any, have melted away into the
general country, and space and elbow-room has been got in their centres:
but there are the towns still with their streets and squares and market-
places; so that it is by means of these smaller towns that we of to-day
can get some kind of idea of what the towns of the older world were
like;--I mean to say at their best."

"Take Oxford, for instance," said I.

"Yes," said he, "I suppose Oxford was beautiful even in the nineteenth
century.  At present it has the great interest of still preserving a
great mass of pre-commercial building, and is a very beautiful place, yet
there are many towns which have become scarcely less beautiful."

Said I: "In passing, may I ask if it is still a place of learning?"

"Still?" said he, smiling.  "Well, it has reverted to some of its best
traditions; so you may imagine how far it is from its nineteenth-century
position.  It is real learning, knowledge cultivated for its own sake--the
Art of Knowledge, in short--which is followed there, not the Commercial
learning of the past.  Though perhaps you do not know that in the
nineteenth century Oxford and its less interesting sister Cambridge
became definitely commercial.  They (and especially Oxford) were the
breeding places of a peculiar class of parasites, who called themselves
cultivated people; they were indeed cynical enough, as the so-called
educated classes of the day generally were; but they affected an
exaggeration of cynicism in order that they might be thought knowing and
worldly-wise.  The rich middle classes (they had no relation with the
working classes) treated them with the kind of contemptuous toleration
with which a mediaeval baron treated his jester; though it must be said
that they were by no means so pleasant as the old jesters were, being, in
fact, _the_ bores of society.  They were laughed at, despised--and paid.
Which last was what they aimed at."

Dear me! thought I, how apt history is to reverse contemporary judgments.
Surely only the worst of them were as bad as that.  But I must admit that
they were mostly prigs, and that they _were_ commercial.  I said aloud,
though more to myself than to Hammond, "Well, how could they be better
than the age that made them?"

"True," he said, "but their pretensions were higher."

"Were they?" said I, smiling.

"You drive me from corner to corner," said he, smiling in turn.  "Let me
say at least that they were a poor sequence to the aspirations of Oxford
of 'the barbarous Middle Ages.'"

"Yes, that will do," said I.

"Also," said Hammond, "what I have been saying of them is true in the
main.  But ask on!"

I said: "We have heard about London and the manufacturing districts and
the ordinary towns: how about the villages?"

Said Hammond: "You must know that toward the end of the nineteenth
century the villages were almost destroyed, unless where they became mere
adjuncts to the manufacturing districts, or formed a sort of minor
manufacturing districts themselves.  Houses were allowed to fall into
decay and actual ruin; trees were cut down for the sake of the few
shillings which the poor sticks would fetch; the building became
inexpressibly mean and hideous.  Labour was scarce; but wages fell
nevertheless.  All the small country arts of life which once added to the
little pleasures of country people were lost.  The country produce which
passed through the hands of the husbandmen never got so far as their
mouths.  Incredible shabbiness and niggardly pinching reigned over the
fields and acres which, in spite of the rude and careless husbandry of
the times, were so kind and bountiful.  Had you any inkling of all this?"

"I have heard that it was so," said I "but what followed?"

"The change," said Hammond, "which in these matters took place very early
in our epoch, was most strangely rapid.  People flocked into the country
villages, and, so to say, flung themselves upon the freed land like a
wild beast upon his prey; and in a very little time the villages of
England were more populous than they had been since the fourteenth
century, and were still growing fast.  Of course, this invasion of the
country was awkward to deal with, and would have created much misery, if
the folk had still been under the bondage of class monopoly.  But as it
was, things soon righted themselves.  People found out what they were fit
for, and gave up attempting to push themselves into occupations in which
they must needs fail.  The town invaded the country; but the invaders,
like the warlike invaders of early days, yielded to the influence of
their surroundings, and became country people; and in their turn, as they
became more numerous than the townsmen, influenced them also; so that the
difference between town and country grew less and less; and it was indeed
this world of the country vivified by the thought and briskness of town-
bred folk which has produced that happy and leisurely but eager life of
which you have had a first taste.  Again I say, many blunders were made,
but we have had time to set them right.  Much was left for the men of my
earlier life to deal with.  The crude ideas of the first half of the
twentieth century, when men were still oppressed by the fear of poverty,
and did not look enough to the present pleasure of ordinary daily life,
spoilt a great deal of what the commercial age had left us of external
beauty: and I admit that it was but slowly that men recovered from the
injuries that they inflicted on themselves even after they became free.
But slowly as the recovery came, it _did_ come; and the more you see of
us, the clearer it will be to you that we are happy.  That we live amidst
beauty without any fear of becoming effeminate; that we have plenty to
do, and on the whole enjoy doing it.  What more can we ask of life?"

He paused, as if he were seeking for words with which to express his
thought.  Then he said:

"This is how we stand.  England was once a country of clearings amongst
the woods and wastes, with a few towns interspersed, which were
fortresses for the feudal army, markets for the folk, gathering places
for the craftsmen.  It then became a country of huge and foul workshops
and fouler gambling-dens, surrounded by an ill-kept, poverty-stricken
farm, pillaged by the masters of the workshops.  It is now a garden,
where nothing is wasted and nothing is spoilt, with the necessary
dwellings, sheds, and workshops scattered up and down the country, all
trim and neat and pretty.  For, indeed, we should be too much ashamed of
ourselves if we allowed the making of goods, even on a large scale, to
carry with it the appearance, even, of desolation and misery.  Why, my
friend, those housewives we were talking of just now would teach us
better than that."

Said I: "This side of your change is certainly for the better.  But
though I shall soon see some of these villages, tell me in a word or two
what they are like, just to prepare me."

"Perhaps," said he, "you have seen a tolerable picture of these villages
as they were before the end of the nineteenth century.  Such things
exist."

"I have seen several of such pictures," said I.

"Well," said Hammond, "our villages are something like the best of such
places, with the church or mote-house of the neighbours for their chief
building.  Only note that there are no tokens of poverty about them: no
tumble-down picturesque; which, to tell you the truth, the artist usually
availed himself of to veil his incapacity for drawing architecture.  Such
things do not please us, even when they indicate no misery.  Like the
mediaevals, we like everything trim and clean, and orderly and bright; as
people always do when they have any sense of architectural power; because
then they know that they can have what they want, and they won't stand
any nonsense from Nature in their dealings with her."

"Besides the villages, are there any scattered country houses?" said I.

"Yes, plenty," said Hammond; "in fact, except in the wastes and forests
and amongst the sand-hills (like Hindhead in Surrey), it is not easy to
be out of sight of a house; and where the houses are thinly scattered
they run large, and are more like the old colleges than ordinary houses
as they used to be.  That is done for the sake of society, for a good
many people can dwell in such houses, as the country dwellers are not
necessarily husbandmen; though they almost all help in such work at
times.  The life that goes on in these big dwellings in the country is
very pleasant, especially as some of the most studious men of our time
live in them, and altogether there is a great variety of mind and mood to
be found in them which brightens and quickens the society there."

"I am rather surprised," said I, "by all this, for it seems to me that
after all the country must be tolerably populous."

"Certainly," said he; "the population is pretty much the same as it was
at the end of the nineteenth century; we have spread it, that is all.  Of
course, also, we have helped to populate other countries--where we were
wanted and were called for."

Said I: "One thing, it seems to me, does not go with your word of
'garden' for the country.  You have spoken of wastes and forests, and I
myself have seen the beginning of your Middlesex and Essex forest.  Why
do you keep such things in a garden? and isn't it very wasteful to do
so?"

"My friend," he said, "we like these pieces of wild nature, and can
afford them, so we have them; let alone that as to the forests, we need a
great deal of timber, and suppose that our sons and sons' sons will do
the like.  As to the land being a garden, I have heard that they used to
have shrubberies and rockeries in gardens once; and though I might not
like the artificial ones, I assure you that some of the natural rockeries
of our garden are worth seeing.  Go north this summer and look at the
Cumberland and Westmoreland ones,--where, by the way, you will see some
sheep-feeding, so that they are not so wasteful as you think; not so
wasteful as forcing-grounds for fruit out of season, _I_ think.  Go and
have a look at the sheep-walks high up the slopes between Ingleborough
and Pen-y-gwent, and tell me if you think we _waste_ the land there by
not covering it with factories for making things that nobody wants, which
was the chief business of the nineteenth century."

"I will try to go there," said I.

"It won't take much trying," said he.




CHAPTER XI: CONCERNING GOVERNMENT


"Now," said I, "I have come to the point of asking questions which I
suppose will be dry for you to answer and difficult for you to explain;
but I have foreseen for some time past that I must ask them, will I 'nill
I.  What kind of a government have you?  Has republicanism finally
triumphed? or have you come to a mere dictatorship, which some persons in
the nineteenth century used to prophesy as the ultimate outcome of
democracy?  Indeed, this last question does not seem so very
unreasonable, since you have turned your Parliament House into a dung-
market.  Or where do you house your present Parliament?"

The old man answered my smile with a hearty laugh, and said: "Well, well,
dung is not the worst kind of corruption; fertility may come of that,
whereas mere dearth came from the other kind, of which those walls once
held the great supporters.  Now, dear guest, let me tell you that our
present parliament would be hard to house in one place, because the whole
people is our parliament."

"I don't understand," said I.

"No, I suppose not," said he.  "I must now shock you by telling you that
we have no longer anything which you, a native of another planet, would
call a government."

"I am not so much shocked as you might think," said I, "as I know
something about governments.  But tell me, how do you manage, and how
have you come to this state of things?"

Said he: "It is true that we have to make some arrangements about our
affairs, concerning which you can ask presently; and it is also true that
everybody does not always agree with the details of these arrangements;
but, further, it is true that a man no more needs an elaborate system of
government, with its army, navy, and police, to force him to give way to
the will of the majority of his _equals_, than he wants a similar
machinery to make him understand that his head and a stone wall cannot
occupy the same space at the same moment.  Do you want further
explanation?"

"Well, yes, I do," quoth I.

Old Hammond settled himself in his chair with a look of enjoyment which
rather alarmed me, and made me dread a scientific disquisition: so I
sighed and abided.  He said:

"I suppose you know pretty well what the process of government was in the
bad old times?"

"I am supposed to know," said I.

(Hammond)  What was the government of those days?  Was it really the
Parliament or any part of it?

(I)  No.

(H.)  Was not the Parliament on the one side a kind of watch-committee
sitting to see that the interests of the Upper Classes took no hurt; and
on the other side a sort of blind to delude the people into supposing
that they had some share in the management of their own affairs?

(I)  History seems to show us this.

(H.)  To what extent did the people manage their own affairs?

(I)  I judge from what I have heard that sometimes they forced the
Parliament to make a law to legalise some alteration which had already
taken place.

(H.)  Anything else?

(I)  I think not.  As I am informed, if the people made any attempt to
deal with the _cause_ of their grievances, the law stepped in and said,
this is sedition, revolt, or what not, and slew or tortured the
ringleaders of such attempts.

(H.)  If Parliament was not the government then, nor the people either,
what was the government?

(I)  Can you tell me?

(H.)  I think we shall not be far wrong if we say that government was the
Law-Courts, backed up by the executive, which handled the brute force
that the deluded people allowed them to use for their own purposes; I
mean the army, navy, and police.

(I)  Reasonable men must needs think you are right.

(H.)  Now as to those Law-Courts.  Were they places of fair dealing
according to the ideas of the day?  Had a poor man a good chance of
defending his property and person in them?

(I)  It is a commonplace that even rich men looked upon a law-suit as a
dire misfortune, even if they gained the case; and as for a poor one--why,
it was considered a miracle of justice and beneficence if a poor man who
had once got into the clutches of the law escaped prison or utter ruin.

(H.)  It seems, then, my son, that the government by law-courts and
police, which was the real government of the nineteenth century, was not
a great success even to the people of that day, living under a class
system which proclaimed inequality and poverty as the law of God and the
bond which held the world together.

(I)  So it seems, indeed.

(H.)  And now that all this is changed, and the "rights of property,"
which mean the clenching the fist on a piece of goods and crying out to
the neighbours, You shan't have this!--now that all this has disappeared
so utterly that it is no longer possible even to jest upon its absurdity,
is such a Government possible?

(I)  It is impossible.

(H.)  Yes, happily.  But for what other purpose than the protection of
the rich from the poor, the strong from the weak, did this Government
exist?

(I.)  I have heard that it was said that their office was to defend their
own citizens against attack from other countries.

(H.)  It was said; but was anyone expected to believe this?  For
instance, did the English Government defend the English citizen against
the French?

(I)  So it was said.

(H.)  Then if the French had invaded England and conquered it, they would
not have allowed the English workmen to live well?

(I, laughing)  As far as I can make out, the English masters of the
English workmen saw to that: they took from their workmen as much of
their livelihood as they dared, because they wanted it for themselves.

(H.)  But if the French had conquered, would they not have taken more
still from the English workmen?

(I)  I do not think so; for in that case the English workmen would have
died of starvation; and then the French conquest would have ruined the
French, just as if the English horses and cattle had died of
under-feeding.  So that after all, the English _workmen_ would have been
no worse off for the conquest: their French Masters could have got no
more from them than their English masters did.

(H.)  This is true; and we may admit that the pretensions of the
government to defend the poor (_i.e._, the useful) people against other
countries come to nothing.  But that is but natural; for we have seen
already that it was the function of government to protect the rich
against the poor.  But did not the government defend its rich men against
other nations?

(I)  I do not remember to have heard that the rich needed defence;
because it is said that even when two nations were at war, the rich men
of each nation gambled with each other pretty much as usual, and even
sold each other weapons wherewith to kill their own countrymen.

(H.)  In short, it comes to this, that whereas the so-called government
of protection of property by means of the law-courts meant destruction of
wealth, this defence of the citizens of one country against those of
another country by means of war or the threat of war meant pretty much
the same thing.

(I)  I cannot deny it.

(H.)  Therefore the government really existed for the destruction of
wealth?

(I)  So it seems.  And yet--

(H.)  Yet what?

(I)  There were many rich people in those times.

(H.)  You see the consequences of that fact?

(I)  I think I do.  But tell me out what they were.

(H.)  If the government habitually destroyed wealth, the country must
have been poor?

(I)  Yes, certainly.

(H.)  Yet amidst this poverty the persons for the sake of whom the
government existed insisted on being rich whatever might happen?

(I)  So it was.

(H.)  What must happen if in a poor country some people insist on being
rich at the expense of the others?

(I)  Unutterable poverty for the others.  All this misery, then, was
caused by the destructive government of which we have been speaking?

(H.)  Nay, it would be incorrect to say so.  The government itself was
but the necessary result of the careless, aimless tyranny of the times;
it was but the machinery of tyranny.  Now tyranny has come to an end, and
we no longer need such machinery; we could not possibly use it since we
are free.  Therefore in your sense of the word we have no government.  Do
you understand this now?

(I)  Yes, I do.  But I will ask you some more questions as to how you as
free men manage your affairs.

(H.)  With all my heart.  Ask away.




CHAPTER XII: CONCERNING THE ARRANGEMENT OF LIFE


"Well," I said, "about those 'arrangements' which you spoke of as taking
the place of government, could you give me any account of them?"

"Neighbour," he said, "although we have simplified our lives a great deal
from what they were, and have got rid of many conventionalities and many
sham wants, which used to give our forefathers much trouble, yet our life
is too complex for me to tell you in detail by means of words how it is
arranged; you must find that out by living amongst us.  It is true that I
can better tell you what we don't do, than what we do do."

"Well?" said I.

"This is the way to put it," said he: "We have been living for a hundred
and fifty years, at least, more or less in our present manner, and a
tradition or habit of life has been growing on us; and that habit has
become a habit of acting on the whole for the best.  It is easy for us to
live without robbing each other.  It would be possible for us to contend
with and rob each other, but it would be harder for us than refraining
from strife and robbery.  That is in short the foundation of our life and
our happiness."

"Whereas in the old days," said I, "it was very hard to live without
strife and robbery.  That's what you mean, isn't it, by giving me the
negative side of your good conditions?"

"Yes," he said, "it was so hard, that those who habitually acted fairly
to their neighbours were celebrated as saints and heroes, and were looked
up to with the greatest reverence."

"While they were alive?" said I.

"No," said he, "after they were dead."

"But as to these days," I said; "you don't mean to tell me that no one
ever transgresses this habit of good fellowship?"

"Certainly not," said Hammond, "but when the transgressions occur,
everybody, transgressors and all, know them for what they are; the errors
of friends, not the habitual actions of persons driven into enmity
against society."

"I see," said I; "you mean that you have no 'criminal' classes."

"How could we have them," said he, "since there is no rich class to breed
enemies against the state by means of the injustice of the state?"

Said I: "I thought that I understood from something that fell from you a
little while ago that you had abolished civil law.  Is that so,
literally?"

"It abolished itself, my friend," said he.  "As I said before, the civil
law-courts were upheld for the defence of private property; for nobody
ever pretended that it was possible to make people act fairly to each
other by means of brute force.  Well, private property being abolished,
all the laws and all the legal 'crimes' which it had manufactured of
course came to an end.  Thou shalt not steal, had to be translated into,
Thou shalt work in order to live happily.  Is there any need to enforce
that commandment by violence?"

"Well," said I, "that is understood, and I agree with it; but how about
crimes of violence? would not their occurrence (and you admit that they
occur) make criminal law necessary?"

Said he: "In your sense of the word, we have no criminal law either.  Let
us look at the matter closer, and see whence crimes of violence spring.
By far the greater part of these in past days were the result of the laws
of private property, which forbade the satisfaction of their natural
desires to all but a privileged few, and of the general visible coercion
which came of those laws.  All that cause of violent crime is gone.
Again, many violent acts came from the artificial perversion of the
sexual passions, which caused overweening jealousy and the like miseries.
Now, when you look carefully into these, you will find that what lay at
the bottom of them was mostly the idea (a law-made idea) of the woman
being the property of the man, whether he were husband, father, brother,
or what not.  That idea has of course vanished with private property, as
well as certain follies about the 'ruin' of women for following their
natural desires in an illegal way, which of course was a convention
caused by the laws of private property.

"Another cognate cause of crimes of violence was the family tyranny,
which was the subject of so many novels and stories of the past, and
which once more was the result of private property.  Of course that is
all ended, since families are held together by no bond of coercion, legal
or social, but by mutual liking and affection, and everybody is free to
come or go as he or she pleases.  Furthermore, our standards of honour
and public estimation are very different from the old ones; success in
besting our neighbours is a road to renown now closed, let us hope for
ever.  Each man is free to exercise his special faculty to the utmost,
and every one encourages him in so doing.  So that we have got rid of the
scowling envy, coupled by the poets with hatred, and surely with good
reason; heaps of unhappiness and ill-blood were caused by it, which with
irritable and passionate men--_i.e._, energetic and active men--often led
to violence."

I laughed, and said: "So that you now withdraw your admission, and say
that there is no violence amongst you?"

"No," said he, "I withdraw nothing; as I told you, such things will
happen.  Hot blood will err sometimes.  A man may strike another, and the
stricken strike back again, and the result be a homicide, to put it at
the worst.  But what then?  Shall we the neighbours make it worse still?
Shall we think so poorly of each other as to suppose that the slain man
calls on us to revenge him, when we know that if he had been maimed, he
would, when in cold blood and able to weigh all the circumstances, have
forgiven his manner?  Or will the death of the slayer bring the slain man
to life again and cure the unhappiness his loss has caused?"

"Yes," I said, "but consider, must not the safety of society be
safeguarded by some punishment?"

"There, neighbour!" said the old man, with some exultation "You have hit
the mark.  That _punishment_ of which men used to talk so wisely and act
so foolishly, what was it but the expression of their fear?  And they had
need to fear, since they--_i.e._, the rulers of society--were dwelling
like an armed band in a hostile country.  But we who live amongst our
friends need neither fear nor punish.  Surely if we, in dread of an
occasional rare homicide, an occasional rough blow, were solemnly and
legally to commit homicide and violence, we could only be a society of
ferocious cowards.  Don't you think so, neighbour?"

"Yes, I do, when I come to think of it from that side," said I.

"Yet you must understand," said the old man, "that when any violence is
committed, we expect the transgressor to make any atonement possible to
him, and he himself expects it.  But again, think if the destruction or
serious injury of a man momentarily overcome by wrath or folly can be any
atonement to the commonwealth?  Surely it can only be an additional
injury to it."

Said I: "But suppose the man has a habit of violence,--kills a man a
year, for instance?"

"Such a thing is unknown," said he.  "In a society where there is no
punishment to evade, no law to triumph over, remorse will certainly
follow transgression."

"And lesser outbreaks of violence," said I, "how do you deal with them?
for hitherto we have been talking of great tragedies, I suppose?"

Said Hammond: "If the ill-doer is not sick or mad (in which case he must
be restrained till his sickness or madness is cured) it is clear that
grief and humiliation must follow the ill-deed; and society in general
will make that pretty clear to the ill-doer if he should chance to be
dull to it; and again, some kind of atonement will follow,--at the least,
an open acknowledgement of the grief and humiliation.  Is it so hard to
say, I ask your pardon, neighbour?--Well, sometimes it is hard--and let
it be."

"You think that enough?" said I.

"Yes," said he, "and moreover it is all that we _can_ do.  If in addition
we torture the man, we turn his grief into anger, and the humiliation he
would otherwise feel for _his_ wrong-doing is swallowed up by a hope of
revenge for _our_ wrong-doing to him.  He has paid the legal penalty, and
can 'go and sin again' with comfort.  Shall we commit such a folly, then?
Remember Jesus had got the legal penalty remitted before he said 'Go and
sin no more.'  Let alone that in a society of equals you will not find
any one to play the part of torturer or jailer, though many to act as
nurse or doctor."

"So," said I, "you consider crime a mere spasmodic disease, which
requires no body of criminal law to deal with it?"

"Pretty much so," said he; "and since, as I have told you, we are a
healthy people generally, so we are not likely to be much troubled with
_this_ disease."

"Well, you have no civil law, and no criminal law.  But have you no laws
of the market, so to say--no regulation for the exchange of wares? for
you must exchange, even if you have no property."

Said he: "We have no obvious individual exchange, as you saw this morning
when you went a-shopping; but of course there are regulations of the
markets, varying according to the circumstances and guided by general
custom.  But as these are matters of general assent, which nobody dreams
of objecting to, so also we have made no provision for enforcing them:
therefore I don't call them laws.  In law, whether it be criminal or
civil, execution always follows judgment, and someone must suffer.  When
you see the judge on his bench, you see through him, as clearly as if he
were made of glass, the policeman to emprison, and the soldier to slay
some actual living person.  Such follies would make an agreeable market,
wouldn't they?"

"Certainly," said I, "that means turning the market into a mere battle-
field, in which many people must suffer as much as in the battle-field of
bullet and bayonet.  And from what I have seen I should suppose that your
marketing, great and little, is carried on in a way that makes it a
pleasant occupation."

"You are right, neighbour," said he.  "Although there are so many, indeed
by far the greater number amongst us, who would be unhappy if they were
not engaged in actually making things, and things which turn out
beautiful under their hands,--there are many, like the housekeepers I was
speaking of, whose delight is in administration and organisation, to use
long-tailed words; I mean people who like keeping things together,
avoiding waste, seeing that nothing sticks fast uselessly.  Such people
are thoroughly happy in their business, all the more as they are dealing
with actual facts, and not merely passing counters round to see what
share they shall have in the privileged taxation of useful people, which
was the business of the commercial folk in past days.  Well, what are you
going to ask me next?"




CHAPTER XIII: CONCERNING POLITICS


Said I: "How do you manage with politics?"

Said Hammond, smiling: "I am glad that it is of _me_ that you ask that
question; I do believe that anybody else would make you explain yourself,
or try to do so, till you were sickened of asking questions.  Indeed, I
believe I am the only man in England who would know what you mean; and
since I know, I will answer your question briefly by saying that we are
very well off as to politics,--because we have none.  If ever you make a
book out of this conversation, put this in a chapter by itself, after the
model of old Horrebow's Snakes in Iceland."

"I will," said I.




CHAPTER XIV: HOW MATTERS ARE MANAGED


Said I: "How about your relations with foreign nations?"

"I will not affect not to know what you mean," said he, "but I will tell
you at once that the whole system of rival and contending nations which
played so great a part in the 'government' of the world of civilisation
has disappeared along with the inequality betwixt man and man in
society."

"Does not that make the world duller?" said I.

"Why?" said the old man.

"The obliteration of national variety," said I.

"Nonsense," he said, somewhat snappishly.  "Cross the water and see.  You
will find plenty of variety: the landscape, the building, the diet, the
amusements, all various.  The men and women varying in looks as well as
in habits of thought; the costume far more various than in the commercial
period.  How should it add to the variety or dispel the dulness, to
coerce certain families or tribes, often heterogeneous and jarring with
one another, into certain artificial and mechanical groups, and call them
nations, and stimulate their patriotism--_i.e._, their foolish and
envious prejudices?"

"Well--I don't know how," said I.

"That's right," said Hammond cheerily; "you can easily understand that
now we are freed from this folly it is obvious to us that by means of
this very diversity the different strains of blood in the world can be
serviceable and pleasant to each other, without in the least wanting to
rob each other: we are all bent on the same enterprise, making the most
of our lives.  And I must tell you whatever quarrels or misunderstandings
arise, they very seldom take place between people of different race; and
consequently since there is less unreason in them, they are the more
readily appeased."

"Good," said I, "but as to those matters of politics; as to general
differences of opinion in one and the same community.  Do you assert that
there are none?"

"No, not at all," said he, somewhat snappishly; "but I do say that
differences of opinion about real solid things need not, and with us do
not, crystallise people into parties permanently hostile to one another,
with different theories as to the build of the universe and the progress
of time.  Isn't that what politics used to mean?"

"H'm, well," said I, "I am not so sure of that."

Said he: "I take, you, neighbour; they only _pretended_ to this serious
difference of opinion; for if it had existed they could not have dealt
together in the ordinary business of life; couldn't have eaten together,
bought and sold together, gambled together, cheated other people
together, but must have fought whenever they met: which would not have
suited them at all.  The game of the masters of politics was to cajole or
force the public to pay the expense of a luxurious life and exciting
amusement for a few cliques of ambitious persons: and the _pretence_ of
serious difference of opinion, belied by every action of their lives, was
quite good enough for that.  What has all that got to do with us?"

Said I: "Why, nothing, I should hope.  But I fear--In short, I have been
told that political strife was a necessary result of human nature."

"Human nature!" cried the old boy, impetuously; "what human nature?  The
human nature of paupers, of slaves, of slave-holders, or the human nature
of wealthy freemen?  Which?  Come, tell me that!"

"Well," said I, "I suppose there would be a difference according to
circumstances in people's action about these matters."

"I should think so, indeed," said he.  "At all events, experience shows
that it is so.  Amongst us, our differences concern matters of business,
and passing events as to them, and could not divide men permanently.  As
a rule, the immediate outcome shows which opinion on a given subject is
the right one; it is a matter of fact, not of speculation.  For instance,
it is clearly not easy to knock up a political party on the question as
to whether haymaking in such and such a country-side shall begin this
week or next, when all men agree that it must at latest begin the week
after next, and when any man can go down into the fields himself and see
whether the seeds are ripe enough for the cutting."

Said I: "And you settle these differences, great and small, by the will
of the majority, I suppose?"

"Certainly," said he; "how else could we settle them?  You see in matters
which are merely personal which do not affect the welfare of the
community--how a man shall dress, what he shall eat and drink, what he
shall write and read, and so forth--there can be no difference of
opinion, and everybody does as he pleases.  But when the matter is of
common interest to the whole community, and the doing or not doing
something affects everybody, the majority must have their way; unless the
minority were to take up arms and show by force that they were the
effective or real majority; which, however, in a society of men who are
free and equal is little likely to happen; because in such a community
the apparent majority _is_ the real majority, and the others, as I have
hinted before, know that too well to obstruct from mere pigheadedness;
especially as they have had plenty of opportunity of putting forward
their side of the question."

"How is that managed?" said I.

"Well," said he, "let us take one of our units of management, a commune,
or a ward, or a parish (for we have all three names, indicating little
real distinction between them now, though time was there was a good
deal).  In such a district, as you would call it, some neighbours think
that something ought to be done or undone: a new town-hall built; a
clearance of inconvenient houses; or say a stone bridge substituted for
some ugly old iron one,--there you have undoing and doing in one.  Well,
at the next ordinary meeting of the neighbours, or Mote, as we call it,
according to the ancient tongue of the times before bureaucracy, a
neighbour proposes the change, and of course, if everybody agrees, there
is an end of discussion, except about details.  Equally, if no one backs
the proposer,--'seconds him,' it used to be called--the matter drops for
the time being; a thing not likely to happen amongst reasonable men,
however, as the proposer is sure to have talked it over with others
before the Mote.  But supposing the affair proposed and seconded, if a
few of the neighbours disagree to it, if they think that the beastly iron
bridge will serve a little longer and they don't want to be bothered with
building a new one just then, they don't count heads that time, but put
off the formal discussion to the next Mote; and meantime arguments _pro_
and _con_ are flying about, and some get printed, so that everybody knows
what is going on; and when the Mote comes together again there is a
regular discussion and at last a vote by show of hands.  If the division
is a close one, the question is again put off for further discussion; if
the division is a wide one, the minority are asked if they will yield to
the more general opinion, which they often, nay, most commonly do.  If
they refuse, the question is debated a third time, when, if the minority
has not perceptibly grown, they always give way; though I believe there
is some half-forgotten rule by which they might still carry it on
further; but I say, what always happens is that they are convinced, not
perhaps that their view is the wrong one, but they cannot persuade or
force the community to adopt it."

"Very good," said I; "but what happens if the divisions are still
narrow?"

Said he: "As a matter of principle and according to the rule of such
cases, the question must then lapse, and the majority, if so narrow, has
to submit to sitting down under the _status quo_.  But I must tell you
that in point of fact the minority very seldom enforces this rule, but
generally yields in a friendly manner."

"But do you know," said I, "that there is something in all this very like
democracy; and I thought that democracy was considered to be in a
moribund condition many, many years ago."

The old boy's eyes twinkled.  "I grant you that our methods have that
drawback.  But what is to be done?  We can't get _anyone_ amongst us to
complain of his not always having his own way in the teeth of the
community, when it is clear that _everybody_ cannot have that indulgence.
What is to be done?"

"Well," said I, "I don't know."

Said he: "The only alternatives to our method that I can conceive of are
these.  First, that we should choose out, or breed, a class of superior
persons capable of judging on all matters without consulting the
neighbours; that, in short, we should get for ourselves what used to be
called an aristocracy of intellect; or, secondly, that for the purpose of
safe-guarding the freedom of the individual will, we should revert to a
system of private property again, and have slaves and slave-holders once
more.  What do you think of those two expedients?"

"Well," said I, "there is a third possibility--to wit, that every man
should be quite independent of every other, and that thus the tyranny of
society should be abolished."

He looked hard at me for a second or two, and then burst out laughing
very heartily; and I confess that I joined him.  When he recovered
himself he nodded at me, and said: "Yes, yes, I quite agree with you--and
so we all do."

"Yes," I said, "and besides, it does not press hardly on the minority:
for, take this matter of the bridge, no man is obliged to work on it if
he doesn't agree to its building.  At least, I suppose not."

He smiled, and said: "Shrewdly put; and yet from the point of view of the
native of another planet.  If the man of the minority does find his
feelings hurt, doubtless he may relieve them by refusing to help in
building the bridge.  But, dear neighbour, that is not a very effective
salve for the wound caused by the 'tyranny of a majority' in our society;
because all work that is done is either beneficial or hurtful to every
member of society.  The man is benefited by the bridge-building if it
turns out a good thing, and hurt by it if it turns out a bad one, whether
he puts a hand to it or not; and meanwhile he is benefiting the bridge-
builders by his work, whatever that may be.  In fact, I see no help for
him except the pleasure of saying 'I told you so' if the bridge-building
turns out to be a mistake and hurts him; if it benefits him he must
suffer in silence.  A terrible tyranny our Communism, is it not?  Folk
used often to be warned against this very unhappiness in times past, when
for every well-fed, contented person you saw a thousand miserable
starvelings.  Whereas for us, we grow fat and well-liking on the tyranny;
a tyranny, to say the truth, not to be made visible by any microscope I
know.  Don't be afraid, my friend; we are not going to seek for troubles
by calling our peace and plenty and happiness by ill names whose very
meaning we have forgotten!"

He sat musing for a little, and then started and said: "Are there any
more questions, dear guest?  The morning is waning fast amidst my
garrulity?"




CHAPTER XV: ON THE LACK OF INCENTIVE TO LABOUR IN A COMMUNIST SOCIETY


"Yes," said I.  "I was expecting Dick and Clara to make their appearance
any moment: but is there time to ask just one or two questions before
they come?"

"Try it, dear neighbour--try it," said old Hammond.  "For the more you
ask me the better I am pleased; and at any rate if they do come and find
me in the middle of an answer, they must sit quiet and pretend to listen
till I come to an end.  It won't hurt them; they will find it quite
amusing enough to sit side by side, conscious of their proximity to each
other."

I smiled, as I was bound to, and said: "Good; I will go on talking
without noticing them when they come in.  Now, this is what I want to ask
you about--to wit, how you get people to work when there is no reward of
labour, and especially how you get them to work strenuously?"

"No reward of labour?" said Hammond, gravely.  "The reward of labour is
_life_.  Is that not enough?"

"But no reward for especially good work," quoth I.

"Plenty of reward," said he--"the reward of creation.  The wages which
God gets, as people might have said time agone.  If you are going to ask
to be paid for the pleasure of creation, which is what excellence in work
means, the next thing we shall hear of will be a bill sent in for the
begetting of children."

"Well, but," said I, "the man of the nineteenth century would say there
is a natural desire towards the procreation of children, and a natural
desire not to work."

"Yes, yes," said he, "I know the ancient platitude,--wholly untrue;
indeed, to us quite meaningless.  Fourier, whom all men laughed at,
understood the matter better."

"Why is it meaningless to you?" said I.

He said: "Because it implies that all work is suffering, and we are so
far from thinking that, that, as you may have noticed, whereas we are not
short of wealth, there is a kind of fear growing up amongst us that we
shall one day be short of work.  It is a pleasure which we are afraid of
losing, not a pain."

"Yes," said I, "I have noticed that, and I was going to ask you about
that also.  But in the meantime, what do you positively mean to assert
about the pleasurableness of work amongst you?"

"This, that _all_ work is now pleasurable; either because of the hope of
gain in honour and wealth with which the work is done, which causes
pleasurable excitement, even when the actual work is not pleasant; or
else because it has grown into a pleasurable _habit_, as in the case with
what you may call mechanical work; and lastly (and most of our work is of
this kind) because there is conscious sensuous pleasure in the work
itself; it is done, that is, by artists."

"I see," said I.  "Can you now tell me how you have come to this happy
condition?  For, to speak plainly, this change from the conditions of the
older world seems to me far greater and more important than all the other
changes you have told me about as to crime, politics, property,
marriage."

"You are right there," said he.  "Indeed, you may say rather that it is
this change which makes all the others possible.  What is the object of
Revolution?  Surely to make people happy.  Revolution having brought its
foredoomed change about, how can you prevent the counter-revolution from
setting in except by making people happy?  What! shall we expect peace
and stability from unhappiness?  The gathering of grapes from thorns and
figs from thistles is a reasonable expectation compared with that!  And
happiness without happy daily work is impossible."

"Most obviously true," said I: for I thought the old boy was preaching a
little.  "But answer my question, as to how you gained this happiness."

"Briefly," said he, "by the absence of artificial coercion, and the
freedom for every man to do what he can do best, joined to the knowledge
of what productions of labour we really wanted.  I must admit that this
knowledge we reached slowly and painfully."

"Go on," said I, "give me more detail; explain more fully.  For this
subject interests me intensely."

"Yes, I will," said he; "but in order to do so I must weary you by
talking a little about the past.  Contrast is necessary for this
explanation.  Do you mind?"

"No, no," said I.

Said he, settling himself in his chair again for a long talk: "It is
clear from all that we hear and read, that in the last age of
civilisation men had got into a vicious circle in the matter of
production of wares.  They had reached a wonderful facility of
production, and in order to make the most of that facility they had
gradually created (or allowed to grow, rather) a most elaborate system of
buying and selling, which has been called the World-Market; and that
World-Market, once set a-going, forced them to go on making more and more
of these wares, whether they needed them or not.  So that while (of
course) they could not free themselves from the toil of making real
necessaries, they created in a never-ending series sham or artificial
necessaries, which became, under the iron rule of the aforesaid World-
Market, of equal importance to them with the real necessaries which
supported life.  By all this they burdened themselves with a prodigious
mass of work merely for the sake of keeping their wretched system going."

"Yes--and then?" said I.

"Why, then, since they had forced themselves to stagger along under this
horrible burden of unnecessary production, it became impossible for them
to look upon labour and its results from any other point of view than
one--to wit, the ceaseless endeavour to expend the least possible amount
of labour on any article made, and yet at the same time to make as many
articles as possible.  To this 'cheapening of production', as it was
called, everything was sacrificed: the happiness of the workman at his
work, nay, his most elementary comfort and bare health, his food, his
clothes, his dwelling, his leisure, his amusement, his education--his
life, in short--did not weigh a grain of sand in the balance against this
dire necessity of 'cheap production' of things, a great part of which
were not worth producing at all.  Nay, we are told, and we must believe
it, so overwhelming is the evidence, though many of our people scarcely
_can_ believe it, that even rich and powerful men, the masters of the
poor devils aforesaid, submitted to live amidst sights and sounds and
smells which it is in the very nature of man to abhor and flee from, in
order that their riches might bolster up this supreme folly.  The whole
community, in fact, was cast into the jaws of this ravening monster, 'the
cheap production' forced upon it by the World-Market."

"Dear me!" said I.  "But what happened?  Did not their cleverness and
facility in production master this chaos of misery at last?  Couldn't
they catch up with the World-Market, and then set to work to devise means
for relieving themselves from this fearful task of extra labour?"

He smiled bitterly.  "Did they even try to?" said he.  "I am not sure.
You know that according to the old saw the beetle gets used to living in
dung; and these people, whether they found the dung sweet or not,
certainly lived in it."

His estimate of the life of the nineteenth century made me catch my
breath a little; and I said feebly, "But the labour-saving machines?"

"Heyday!" quoth he.  "What's that you are saying? the labour-saving
machines?  Yes, they were made to 'save labour' (or, to speak more
plainly, the lives of men) on one piece of work in order that it might be
expended--I will say wasted--on another, probably useless, piece of work.
Friend, all their devices for cheapening labour simply resulted in
increasing the burden of labour.  The appetite of the World-Market grew
with what it fed on: the countries within the ring of 'civilisation'
(that is, organised misery) were glutted with the abortions of the
market, and force and fraud were used unsparingly to 'open up' countries
_outside_ that pale.  This process of 'opening up' is a strange one to
those who have read the professions of the men of that period and do not
understand their practice; and perhaps shows us at its worst the great
vice of the nineteenth century, the use of hypocrisy and cant to evade
the responsibility of vicarious ferocity.  When the civilised
World-Market coveted a country not yet in its clutches, some transparent
pretext was found--the suppression of a slavery different from and not so
cruel as that of commerce; the pushing of a religion no longer believed
in by its promoters; the 'rescue' of some desperado or homicidal madman
whose misdeeds had got him into trouble amongst the natives of the
'barbarous' country--any stick, in short, which would beat the dog at
all.  Then some bold, unprincipled, ignorant adventurer was found (no
difficult task in the days of competition), and he was bribed to 'create
a market' by breaking up whatever traditional society there might be in
the doomed country, and by destroying whatever leisure or pleasure he
found there.  He forced wares on the natives which they did not want, and
took their natural products in 'exchange,' as this form of robbery was
called, and thereby he 'created new wants,' to supply which (that is, to
be allowed to live by their new masters) the hapless, helpless people had
to sell themselves into the slavery of hopeless toil so that they might
have something wherewith to purchase the nullities of 'civilisation.'

"Ah," said the old man, pointing to the Museum, "I have read books and
papers in there, telling strange stories indeed of the dealings of
civilisation (or organised misery) with 'non-civilisation'; from the time
when the British Government deliberately sent blankets infected with
small-pox as choice gifts to inconvenient tribes of Red-skins, to the
time when Africa was infested by a man named Stanley, who--"

"Excuse me," said I, "but as you know, time presses; and I want to keep
our question on the straightest line possible; and I want at once to ask
this about these wares made for the World-Market--how about their
quality; these people who were so clever about making goods, I suppose
they made them well?"

"Quality!" said the old man crustily, for he was rather peevish at being
cut short in his story; "how could they possibly attend to such trifles
as the quality of the wares they sold?  The best of them were of a lowish
average, the worst were transparent make-shifts for the things asked for,
which nobody would have put up with if they could have got anything else.
It was a current jest of the time that the wares were made to sell and
not to use; a jest which you, as coming from another planet, may
understand, but which our folk could not."

Said I: "What! did they make nothing well?"

"Why, yes," said he, "there was one class of goods which they did make
thoroughly well, and that was the class of machines which were used for
making things.  These were usually quite perfect pieces of workmanship,
admirably adapted to the end in view.  So that it may be fairly said that
the great achievement of the nineteenth century was the making of
machines which were wonders of invention, skill, and patience, and which
were used for the production of measureless quantities of worthless make-
shifts.  In truth, the owners of the machines did not consider anything
which they made as wares, but simply as means for the enrichment of
themselves.  Of course the only admitted test of utility in wares was the
finding of buyers for them--wise men or fools, as it might chance."

"And people put up with this?" said I.

"For a time," said he.

"And then?"

"And then the overturn," said the old man, smiling, "and the nineteenth
century saw itself as a man who has lost his clothes whilst bathing, and
has to walk naked through the town."

"You are very bitter about that unlucky nineteenth century," said I.

"Naturally," said he, "since I know so much about it."

He was silent a little, and then said: "There are traditions--nay, real
histories--in our family about it: my grandfather was one of its victims.
If you know something about it, you will understand what he suffered when
I tell you that he was in those days a genuine artist, a man of genius,
and a revolutionist."

"I think I do understand," said I: "but now, as it seems, you have
reversed all this?"

"Pretty much so," said he.  "The wares which we make are made because
they are needed: men make for their neighbours' use as if they were
making for themselves, not for a vague market of which they know nothing,
and over which they have no control: as there is no buying and selling,
it would be mere insanity to make goods on the chance of their being
wanted; for there is no longer anyone who can be compelled to buy them.
So that whatever is made is good, and thoroughly fit for its purpose.
Nothing can be made except for genuine use; therefore no inferior goods
are made.  Moreover, as aforesaid, we have now found out what we want, so
we make no more than we want; and as we are not driven to make a vast
quantity of useless things we have time and resources enough to consider
our pleasure in making them.  All work which would be irksome to do by
hand is done by immensely improved machinery; and in all work which it is
a pleasure to do by hand machinery is done without.  There is no
difficulty in finding work which suits the special turn of mind of
everybody; so that no man is sacrificed to the wants of another.  From
time to time, when we have found out that some piece of work was too
disagreeable or troublesome, we have given it up and done altogether
without the thing produced by it.  Now, surely you can see that under
these circumstances all the work that we do is an exercise of the mind
and body more or less pleasant to be done: so that instead of avoiding
work everybody seeks it: and, since people have got defter in doing the
work generation after generation, it has become so easy to do, that it
seems as if there were less done, though probably more is produced.  I
suppose this explains that fear, which I hinted at just now, of a
possible scarcity in work, which perhaps you have already noticed, and
which is a feeling on the increase, and has been for a score of years."

"But do you think," said I, "that there is any fear of a work-famine
amongst you?"

"No, I do not," said he, "and I will tell why; it is each man's business
to make his own work pleasanter and pleasanter, which of course tends
towards raising the standard of excellence, as no man enjoys turning out
work which is not a credit to him, and also to greater deliberation in
turning it out; and there is such a vast number of things which can be
treated as works of art, that this alone gives employment to a host of
deft people.  Again, if art be inexhaustible, so is science also; and
though it is no longer the only innocent occupation which is thought
worth an intelligent man spending his time upon, as it once was, yet
there are, and I suppose will be, many people who are excited by its
conquest of difficulties, and care for it more than for anything else.
Again, as more and more of pleasure is imported into work, I think we
shall take up kinds of work which produce desirable wares, but which we
gave up because we could not carry them on pleasantly.  Moreover, I think
that it is only in parts of Europe which are more advanced than the rest
of the world that you will hear this talk of the fear of a work-famine.
Those lands which were once the colonies of Great Britain, for instance,
and especially America--that part of it, above all, which was once the
United states--are now and will be for a long while a great resource to
us.  For these lands, and, I say, especially the northern parts of
America, suffered so terribly from the full force of the last days of
civilisation, and became such horrible places to live in, that they are
now very backward in all that makes life pleasant.  Indeed, one may say
that for nearly a hundred years the people of the northern parts of
America have been engaged in gradually making a dwelling-place out of a
stinking dust-heap; and there is still a great deal to do, especially as
the country is so big."

"Well," said I, "I am exceedingly glad to think that you have such a
prospect of happiness before you.  But I should like to ask a few more
questions, and then I have done for to-day."




CHAPTER XVI: DINNER IN THE HALL OF THE BLOOMSBURY MARKET


As I spoke, I heard footsteps near the door; the latch yielded, and in
came our two lovers, looking so handsome that one had no feeling of shame
in looking on at their little-concealed love-making; for indeed it seemed
as if all the world must be in love with them.  As for old Hammond, he
looked on them like an artist who has just painted a picture nearly as
well as he thought he could when he began it, and was perfectly happy.  He
said:

"Sit down, sit down, young folk, and don't make a noise.  Our guest here
has still some questions to ask me."

"Well, I should suppose so," said Dick; "you have only been three hours
and a half together; and it isn't to be hoped that the history of two
centuries could be told in three hours and a half: let alone that, for
all I know, you may have been wandering into the realms of geography and
craftsmanship."

"As to noise, my dear kinsman," said Clara, "you will very soon be
disturbed by the noise of the dinner-bell, which I should think will be
very pleasant music to our guest, who breakfasted early, it seems, and
probably had a tiring day yesterday."

I said: "Well, since you have spoken the word, I begin to feel that it is
so; but I have been feeding myself with wonder this long time past:
really, it's quite true," quoth I, as I saw her smile, O so prettily!  But
just then from some tower high up in the air came the sound of silvery
chimes playing a sweet clear tune, that sounded to my unaccustomed ears
like the song of the first blackbird in the spring, and called a rush of
memories to my mind, some of bad times, some of good, but all sweetened
now into mere pleasure.

"No more questions now before dinner," said Clara; and she took my hand
as an affectionate child would, and led me out of the room and down
stairs into the forecourt of the Museum, leaving the two Hammonds to
follow as they pleased.

We went into the market-place which I had been in before, a thinnish
stream of elegantly {1} dressed people going in along with us.  We turned
into the cloister and came to a richly moulded and carved doorway, where
a very pretty dark-haired young girl gave us each a beautiful bunch of
summer flowers, and we entered a hall much bigger than that of the
Hammersmith Guest House, more elaborate in its architecture and perhaps
more beautiful.  I found it difficult to keep my eyes off the
wall-pictures (for I thought it bad manners to stare at Clara all the
time, though she was quite worth it).  I saw at a glance that their
subjects were taken from queer old-world myths and imaginations which in
yesterday's world only about half a dozen people in the country knew
anything about; and when the two Hammonds sat down opposite to us, I said
to the old man, pointing to the frieze:

"How strange to see such subjects here!"

"Why?" said he.  "I don't see why you should be surprised; everybody
knows the tales; and they are graceful and pleasant subjects, not too
tragic for a place where people mostly eat and drink and amuse
themselves, and yet full of incident."

I smiled, and said: "Well, I scarcely expected to find record of the
Seven Swans and the King of the Golden Mountain and Faithful Henry, and
such curious pleasant imaginations as Jacob Grimm got together from the
childhood of the world, barely lingering even in his time: I should have
thought you would have forgotten such childishness by this time."

The old man smiled, and said nothing; but Dick turned rather red, and
broke out:

"What _do_ you mean, guest?  I think them very beautiful, I mean not only
the pictures, but the stories; and when we were children we used to
imagine them going on in every wood-end, by the bight of every stream:
every house in the fields was the Fairyland King's House to us.  Don't
you remember, Clara?"

"Yes," she said; and it seemed to me as if a slight cloud came over her
fair face.  I was going to speak to her on the subject, when the pretty
waitresses came to us smiling, and chattering sweetly like reed warblers
by the river side, and fell to giving us our dinner.  As to this, as at
our breakfast, everything was cooked and served with a daintiness which
showed that those who had prepared it were interested in it; but there
was no excess either of quantity or of gourmandise; everything was
simple, though so excellent of its kind; and it was made clear to us that
this was no feast, only an ordinary meal.  The glass, crockery, and plate
were very beautiful to my eyes, used to the study of mediaeval art; but a
nineteenth-century club-haunter would, I daresay, have found them rough
and lacking in finish; the crockery being lead-glazed pot-ware, though
beautifully ornamented; the only porcelain being here and there a piece
of old oriental ware.  The glass, again, though elegant and quaint, and
very varied in form, was somewhat bubbled and hornier in texture than the
commercial articles of the nineteenth century.  The furniture and general
fittings of the hall were much of a piece with the table-gear, beautiful
in form and highly ornamented, but without the commercial "finish" of the
joiners and cabinet-makers of our time.  Withal, there was a total
absence of what the nineteenth century calls "comfort"--that is, stuffy
inconvenience; so that, even apart from the delightful excitement of the
day, I had never eaten my dinner so pleasantly before.

When we had done eating, and were sitting a little while, with a bottle
of very good Bordeaux wine before us, Clara came back to the question of
the subject-matter of the pictures, as though it had troubled her.

She looked up at them, and said: "How is it that though we are so
interested with our life for the most part, yet when people take to
writing poems or painting pictures they seldom deal with our modern life,
or if they do, take good care to make their poems or pictures unlike that
life?  Are we not good enough to paint ourselves?  How is it that we find
the dreadful times of the past so interesting to us--in pictures and
poetry?"

Old Hammond smiled.  "It always was so, and I suppose always will be,"
said he, "however it may be explained.  It is true that in the nineteenth
century, when there was so little art and so much talk about it, there
was a theory that art and imaginative literature ought to deal with
contemporary life; but they never did so; for, if there was any pretence
of it, the author always took care (as Clara hinted just now) to
disguise, or exaggerate, or idealise, and in some way or another make it
strange; so that, for all the verisimilitude there was, he might just as
well have dealt with the times of the Pharaohs."

"Well," said Dick, "surely it is but natural to like these things
strange; just as when we were children, as I said just now, we used to
pretend to be so-and-so in such-and-such a place.  That's what these
pictures and poems do; and why shouldn't they?"

"Thou hast hit it, Dick," quoth old Hammond; "it is the child-like part
of us that produces works of imagination.  When we are children time
passes so slow with us that we seem to have time for everything."

He sighed, and then smiled and said: "At least let us rejoice that we
have got back our childhood again.  I drink to the days that are!"

"Second childhood," said I in a low voice, and then blushed at my double
rudeness, and hoped that he hadn't heard.  But he had, and turned to me
smiling, and said: "Yes, why not?  And for my part, I hope it may last
long; and that the world's next period of wise and unhappy manhood, if
that should happen, will speedily lead us to a third childhood: if indeed
this age be not our third.  Meantime, my friend, you must know that we
are too happy, both individually and collectively, to trouble ourselves
about what is to come hereafter."

"Well, for my part," said Clara, "I wish we were interesting enough to be
written or painted about."

Dick answered her with some lover's speech, impossible to be written
down, and then we sat quiet a little.




CHAPTER XVII: HOW THE CHANGE CAME


Dick broke the silence at last, saying: "Guest, forgive us for a little
after-dinner dulness.  What would you like to do?  Shall we have out
Greylocks and trot back to Hammersmith? or will you come with us and hear
some Welsh folk sing in a hall close by here? or would you like presently
to come with me into the City and see some really fine building? or--what
shall it be?"

"Well," said I, "as I am a stranger, I must let you choose for me."

In point of fact, I did not by any means want to be 'amused' just then;
and also I rather felt as if the old man, with his knowledge of past
times, and even a kind of inverted sympathy for them caused by his active
hatred of them, was as it were a blanket for me against the cold of this
very new world, where I was, so to say, stripped bare of every habitual
thought and way of acting; and I did not want to leave him too soon.  He
came to my rescue at once, and said--

"Wait a bit, Dick; there is someone else to be consulted besides you and
the guest here, and that is I.  I am not going to lose the pleasure of
his company just now, especially as I know he has something else to ask
me.  So go to your Welshmen, by all means; but first of all bring us
another bottle of wine to this nook, and then be off as soon as you like;
and come again and fetch our friend to go westward, but not too soon."

Dick nodded smilingly, and the old man and I were soon alone in the great
hall, the afternoon sun gleaming on the red wine in our tall
quaint-shaped glasses.  Then said Hammond:

"Does anything especially puzzle you about our way of living, now you
have heard a good deal and seen a little of it?"

Said I: "I think what puzzles me most is how it all came about."

"It well may," said he, "so great as the change is.  It would be
difficult indeed to tell you the whole story, perhaps impossible:
knowledge, discontent, treachery, disappointment, ruin, misery,
despair--those who worked for the change because they could see further
than other people went through all these phases of suffering; and
doubtless all the time the most of men looked on, not knowing what was
doing, thinking it all a matter of course, like the rising and setting of
the sun--and indeed it was so."

"Tell me one thing, if you can," said I.  "Did the change, the
'revolution' it used to be called, come peacefully?"

"Peacefully?" said he; "what peace was there amongst those poor confused
wretches of the nineteenth century?  It was war from beginning to end:
bitter war, till hope and pleasure put an end to it."

"Do you mean actual fighting with weapons?" said I, "or the strikes and
lock-outs and starvation of which we have heard?"

"Both, both," he said.  "As a matter of fact, the history of the terrible
period of transition from commercial slavery to freedom may thus be
summarised.  When the hope of realising a communal condition of life for
all men arose, quite late in the nineteenth century, the power of the
middle classes, the then tyrants of society, was so enormous and
crushing, that to almost all men, even those who had, you may say despite
themselves, despite their reason and judgment, conceived such hopes, it
seemed a dream.  So much was this the case that some of those more
enlightened men who were then called Socialists, although they well knew,
and even stated in public, that the only reasonable condition of Society
was that of pure Communism (such as you now see around you), yet shrunk
from what seemed to them the barren task of preaching the realisation of
a happy dream.  Looking back now, we can see that the great motive-power
of the change was a longing for freedom and equality, akin if you please
to the unreasonable passion of the lover; a sickness of heart that
rejected with loathing the aimless solitary life of the well-to-do
educated man of that time: phrases, my dear friend, which have lost their
meaning to us of the present day; so far removed we are from the dreadful
facts which they represent.

"Well, these men, though conscious of this feeling, had no faith in it,
as a means of bringing about the change.  Nor was that wonderful: for
looking around them they saw the huge mass of the oppressed classes too
much burdened with the misery of their lives, and too much overwhelmed by
the selfishness of misery, to be able to form a conception of any escape
from it except by the ordinary way prescribed by the system of slavery
under which they lived; which was nothing more than a remote chance of
climbing out of the oppressed into the oppressing class.

"Therefore, though they knew that the only reasonable aim for those who
would better the world was a condition of equality; in their impatience
and despair they managed to convince themselves that if they could by
hook or by crook get the machinery of production and the management of
property so altered that the 'lower classes' (so the horrible word ran)
might have their slavery somewhat ameliorated, they would be ready to fit
into this machinery, and would use it for bettering their condition still
more and still more, until at last the result would be a practical
equality (they were very fond of using the word 'practical'), because
'the rich' would be forced to pay so much for keeping 'the poor' in a
tolerable condition that the condition of riches would become no longer
valuable and would gradually die out.  Do you follow me?"

"Partly," said I.  "Go on."

Said old Hammond: "Well, since you follow me, you will see that as a
theory this was not altogether unreasonable; but 'practically,' it turned
out a failure."

"How so?" said I.

"Well, don't you see," said he, "because it involved the making of a
machinery by those who didn't know what they wanted the machines to do.
So far as the masses of the oppressed class furthered this scheme of
improvement, they did it to get themselves improved slave-rations--as
many of them as could.  And if those classes had really been incapable of
being touched by that instinct which produced the passion for freedom and
equality aforesaid, what would have happened, I think, would have been
this: that a certain part of the working classes would have been so far
improved in condition that they would have approached the condition of
the middling rich men; but below them would have been a great class of
most miserable slaves, whose slavery would have been far more hopeless
than the older class-slavery had been."

"What stood in the way of this?" said I.

"Why, of course," said he, "just that instinct for freedom aforesaid.  It
is true that the slave-class could not conceive the happiness of a free
life.  Yet they grew to understand (and very speedily too) that they were
oppressed by their masters, and they assumed, you see how justly, that
they could do without them, though perhaps they scarce knew how; so that
it came to this, that though they could not look forward to the happiness
or peace of the freeman, they did at least look forward to the war which
a vague hope told them would bring that peace about."

"Could you tell me rather more closely what actually took place?" said I;
for I thought _him_ rather vague here.

"Yes," he said, "I can.  That machinery of life for the use of people who
didn't know what they wanted of it, and which was known at the time as
State Socialism, was partly put in motion, though in a very piecemeal
way.  But it did not work smoothly; it was, of course, resisted at every
turn by the capitalists; and no wonder, for it tended more and more to
upset the commercial system I have told you of; without providing
anything really effective in its place.  The result was growing
confusion, great suffering amongst the working classes, and, as a
consequence, great discontent.  For a long time matters went on like
this.  The power of the upper classes had lessened, as their command over
wealth lessened, and they could not carry things wholly by the high hand
as they had been used to in earlier days.  So far the State Socialists
were justified by the result.  On the other hand, the working classes
were ill-organised, and growing poorer in reality, in spite of the gains
(also real in the long run) which they had forced from the masters.  Thus
matters hung in the balance; the masters could not reduce their slaves to
complete subjection, though they put down some feeble and partial riots
easily enough.  The workers forced their masters to grant them
ameliorations, real or imaginary, of their condition, but could not force
freedom from them.  At last came a great crash.  To explain this you must
understand that very great progress had been made amongst the workers,
though as before said but little in the direction of improved
livelihood."

I played the innocent and said: "In what direction could they improve, if
not in livelihood?"

Said he: "In the power to bring about a state of things in which
livelihood would be full, and easy to gain.  They had at last learned how
to combine after a long period of mistakes and disasters.  The workmen
had now a regular organization in the struggle against their masters, a
struggle which for more than half a century had been accepted as an
inevitable part of the conditions of the modern system of labour and
production.  This combination had now taken the form of a federation of
all or almost all the recognised wage-paid employments, and it was by its
means that those betterments of the conditions of the workmen had been
forced from the masters: and though they were not seldom mixed up with
the rioting that happened, especially in the earlier days of their
organization, it by no means formed an essential part of their tactics;
indeed at the time I am now speaking of they had got to be so strong that
most commonly the mere threat of a 'strike' was enough to gain any minor
point: because they had given up the foolish tactics of the ancient
trades unions of calling out of work a part only of the workers of such
and such an industry, and supporting them while out of work on the labour
of those that remained in.  By this time they had a biggish fund of money
for the support of strikes, and could stop a certain industry altogether
for a time if they so determined."

Said I: "Was there not a serious danger of such moneys being misused--of
jobbery, in fact?"

Old Hammond wriggled uneasily on his seat, and said:

"Though all this happened so long ago, I still feel the pain of mere
shame when I have to tell you that it was more than a danger: that such
rascality often happened; indeed more than once the whole combination
seemed dropping to pieces because of it: but at the time of which I am
telling, things looked so threatening, and to the workmen at least the
necessity of their dealing with the fast-gathering trouble which the
labour-struggle had brought about, was so clear, that the conditions of
the times had begot a deep seriousness amongst all reasonable people; a
determination which put aside all non-essentials, and which to thinking
men was ominous of the swiftly-approaching change: such an element was
too dangerous for mere traitors and self-seekers, and one by one they
were thrust out and mostly joined the declared reactionaries."

"How about those ameliorations," said I; "what were they? or rather of
what nature?"

Said he: "Some of them, and these of the most practical importance to the
mens' livelihood, were yielded by the masters by direct compulsion on the
part of the men; the new conditions of labour so gained were indeed only
customary, enforced by no law: but, once established, the masters durst
not attempt to withdraw them in face of the growing power of the combined
workers.  Some again were steps on the path of 'State Socialism'; the
most important of which can be speedily summed up.  At the end of the
nineteenth century the cry arose for compelling the masters to employ
their men a less number of hours in the day: this cry gathered volume
quickly, and the masters had to yield to it.  But it was, of course,
clear that unless this meant a higher price for work per hour, it would
be a mere nullity, and that the masters, unless forced, would reduce it
to that.  Therefore after a long struggle another law was passed fixing a
minimum price for labour in the most important industries; which again
had to be supplemented by a law fixing the maximum price on the chief
wares then considered necessary for a workman's life."

"You were getting perilously near to the late Roman poor-rates," said I,
smiling, "and the doling out of bread to the proletariat."

"So many said at the time," said the old man drily; "and it has long been
a commonplace that that slough awaits State Socialism in the end, if it
gets to the end, which as you know it did not with us.  However it went
further than this minimum and maximum business, which by the by we can
now see was necessary.  The government now found it imperative on them to
meet the outcry of the master class at the approaching destruction of
Commerce (as desirable, had they known it, as the extinction of the
cholera, which has since happily taken place).  And they were forced to
meet it by a measure hostile to the masters, the establishment of
government factories for the production of necessary wares, and markets
for their sale.  These measures taken altogether did do something: they
were in fact of the nature of regulations made by the commander of a
beleaguered city.  But of course to the privileged classes it seemed as
if the end of the world were come when such laws were enacted.

"Nor was that altogether without a warrant: the spread of communistic
theories, and the partial practice of State Socialism had at first
disturbed, and at last almost paralysed the marvellous system of commerce
under which the old world had lived so feverishly, and had produced for
some few a life of gambler's pleasure, and for many, or most, a life of
mere misery: over and over again came 'bad times' as they were called,
and indeed they were bad enough for the wage-slaves.  The year 1952 was
one of the worst of these times; the workmen suffered dreadfully: the
partial, inefficient government factories, which were terribly jobbed,
all but broke down, and a vast part of the population had for the time
being to be fed on undisguised "charity" as it was called.

"The Combined Workers watched the situation with mingled hope and
anxiety.  They had already formulated their general demands; but now by a
solemn and universal vote of the whole of their federated societies, they
insisted on the first step being taken toward carrying out their demands:
this step would have led directly to handing over the management of the
whole natural resources of the country, together with the machinery for
using them into the power of the Combined Workers, and the reduction of
the privileged classes into the position of pensioners obviously
dependent on the pleasure of the workers.  The 'Resolution,' as it was
called, which was widely published in the newspapers of the day, was in
fact a declaration of war, and was so accepted by the master class.  They
began henceforward to prepare for a firm stand against the 'brutal and
ferocious communism of the day,' as they phrased it.  And as they were in
many ways still very powerful, or seemed so to be; they still hoped by
means of brute force to regain some of what they had lost, and perhaps in
the end the whole of it.  It was said amongst them on all hands that it
had been a great mistake of the various governments not to have resisted
sooner; and the liberals and radicals (the name as perhaps you may know
of the more democratically inclined part of the ruling classes) were much
blamed for having led the world to this pass by their mis-timed pedantry
and foolish sentimentality: and one Gladstone, or Gledstein (probably,
judging by this name, of Scandinavian descent), a notable politician of
the nineteenth century, was especially singled out for reprobation in
this respect.  I need scarcely point out to you the absurdity of all
this.  But terrible tragedy lay hidden behind this grinning through a
horse-collar of the reactionary party.  'The insatiable greed of the
lower classes must be repressed'--'The people must be taught a
lesson'--these were the sacramental phrases current amongst the
reactionists, and ominous enough they were."

The old man stopped to look keenly at my attentive and wondering face;
and then said:

"I know, dear guest, that I have been using words and phrases which few
people amongst us could understand without long and laborious
explanation; and not even then perhaps.  But since you have not yet gone
to sleep, and since I am speaking to you as to a being from another
planet, I may venture to ask you if you have followed me thus far?"

"O yes," said I, "I quite understand: pray go on; a great deal of what
you have been saying was common place with us--when--when--"

"Yes," said he gravely, "when you were dwelling in the other planet.
Well, now for the crash aforesaid.

"On some comparatively trifling occasion a great meeting was summoned by
the workmen leaders to meet in Trafalgar Square (about the right to meet
in which place there had for years and years been bickering).  The civic
bourgeois guard (called the police) attacked the said meeting with
bludgeons, according to their custom; many people were hurt in the
_melee_, of whom five in all died, either trampled to death on the spot,
or from the effects of their cudgelling; the meeting was scattered, and
some hundred of prisoners cast into gaol.  A similar meeting had been
treated in the same way a few days before at a place called Manchester,
which has now disappeared.  Thus the 'lesson' began.  The whole country
was thrown into a ferment by this; meetings were held which attempted
some rough organisation for the holding of another meeting to retort on
the authorities.  A huge crowd assembled in Trafalgar Square and the
neighbourhood (then a place of crowded streets), and was too big for the
bludgeon-armed police to cope with; there was a good deal of dry-blow
fighting; three or four of the people were killed, and half a score of
policemen were crushed to death in the throng, and the rest got away as
they could.  This was a victory for the people as far as it went.  The
next day all London (remember what it was in those days) was in a state
of turmoil.  Many of the rich fled into the country; the executive got
together soldiery, but did not dare to use them; and the police could not
be massed in any one place, because riots or threats of riots were
everywhere.  But in Manchester, where the people were not so courageous
or not so desperate as in London, several of the popular leaders were
arrested.  In London a convention of leaders was got together from the
Federation of Combined Workmen, and sat under the old revolutionary name
of the Committee of Public Safety; but as they had no drilled and armed
body of men to direct, they attempted no aggressive measures, but only
placarded the walls with somewhat vague appeals to the workmen not to
allow themselves to be trampled upon.  However, they called a meeting in
Trafalgar Square for the day fortnight of the last-mentioned skirmish.

"Meantime the town grew no quieter, and business came pretty much to an
end.  The newspapers--then, as always hitherto, almost entirely in the
hands of the masters--clamoured to the Government for repressive
measures; the rich citizens were enrolled as an extra body of police, and
armed with bludgeons like them; many of these were strong, well-fed, full-
blooded young men, and had plenty of stomach for fighting; but the
Government did not dare to use them, and contented itself with getting
full powers voted to it by the Parliament for suppressing any revolt, and
bringing up more and more soldiers to London.  Thus passed the week after
the great meeting; almost as large a one was held on the Sunday, which
went off peaceably on the whole, as no opposition to it was offered, and
again the people cried 'victory.'  But on the Monday the people woke up
to find that they were hungry.  During the last few days there had been
groups of men parading the streets asking (or, if you please, demanding)
money to buy food; and what for goodwill, what for fear, the richer
people gave them a good deal.  The authorities of the parishes also (I
haven't time to explain that phrase at present) gave willy-nilly what
provisions they could to wandering people; and the Government, by means
of its feeble national workshops, also fed a good number of half-starved
folk.  But in addition to this, several bakers' shops and other provision
stores had been emptied without a great deal of disturbance.  So far, so
good.  But on the Monday in question the Committee of Public Safety, on
the one hand afraid of general unorganised pillage, and on the other
emboldened by the wavering conduct of the authorities, sent a deputation
provided with carts and all necessary gear to clear out two or three big
provision stores in the centre of the town, leaving papers with the shop
managers promising to pay the price of them: and also in the part of the
town where they were strongest they took possession of several bakers'
shops and set men at work in them for the benefit of the people;--all of
which was done with little or no disturbance, the police assisting in
keeping order at the sack of the stores, as they would have done at a big
fire.

"But at this last stroke the reactionaries were so alarmed, that they
were, determined to force the executive into action.  The newspapers next
day all blazed into the fury of frightened people, and threatened the
people, the Government, and everybody they could think of, unless 'order
were at once restored.'  A deputation of leading commercial people waited
on the Government and told them that if they did not at once arrest the
Committee of Public Safety, they themselves would gather a body of men,
arm them, and fall on 'the incendiaries,' as they called them.

"They, together with a number of the newspaper editors, had a long
interview with the heads of the Government and two or three military men,
the deftest in their art that the country could furnish.  The deputation
came away from that interview, says a contemporary eye-witness, smiling
and satisfied, and said no more about raising an anti-popular army, but
that afternoon left London with their families for their country seats or
elsewhere.

"The next morning the Government proclaimed a state of siege in London,--a
thing common enough amongst the absolutist governments on the Continent,
but unheard-of in England in those days.  They appointed the youngest and
cleverest of their generals to command the proclaimed district; a man who
had won a certain sort of reputation in the disgraceful wars in which the
country had been long engaged from time to time.  The newspapers were in
ecstacies, and all the most fervent of the reactionaries now came to the
front; men who in ordinary times were forced to keep their opinions to
themselves or their immediate circle, but who began to look forward to
crushing once for all the Socialist, and even democratic tendencies,
which, said they, had been treated with such foolish indulgence for the
last sixty years.

"But the clever general took no visible action; and yet only a few of the
minor newspapers abused him; thoughtful men gathered from this that a
plot was hatching.  As for the Committee of Public Safety, whatever they
thought of their position, they had now gone too far to draw back; and
many of them, it seems, thought that the government would not act.  They
went on quietly organising their food supply, which was a miserable
driblet when all is said; and also as a retort to the state of siege,
they armed as many men as they could in the quarter where they were
strongest, but did not attempt to drill or organise them, thinking,
perhaps, that they could not at the best turn them into trained soldiers
till they had some breathing space.  The clever general, his soldiers,
and the police did not meddle with all this in the least in the world;
and things were quieter in London that week-end; though there were riots
in many places of the provinces, which were quelled by the authorities
without much trouble.  The most serious of these were at Glasgow and
Bristol.

"Well, the Sunday of the meeting came, and great crowds came to Trafalgar
Square in procession, the greater part of the Committee amongst them,
surrounded by their band of men armed somehow or other.  The streets were
quite peaceful and quiet, though there were many spectators to see the
procession pass.  Trafalgar Square had no body of police in it; the
people took quiet possession of it, and the meeting began.  The armed men
stood round the principal platform, and there were a few others armed
amidst the general crowd; but by far the greater part were unarmed.

"Most people thought the meeting would go off peaceably; but the members
of the Committee had heard from various quarters that something would be
attempted against them; but these rumours were vague, and they had no
idea of what threatened.  They soon found out.

"For before the streets about the Square were filled, a body of soldiers
poured into it from the north-west corner and took up their places by the
houses that stood on the west side.  The people growled at the sight of
the red-coats; the armed men of the Committee stood undecided, not
knowing what to do; and indeed this new influx so jammed the crowd
together that, unorganised as they were, they had little chance of
working through it.  They had scarcely grasped the fact of their enemies
being there, when another column of soldiers, pouring out of the streets
which led into the great southern road going down to the Parliament House
(still existing, and called the Dung Market), and also from the
embankment by the side of the Thames, marched up, pushing the crowd into
a denser and denser mass, and formed along the south side of the Square.
Then any of those who could see what was going on, knew at once that they
were in a trap, and could only wonder what would be done with them.

"The closely-packed crowd would not or could not budge, except under the
influence of the height of terror, which was soon to be supplied to them.
A few of the armed men struggled to the front, or climbled up to the base
of the monument which then stood there, that they might face the wall of
hidden fire before them; and to most men (there were many women amongst
them) it seemed as if the end of the world had come, and to-day seemed
strangely different from yesterday.  No sooner were the soldiers drawn up
aforesaid than, says an eye-witness, 'a glittering officer on horseback
came prancing out from the ranks on the south, and read something from a
paper which he held in his hand; which something, very few heard; but I
was told afterwards that it was an order for us to disperse, and a
warning that he had legal right to fire on the crowd else, and that he
would do so.  The crowd took it as a challenge of some sort, and a hoarse
threatening roar went up from them; and after that there was comparative
silence for a little, till the officer had got back into the ranks.  I
was near the edge of the crowd, towards the soldiers,' says this
eye-witness, 'and I saw three little machines being wheeled out in front
of the ranks, which I knew for mechanical guns.  I cried out, "Throw
yourselves down! they are going to fire!"  But no one scarcely could
throw himself down, so tight as the crowd were packed.  I heard a sharp
order given, and wondered where I should be the next minute; and then--It
was as if--the earth had opened, and hell had come up bodily amidst us.
It is no use trying to describe the scene that followed.  Deep lanes were
mowed amidst the thick crowd; the dead and dying covered the ground, and
the shrieks and wails and cries of horror filled all the air, till it
seemed as if there were nothing else in the world but murder and death.
Those of our armed men who were still unhurt cheered wildly and opened a
scattering fire on the soldiers.  One or two soldiers fell; and I saw the
officers going up and down the ranks urging the men to fire again; but
they received the orders in sullen silence, and let the butts of their
guns fall.  Only one sergeant ran to a machine-gun and began to set it
going; but a tall young man, an officer too, ran out of the ranks and
dragged him back by the collar; and the soldiers stood there motionless
while the horror-stricken crowd, nearly wholly unarmed (for most of the
armed men had fallen in that first discharge), drifted out of the Square.
I was told afterwards that the soldiers on the west side had fired also,
and done their part of the slaughter.  How I got out of the Square I
scarcely know: I went, not feeling the ground under me, what with rage
and terror and despair.'

"So says our eye-witness.  The number of the slain on the side of the
people in that shooting during a minute was prodigious; but it was not
easy to come at the truth about it; it was probably between one and two
thousand.  Of the soldiers, six were killed outright, and a dozen
wounded."

I listened, trembling with excitement.  The old man's eyes glittered and
his face flushed as he spoke, and told the tale of what I had often
thought might happen.  Yet I wondered that he should have got so elated
about a mere massacre, and I said:

"How fearful!  And I suppose that this massacre put an end to the whole
revolution for that time?"

"No, no," cried old Hammond; "it began it!"

He filled his glass and mine, and stood up and cried out, "Drink this
glass to the memory of those who died there, for indeed it would be a
long tale to tell how much we owe them."

I drank, and he sat down again and went on.

"That massacre of Trafalgar Square began the civil war, though, like all
such events, it gathered head slowly, and people scarcely knew what a
crisis they were acting in.

"Terrible as the massacre was, and hideous and overpowering as the first
terror had been, when the people had time to think about it, their
feeling was one of anger rather than fear; although the military
organisation of the state of siege was now carried out without shrinking
by the clever young general.  For though the ruling-classes when the news
spread next morning felt one gasp of horror and even dread, yet the
Government and their immediate backers felt that now the wine was drawn
and must be drunk.  However, even the most reactionary of the capitalist
papers, with two exceptions, stunned by the tremendous news, simply gave
an account of what had taken place, without making any comment upon it.
The exceptions were one, a so-called 'liberal' paper (the Government of
the day was of that complexion), which, after a preamble in which it
declared its undeviating sympathy with the cause of labour, proceeded to
point out that in times of revolutionary disturbance it behoved the
Government to be just but firm, and that by far the most merciful way of
dealing with the poor madmen who were attacking the very foundations of
society (which had made them mad and poor) was to shoot them at once, so
as to stop others from drifting into a position in which they would run a
chance of being shot.  In short, it praised the determined action of the
Government as the acme of human wisdom and mercy, and exulted in the
inauguration of an epoch of reasonable democracy free from the tyrannical
fads of Socialism.

"The other exception was a paper thought to be one of the most violent
opponents of democracy, and so it was; but the editor of it found his
manhood, and spoke for himself and not for his paper.  In a few simple,
indignant words he asked people to consider what a society was worth
which had to be defended by the massacre of unarmed citizens, and called
on the Government to withdraw their state of siege and put the general
and his officers who fired on the people on their trial for murder.  He
went further, and declared that whatever his opinion might be as to the
doctrines of the Socialists, he for one should throw in his lot with the
people, until the Government atoned for their atrocity by showing that
they were prepared to listen to the demands of men who knew what they
wanted, and whom the decrepitude of society forced into pushing their
demands in some way or other.

"Of course, this editor was immediately arrested by the military power;
but his bold words were already in the hands of the public, and produced
a great effect: so great an effect that the Government, after some
vacillation, withdrew the state of siege; though at the same time it
strengthened the military organisation and made it more stringent.  Three
of the Committee of Public Safety had been slain in Trafalgar Square: of
the rest the greater part went back to their old place of meeting, and
there awaited the event calmly.  They were arrested there on the Monday
morning, and would have been shot at once by the general, who was a mere
military machine, if the Government had not shrunk before the
responsibility of killing men without any trial.  There was at first a
talk of trying them by a special commission of judges, as it was
called--_i.e._, before a set of men bound to find them guilty, and whose
business it was to do so.  But with the Government the cold fit had
succeeded to the hot one; and the prisoners were brought before a jury at
the assizes.  There a fresh blow awaited the Government; for in spite of
the judge's charge, which distinctly instructed the jury to find the
prisoners guilty, they were acquitted, and the jury added to their
verdict a presentment, in which they condemned the action of the
soldiery, in the queer phraseology of the day, as 'rash, unfortunate, and
unnecessary.'  The Committee of Public Safety renewed its sittings, and
from thenceforth was a popular rallying-point in opposition to the
Parliament.  The Government now gave way on all sides, and made a show of
yielding to the demands of the people, though there was a widespread plot
for effecting a coup d'etat set on foot between the leaders of the two so-
called opposing parties in the parliamentary faction fight.  The well-
meaning part of the public was overjoyed, and thought that all danger of
a civil war was over.  The victory of the people was celebrated by huge
meetings held in the parks and elsewhere, in memory of the victims of the
great massacre.

"But the measures passed for the relief of the workers, though to the
upper classes they seemed ruinously revolutionary, were not thorough
enough to give the people food and a decent life, and they had to be
supplemented by unwritten enactments without legality to back them.
Although the Government and Parliament had the law-courts, the army, and
'society' at their backs, the Committee of Public Safety began to be a
force in the country, and really represented the producing classes.  It
began to improve immensely in the days which followed on the acquittal of
its members.  Its old members had little administrative capacity, though
with the exception of a few self-seekers and traitors, they were honest,
courageous men, and many of them were endowed with considerable talent of
other kinds.  But now that the times called for immediate action, came
forward the men capable of setting it on foot; and a new network of
workmen's associations grew up very speedily, whose avowed single object
was the tiding over of the ship of the community into a simple condition
of Communism; and as they practically undertook also the management of
the ordinary labour-war, they soon became the mouthpiece and intermediary
of the whole of the working classes; and the manufacturing
profit-grinders now found themselves powerless before this combination;
unless _their_ committee, Parliament, plucked up courage to begin the
civil war again, and to shoot right and left, they were bound to yield to
the demands of the men whom they employed, and pay higher and higher
wages for shorter and shorter day's work.  Yet one ally they had, and
that was the rapidly approaching breakdown of the whole system founded on
the World-Market and its supply; which now became so clear to all people,
that the middle classes, shocked for the moment into condemnation of the
Government for the great massacre, turned round nearly in a mass, and
called on the Government to look to matters, and put an end to the
tyranny of the Socialist leaders.

"Thus stimulated, the reactionist plot exploded probably before it was
ripe; but this time the people and their leaders were forewarned, and,
before the reactionaries could get under way, had taken the steps they
thought necessary.

"The Liberal Government (clearly by collusion) was beaten by the
Conservatives, though the latter were nominally much in the minority.  The
popular representatives in the House understood pretty well what this
meant, and after an attempt to fight the matter out by divisions in the
House of Commons, they made a protest, left the House, and came in a body
to the Committee of Public Safety: and the civil war began again in good
earnest.

"Yet its first act was not one of mere fighting.  The new Tory Government
determined to act, yet durst not re-enact the state of siege, but it sent
a body of soldiers and police to arrest the Committee of Public Safety in
the lump.  They made no resistance, though they might have done so, as
they had now a considerable body of men who were quite prepared for
extremities.  But they were determined to try first a weapon which they
thought stronger than street fighting.

"The members of the Committee went off quietly to prison; but they had
left their soul and their organisation behind them.  For they depended
not on a carefully arranged centre with all kinds of checks and counter-
checks about it, but on a huge mass of people in thorough sympathy with
the movement, bound together by a great number of links of small centres
with very simple instructions.  These instructions were now carried out.

"The next morning, when the leaders of the reaction were chuckling at the
effect which the report in the newspapers of their stroke would have upon
the public--no newspapers appeared; and it was only towards noon that a
few straggling sheets, about the size of the gazettes of the seventeenth
century, worked by policemen, soldiers, managers, and press-writers, were
dribbled through the streets.  They were greedily seized on and read; but
by this time the serious part of their news was stale, and people did not
need to be told that the GENERAL STRIKE had begun.  The railways did not
run, the telegraph-wires were unserved; flesh, fish, and green stuff
brought to market was allowed to lie there still packed and perishing;
the thousands of middle-class families, who were utterly dependant for
the next meal on the workers, made frantic efforts through their more
energetic members to cater for the needs of the day, and amongst those of
them who could throw off the fear of what was to follow, there was, I am
told, a certain enjoyment of this unexpected picnic--a forecast of the
days to come, in which all labour grew pleasant.

"So passed the first day, and towards evening the Government grew quite
distracted.  They had but one resource for putting down any popular
movement--to wit, mere brute-force; but there was nothing for them
against which to use their army and police: no armed bodies appeared in
the streets; the offices of the Federated Workmen were now, in
appearance, at least, turned into places for the relief of people thrown
out of work, and under the circumstances, they durst not arrest the men
engaged in such business, all the more, as even that night many quite
respectable people applied at these offices for relief, and swallowed
down the charity of the revolutionists along with their supper.  So the
Government massed soldiers and police here and there--and sat still for
that night, fully expecting on the morrow some manifesto from 'the
rebels,' as they now began to be called, which would give them an
opportunity of acting in some way or another.  They were disappointed.
The ordinary newspapers gave up the struggle that morning, and only one
very violent reactionary paper (called the _Daily Telegraph_) attempted
an appearance, and rated 'the rebels' in good set terms for their folly
and ingratitude in tearing out the bowels of their 'common mother,' the
English Nation, for the benefit of a few greedy paid agitators, and the
fools whom they were deluding.  On the other hand, the Socialist papers
(of which three only, representing somewhat different schools, were
published in London) came out full to the throat of well-printed matter.
They were greedily bought by the whole public, who, of course, like the
Government, expected a manifesto in them.  But they found no word of
reference to the great subject.  It seemed as if their editors had
ransacked their drawers for articles which would have been in place forty
years before, under the technical name of educational articles.  Most of
these were admirable and straightforward expositions of the doctrines and
practice of Socialism, free from haste and spite and hard words, and came
upon the public with a kind of May-day freshness, amidst the worry and
terror of the moment; and though the knowing well understood that the
meaning of this move in the game was mere defiance, and a token of
irreconcilable hostility to the then rulers of society, and though, also,
they were meant for nothing else by 'the rebels,' yet they really had
their effect as 'educational articles.'  However, 'education' of another
kind was acting upon the public with irresistible power, and probably
cleared their heads a little.

"As to the Government, they were absolutely terrified by this act of
'boycotting' (the slang word then current for such acts of abstention).
Their counsels became wild and vacillating to the last degree: one hour
they were for giving way for the present till they could hatch another
plot; the next they all but sent an order for the arrest in the lump of
all the workmen's committees; the next they were on the point of ordering
their brisk young general to take any excuse that offered for another
massacre.  But when they called to mind that the soldiery in that
'Battle' of Trafalgar Square were so daunted by the slaughter which they
had made, that they could not be got to fire a second volley, they shrank
back again from the dreadful courage necessary for carrying out another
massacre.  Meantime the prisoners, brought the second time before the
magistrates under a strong escort of soldiers, were the second time
remanded.

"The strike went on this day also.  The workmen's committees were
extended, and gave relief to great numbers of people, for they had
organised a considerable amount of production of food by men whom they
could depend upon.  Quite a number of well-to-do people were now
compelled to seek relief of them.  But another curious thing happened: a
band of young men of the upper classes armed themselves, and coolly went
marauding in the streets, taking what suited them of such eatables and
portables that they came across in the shops which had ventured to open.
This operation they carried out in Oxford Street, then a great street of
shops of all kinds.  The Government, being at that hour in one of their
yielding moods, thought this a fine opportunity for showing their
impartiality in the maintenance of 'order,' and sent to arrest these
hungry rich youths; who, however, surprised the police by a valiant
resistance, so that all but three escaped.  The Government did not gain
the reputation for impartiality which they expected from this move; for
they forgot that there were no evening papers; and the account of the
skirmish spread wide indeed, but in a distorted form for it was mostly
told simply as an exploit of the starving people from the East-end; and
everybody thought it was but natural for the Government to put them down
when and where they could.

"That evening the rebel prisoners were visited in their cells by _very_
polite and sympathetic persons, who pointed out to them what a suicidal
course they were following, and how dangerous these extreme courses were
for the popular cause.  Says one of the prisoners: 'It was great sport
comparing notes when we came out anent the attempt of the Government to
"get at" us separately in prison, and how we answered the blandishments
of the highly "intelligent and refined" persons set on to pump us.  One
laughed; another told extravagant long-bow stories to the envoy; a third
held a sulky silence; a fourth damned the polite spy and bade him hold
his jaw--and that was all they got out of us.'

"So passed the second day of the great strike.  It was clear to all
thinking people that the third day would bring on the crisis; for the
present suspense and ill-concealed terror was unendurable.  The ruling
classes, and the middle-class non-politicians who had been their real
strength and support, were as sheep lacking a shepherd; they literally
did not know what to do.

"One thing they found they had to do: try to get the 'rebels' to do
something.  So the next morning, the morning of the third day of the
strike, when the members of the Committee of Public Safety appeared again
before the magistrate, they found themselves treated with the greatest
possible courtesy--in fact, rather as envoys and ambassadors than
prisoners.  In short, the magistrate had received his orders; and with no
more to do than might come of a long stupid speech, which might have been
written by Dickens in mockery, he discharged the prisoners, who went back
to their meeting-place and at once began a due sitting.  It was high
time.  For this third day the mass was fermenting indeed.  There was, of
course, a vast number of working people who were not organised in the
least in the world; men who had been used to act as their masters drove
them, or rather as the system drove, of which their masters were a part.
That system was now falling to pieces, and the old pressure of the master
having been taken off these poor men, it seemed likely that nothing but
the mere animal necessities and passions of men would have any hold on
them, and that mere general overturn would be the result.  Doubtless this
would have happened if it had not been that the huge mass had been
leavened by Socialist opinion in the first place, and in the second by
actual contact with declared Socialists, many or indeed most of whom were
members of those bodies of workmen above said.

If anything of this kind had happened some years before, when the masters
of labour were still looked upon as the natural rulers of the people, and
even the poorest and most ignorant man leaned upon them for support,
while they submitted to their fleecing, the entire break-up of all
society would have followed.  But the long series of years during which
the workmen had learned to despise their rulers, had done away with their
dependence upon them, and they were now beginning to trust (somewhat
dangerously, as events proved) in the non-legal leaders whom events had
thrust forward; and though most of these were now become mere
figure-heads, their names and reputations were useful in this crisis as a
stop-gap.

"The effect of the news, therefore, of the release of the Committee gave
the Government some breathing time: for it was received with the greatest
joy by the workers, and even the well-to-do saw in it a respite from the
mere destruction which they had begun to dread, and the fear of which
most of them attributed to the weakness of the Government.  As far as the
passing hour went, perhaps they were right in this."

"How do you mean?" said I.  "What could the Government have done?  I
often used to think that they would be helpless in such a crisis."

Said old Hammond: "Of course I don't doubt that in the long run matters
would have come about as they did.  But if the Government could have
treated their army as a real army, and used them strategically as a
general would have done, looking on the people as a mere open enemy to be
shot at and dispersed wherever they turned up, they would probably have
gained the victory at the time."

"But would the soldiers have acted against the people in this way?" said
I.

Said he: "I think from all I have heard that they would have done so if
they had met bodies of men armed however badly, and however badly they
had been organised.  It seems also as if before the Trafalgar Square
massacre they might as a whole have been depended upon to fire upon an
unarmed crowd, though they were much honeycombed by Socialism.  The
reason for this was that they dreaded the use by apparently unarmed men
of an explosive called dynamite, of which many loud boasts were made by
the workers on the eve of these events; although it turned out to be of
little use as a material for war in the way that was expected.  Of course
the officers of the soldiery fanned this fear to the utmost, so that the
rank and file probably thought on that occasion that they were being led
into a desperate battle with men who were really armed, and whose weapon
was the more dreadful, because it was concealed.  After that massacre,
however, it was at all times doubtful if the regular soldiers would fire
upon an unarmed or half-armed crowd."

Said I: "The regular soldiers?  Then there were other combatants against
the people?"

"Yes," said he, "we shall come to that presently."

"Certainly," I said, "you had better go on straight with your story.  I
see that time is wearing."

Said Hammond: "The Government lost no time in coming to terms with the
Committee of Public Safety; for indeed they could think of nothing else
than the danger of the moment.  They sent a duly accredited envoy to
treat with these men, who somehow had obtained dominion over people's
minds, while the formal rulers had no hold except over their bodies.
There is no need at present to go into the details of the truce (for such
it was) between these high contracting parties, the Government of the
empire of Great Britain and a handful of working-men (as they were called
in scorn in those days), amongst whom, indeed, were some very capable and
'square-headed' persons, though, as aforesaid, the abler men were not
then the recognised leaders.  The upshot of it was that all the definite
claims of the people had to be granted.  We can now see that most of
these claims were of themselves not worth either demanding or resisting;
but they were looked on at that time as most important, and they were at
least tokens of revolt against the miserable system of life which was
then beginning to tumble to pieces.  One claim, however, was of the
utmost immediate importance, and this the Government tried hard to evade;
but as they were not dealing with fools, they had to yield at last.  This
was the claim of recognition and formal status for the Committee of
Public Safety, and all the associations which it fostered under its wing.
This it is clear meant two things: first, amnesty for 'the rebels,' great
and small, who, without a distinct act of civil war, could no longer be
attacked; and next, a continuance of the organised revolution.  Only one
point the Government could gain, and that was a name.  The dreadful
revolutionary title was dropped, and the body, with its branches, acted
under the respectable name of the 'Board of Conciliation and its local
offices.'  Carrying this name, it became the leader of the people in the
civil war which soon followed."

"O," said I, somewhat startled, "so the civil war went on, in spite of
all that had happened?"

"So it was," said he.  "In fact, it was this very legal recognition which
made the civil war possible in the ordinary sense of war; it took the
struggle out of the element of mere massacres on one side, and endurance
plus strikes on the other."

"And can you tell me in what kind of way the war was carried on?" said I.

"Yes" he said; "we have records and to spare of all that; and the essence
of them I can give you in a few words.  As I told you, the rank and file
of the army was not to be trusted by the reactionists; but the officers
generally were prepared for anything, for they were mostly the very
stupidest men in the country.  Whatever the Government might do, a great
part of the upper and middle classes were determined to set on foot a
counter revolution; for the Communism which now loomed ahead seemed quite
unendurable to them.  Bands of young men, like the marauders in the great
strike of whom I told you just now, armed themselves and drilled, and
began on any opportunity or pretence to skirmish with the people in the
streets.  The Government neither helped them nor put them down, but stood
by, hoping that something might come of it.  These 'Friends of Order,' as
they were called, had some successes at first, and grew bolder; they got
many officers of the regular army to help them, and by their means laid
hold of munitions of war of all kinds.  One part of their tactics
consisted in their guarding and even garrisoning the big factories of the
period: they held at one time, for instance, the whole of that place
called Manchester which I spoke of just now.  A sort of irregular war was
carried on with varied success all over the country; and at last the
Government, which at first pretended to ignore the struggle, or treat it
as mere rioting, definitely declared for 'the Friends of Order,' and
joined to their bands whatsoever of the regular army they could get
together, and made a desperate effort to overwhelm 'the rebels,' as they
were now once more called, and as indeed they called themselves.

"It was too late.  All ideas of peace on a basis of compromise had
disappeared on either side.  The end, it was seen clearly, must be either
absolute slavery for all but the privileged, or a system of life founded
on equality and Communism.  The sloth, the hopelessness, and if I may say
so, the cowardice of the last century, had given place to the eager,
restless heroism of a declared revolutionary period.  I will not say that
the people of that time foresaw the life we are leading now, but there
was a general instinct amongst them towards the essential part of that
life, and many men saw clearly beyond the desperate struggle of the day
into the peace which it was to bring about.  The men of that day who were
on the side of freedom were not unhappy, I think, though they were
harassed by hopes and fears, and sometimes torn by doubts, and the
conflict of duties hard to reconcile."

"But how did the people, the revolutionists, carry on the war?  What were
the elements of success on their side?"

I put this question, because I wanted to bring the old man back to the
definite history, and take him out of the musing mood so natural to an
old man.

He answered: "Well, they did not lack organisers; for the very conflict
itself, in days when, as I told you, men of any strength of mind cast
away all consideration for the ordinary business of life, developed the
necessary talent amongst them.  Indeed, from all I have read and heard, I
much doubt whether, without this seemingly dreadful civil war, the due
talent for administration would have been developed amongst the working
men.  Anyhow, it was there, and they soon got leaders far more than equal
to the best men amongst the reactionaries.  For the rest, they had no
difficulty about the material of their army; for that revolutionary
instinct so acted on the ordinary soldier in the ranks that the greater
part, certainly the best part, of the soldiers joined the side of the
people.  But the main element of their success was this, that wherever
the working people were not coerced, they worked, not for the
reactionists, but for 'the rebels.'  The reactionists could get no work
done for them outside the districts where they were all-powerful: and
even in those districts they were harassed by continual risings; and in
all cases and everywhere got nothing done without obstruction and black
looks and sulkiness; so that not only were their armies quite worn out
with the difficulties which they had to meet, but the non-combatants who
were on their side were so worried and beset with hatred and a thousand
little troubles and annoyances that life became almost unendurable to
them on those terms.  Not a few of them actually died of the worry; many
committed suicide.  Of course, a vast number of them joined actively in
the cause of reaction, and found some solace to their misery in the
eagerness of conflict.  Lastly, many thousands gave way and submitted to
'the rebels'; and as the numbers of these latter increased, it at last
became clear to all men that the cause which was once hopeless, was now
triumphant, and that the hopeless cause was that of slavery and
privilege."




CHAPTER XVIII: THE BEGINNING OF THE NEW LIFE


"Well," said I, "so you got clear out of all your trouble.  Were people
satisfied with the new order of things when it came?"

"People?" he said.  "Well, surely all must have been glad of peace when
it came; especially when they found, as they must have found, that after
all, they--even the once rich--were not living very badly.  As to those
who had been poor, all through the war, which lasted about two years,
their condition had been bettering, in spite of the struggle; and when
peace came at last, in a very short time they made great strides towards
a decent life.  The great difficulty was that the once-poor had such a
feeble conception of the real pleasure of life: so to say, they did not
ask enough, did not know how to ask enough, from the new state of things.
It was perhaps rather a good than an evil thing that the necessity for
restoring the wealth destroyed during the war forced them into working at
first almost as hard as they had been used to before the Revolution.  For
all historians are agreed that there never was a war in which there was
so much destruction of wares, and instruments for making them as in this
civil war."

"I am rather surprised at that," said I.

"Are you?  I don't see why," said Hammond.

"Why," I said, "because the party of order would surely look upon the
wealth as their own property, no share of which, if they could help it,
should go to their slaves, supposing they conquered.  And on the other
hand, it was just for the possession of that wealth that 'the rebels'
were fighting, and I should have thought, especially when they saw that
they were winning, that they would have been careful to destroy as little
as possible of what was so soon to be their own."

"It was as I have told you, however," said he.  "The party of order, when
they recovered from their first cowardice of surprise--or, if you please,
when they fairly saw that, whatever happened, they would be ruined,
fought with great bitterness, and cared little what they did, so long as
they injured the enemies who had destroyed the sweets of life for them.
As to 'the rebels,' I have told you that the outbreak of actual war made
them careless of trying to save the wretched scraps of wealth that they
had.  It was a common saying amongst them, Let the country be cleared of
everything except valiant living men, rather than that we fall into
slavery again!"

He sat silently thinking a little while, and then said:

"When the conflict was once really begun, it was seen how little of any
value there was in the old world of slavery and inequality.  Don't you
see what it means?  In the times which you are thinking of, and of which
you seem to know so much, there was no hope; nothing but the dull jog of
the mill-horse under compulsion of collar and whip; but in that fighting-
time that followed, all was hope: 'the rebels' at least felt themselves
strong enough to build up the world again from its dry bones,--and they
did it, too!" said the old man, his eyes glittering under his beetling
brows.  He went on: "And their opponents at least and at last learned
something about the reality of life, and its sorrows, which they--their
class, I mean--had once known nothing of.  In short, the two combatants,
the workman and the gentleman, between them--"

"Between them," said I, quickly, "they destroyed commercialism!"

"Yes, yes, yes," said he; "that is it.  Nor could it have been destroyed
otherwise; except, perhaps, by the whole of society gradually falling
into lower depths, till it should at last reach a condition as rude as
barbarism, but lacking both the hope and the pleasures of barbarism.
Surely the sharper, shorter remedy was the happiest."

"Most surely," said I.

"Yes," said the old man, "the world was being brought to its second
birth; how could that take place without a tragedy?  Moreover, think of
it.  The spirit of the new days, of our days, was to be delight in the
life of the world; intense and overweening love of the very skin and
surface of the earth on which man dwells, such as a lover has in the fair
flesh of the woman he loves; this, I say, was to be the new spirit of the
time.  All other moods save this had been exhausted: the unceasing
criticism, the boundless curiosity in the ways and thoughts of man, which
was the mood of the ancient Greek, to whom these things were not so much
a means, as an end, was gone past recovery; nor had there been really any
shadow of it in the so-called science of the nineteenth century, which,
as you must know, was in the main an appendage to the commercial system;
nay, not seldom an appendage to the police of that system.  In spite of
appearances, it was limited and cowardly, because it did not really
believe in itself.  It was the outcome, as it was the sole relief, of the
unhappiness of the period which made life so bitter even to the rich, and
which, as you may see with your bodily eyes, the great change has swept
away.  More akin to our way of looking at life was the spirit of the
Middle Ages, to whom heaven and the life of the next world was such a
reality, that it became to them a part of the life upon the earth; which
accordingly they loved and adorned, in spite of the ascetic doctrines of
their formal creed, which bade them contemn it.

"But that also, with its assured belief in heaven and hell as two
countries in which to live, has gone, and now we do, both in word and in
deed, believe in the continuous life of the world of men, and as it were,
add every day of that common life to the little stock of days which our
own mere individual experience wins for us: and consequently we are
happy.  Do you wonder at it?  In times past, indeed, men were told to
love their kind, to believe in the religion of humanity, and so forth.
But look you, just in the degree that a man had elevation of mind and
refinement enough to be able to value this idea, was he repelled by the
obvious aspect of the individuals composing the mass which he was to
worship; and he could only evade that repulsion by making a conventional
abstraction of mankind that had little actual or historical relation to
the race; which to his eyes was divided into blind tyrants on the one
hand and apathetic degraded slaves on the other.  But now, where is the
difficulty in accepting the religion of humanity, when the men and women
who go to make up humanity are free, happy, and energetic at least, and
most commonly beautiful of body also, and surrounded by beautiful things
of their own fashioning, and a nature bettered and not worsened by
contact with mankind?  This is what this age of the world has reserved
for us."

"It seems true," said I, "or ought to be, if what my eyes have seen is a
token of the general life you lead.  Can you now tell me anything of your
progress after the years of the struggle?"

Said he: "I could easily tell you more than you have time to listen to;
but I can at least hint at one of the chief difficulties which had to be
met: and that was, that when men began to settle down after the war, and
their labour had pretty much filled up the gap in wealth caused by the
destruction of that war, a kind of disappointment seemed coming over us,
and the prophecies of some of the reactionists of past times seemed as if
they would come true, and a dull level of utilitarian comfort be the end
for a while of our aspirations and success.  The loss of the competitive
spur to exertion had not, indeed, done anything to interfere with the
necessary production of the community, but how if it should make men dull
by giving them too much time for thought or idle musing?  But, after all,
this dull thunder-cloud only threatened us, and then passed over.
Probably, from what I have told you before, you will have a guess at the
remedy for such a disaster; remembering always that many of the things
which used to be produced--slave-wares for the poor and mere
wealth-wasting wares for the rich--ceased to be made.  That remedy was,
in short, the production of what used to be called art, but which has no
name amongst us now, because it has become a necessary part of the labour
of every man who produces."

Said I: "What! had men any time or opportunity for cultivating the fine
arts amidst the desperate struggle for life and freedom that you have
told me of?"

Said Hammond: "You must not suppose that the new form of art was founded
chiefly on the memory of the art of the past; although, strange to say,
the civil war was much less destructive of art than of other things, and
though what of art existed under the old forms, revived in a wonderful
way during the latter part of the struggle, especially as regards music
and poetry.  The art or work-pleasure, as one ought to call it, of which
I am now speaking, sprung up almost spontaneously, it seems, from a kind
of instinct amongst people, no longer driven desperately to painful and
terrible over-work, to do the best they could with the work in hand--to
make it excellent of its kind; and when that had gone on for a little, a
craving for beauty seemed to awaken in men's minds, and they began rudely
and awkwardly to ornament the wares which they made; and when they had
once set to work at that, it soon began to grow.  All this was much
helped by the abolition of the squalor which our immediate ancestors put
up with so coolly; and by the leisurely, but not stupid, country-life
which now grew (as I told you before) to be common amongst us.  Thus at
last and by slow degrees we got pleasure into our work; then we became
conscious of that pleasure, and cultivated it, and took care that we had
our fill of it; and then all was gained, and we were happy.  So may it be
for ages and ages!"

The old man fell into a reverie, not altogether without melancholy I
thought; but I would not break it.  Suddenly he started, and said: "Well,
dear guest, here are come Dick and Clara to fetch you away, and there is
an end of my talk; which I daresay you will not be sorry for; the long
day is coming to an end, and you will have a pleasant ride back to
Hammersmith."




CHAPTER XIX: THE DRIVE BACK TO HAMMERSMITH


I said nothing, for I was not inclined for mere politeness to him after
such very serious talk; but in fact I should liked to have gone on
talking with the older man, who could understand something at least of my
wonted ways of looking at life, whereas, with the younger people, in
spite of all their kindness, I really was a being from another planet.
However, I made the best of it, and smiled as amiably as I could on the
young couple; and Dick returned the smile by saying, "Well, guest, I am
glad to have you again, and to find that you and my kinsman have not
quite talked yourselves into another world; I was half suspecting as I
was listening to the Welshmen yonder that you would presently be
vanishing away from us, and began to picture my kinsman sitting in the
hall staring at nothing and finding that he had been talking a while past
to nobody."

I felt rather uncomfortable at this speech, for suddenly the picture of
the sordid squabble, the dirty and miserable tragedy of the life I had
left for a while, came before my eyes; and I had, as it were, a vision of
all my longings for rest and peace in the past, and I loathed the idea of
going back to it again.  But the old man chuckled and said:

"Don't be afraid, Dick.  In any case, I have not been talking to thin
air; nor, indeed to this new friend of ours only.  Who knows but I may
not have been talking to many people?  For perhaps our guest may some day
go back to the people he has come from, and may take a message from us
which may bear fruit for them, and consequently for us."

Dick looked puzzled, and said: "Well, gaffer, I do not quite understand
what you mean.  All I can say is, that I hope he will not leave us: for
don't you see, he is another kind of man to what we are used to, and
somehow he makes us think of all kind of things; and already I feel as if
I could understand Dickens the better for having talked with him."

"Yes," said Clara, "and I think in a few months we shall make him look
younger; and I should like to see what he was like with the wrinkles
smoothed out of his face.  Don't you think he will look younger after a
little time with us?"

The old man shook his head, and looked earnestly at me, but did not
answer her, and for a moment or two we were all silent.  Then Clara broke
out:

"Kinsman, I don't like this: something or another troubles me, and I feel
as if something untoward were going to happen.  You have been talking of
past miseries to the guest, and have been living in past unhappy times,
and it is in the air all round us, and makes us feel as if we were
longing for something that we cannot have."

The old man smiled on her kindly, and said: "Well, my child, if that be
so, go and live in the present, and you will soon shake it off." Then he
turned to me, and said: "Do you remember anything like that, guest, in
the country from which you come?"

The lovers had turned aside now, and were talking together softly, and
not heeding us; so I said, but in a low voice: "Yes, when I was a happy
child on a sunny holiday, and had everything that I could think of."

"So it is," said he.  "You remember just now you twitted me with living
in the second childhood of the world.  You will find it a happy world to
live in; you will be happy there--for a while."

Again I did not like his scarcely veiled threat, and was beginning to
trouble myself with trying to remember how I had got amongst this curious
people, when the old man called out in a cheery voice: "Now, my children,
take your guest away, and make much of him; for it is your business to
make him sleek of skin and peaceful of mind: he has by no means been as
lucky as you have.  Farewell, guest!" and he grasped my hand warmly.

"Good-bye," said I, "and thank you very much for all that you have told
me.  I will come and see you as soon as I come back to London.  May I?"

"Yes," he said, "come by all means--if you can."

"It won't be for some time yet," quoth Dick, in his cheery voice; "for
when the hay is in up the river, I shall be for taking him a round
through the country between hay and wheat harvest, to see how our friends
live in the north country.  Then in the wheat harvest we shall do a good
stroke of work, I should hope,--in Wiltshire by preference; for he will
be getting a little hard with all the open-air living, and I shall be as
tough as nails."

"But you will take me along, won't you, Dick?" said Clara, laying her
pretty hand on his shoulder.

"Will I not?" said Dick, somewhat boisterously.  "And we will manage to
send you to bed pretty tired every night; and you will look so beautiful
with your neck all brown, and your hands too, and you under your gown as
white as privet, that you will get some of those strange discontented
whims out of your head, my dear.  However, our week's haymaking will do
all that for you."

The girl reddened very prettily, and not for shame but for pleasure; and
the old man laughed, and said:

"Guest, I see that you will be as comfortable as need be; for you need
not fear that those two will be too officious with you: they will be so
busy with each other, that they will leave you a good deal to yourself, I
am sure, and that is a real kindness to a guest, after all.  O, you need
not be afraid of being one too many, either: it is just what these birds
in a nest like, to have a good convenient friend to turn to, so that they
may relieve the ecstasies of love with the solid commonplace of
friendship.  Besides, Dick, and much more Clara, likes a little talking
at times; and you know lovers do not talk unless they get into trouble,
they only prattle.  Good-bye, guest; may you be happy!"

Clara went up to old Hammond, threw her arms about his neck and kissed
him heartily, and said:

"You are a dear old man, and may have your jest about me as much as you
please; and it won't be long before we see you again; and you may be sure
we shall make our guest happy; though, mind you, there is some truth in
what you say."

Then I shook hands again, and we went out of the hall and into the
cloisters, and so in the street found Greylocks in the shafts waiting for
us.  He was well looked after; for a little lad of about seven years old
had his hand on the rein and was solemnly looking up into his face; on
his back, withal, was a girl of fourteen, holding a three-year old sister
on before her; while another girl, about a year older than the boy, hung
on behind.  The three were occupied partly with eating cherries, partly
with patting and punching Greylocks, who took all their caresses in good
part, but pricked up his ears when Dick made his appearance.  The girls
got off quietly, and going up to Clara, made much of her and snuggled up
to her.  And then we got into the carriage, Dick shook the reins, and we
got under way at once, Greylocks trotting soberly between the lovely
trees of the London streets, that were sending floods of fragrance into
the cool evening air; for it was now getting toward sunset.

We could hardly go but fair and softly all the way, as there were a great
many people abroad in that cool hour.  Seeing so many people made me
notice their looks the more; and I must say, my taste, cultivated in the
sombre greyness, or rather brownness, of the nineteenth century, was
rather apt to condemn the gaiety and brightness of the raiment; and I
even ventured to say as much to Clara.  She seemed rather surprised, and
even slightly indignant, and said: "Well, well, what's the matter?  They
are not about any dirty work; they are only amusing themselves in the
fine evening; there is nothing to foul their clothes.  Come, doesn't it
all look very pretty?  It isn't gaudy, you know."

Indeed that was true; for many of the people were clad in colours that
were sober enough, though beautiful, and the harmony of the colours was
perfect and most delightful.

I said, "Yes, that is so; but how can everybody afford such costly
garments?  Look! there goes a middle-aged man in a sober grey dress; but
I can see from here that it is made of very fine woollen stuff, and is
covered with silk embroidery."

Said Clara: "He could wear shabby clothes if he pleased,--that is, if he
didn't think he would hurt people's feelings by doing so."

"But please tell me," said I, "how can they afford it?"

As soon as I had spoken I perceived that I had got back to my old
blunder; for I saw Dick's shoulders shaking with laughter; but he
wouldn't say a word, but handed me over to the tender mercies of Clara,
who said--

"Why, I don't know what you mean.  Of course we can afford it, or else we
shouldn't do it.  It would be easy enough for us to say, we will only
spend our labour on making our clothes comfortable: but we don't choose
to stop there.  Why do you find fault with us?  Does it seem to you as if
we starved ourselves of food in order to make ourselves fine clothes?  Or
do you think there is anything wrong in liking to see the coverings of
our bodies beautiful like our bodies are?--just as a deer's or an otter's
skin has been made beautiful from the first?  Come, what is wrong with
you?"

I bowed before the storm, and mumbled out some excuse or other.  I must
say, I might have known that people who were so fond of architecture
generally, would not be backward in ornamenting themselves; all the more
as the shape of their raiment, apart from its colour, was both beautiful
and reasonable--veiling the form, without either muffling or caricaturing
it.

Clara was soon mollified; and as we drove along toward the wood before
mentioned, she said to Dick--

"I tell you what, Dick: now that kinsman Hammond the Elder has seen our
guest in his queer clothes, I think we ought to find him something decent
to put on for our journey to-morrow: especially since, if we do not, we
shall have to answer all sorts of questions as to his clothes and where
they came from.  Besides," she said slily, "when he is clad in handsome
garments he will not be so quick to blame us for our childishness in
wasting our time in making ourselves look pleasant to each other."

"All right, Clara," said Dick; "he shall have everything that you--that
he wants to have.  I will look something out for him before he gets up to-
morrow."




CHAPTER XX: THE HAMMERSMITH GUEST-HOUSE AGAIN


Amidst such talk, driving quietly through the balmy evening, we came to
Hammersmith, and were well received by our friends there.  Boffin, in a
fresh suit of clothes, welcomed me back with stately courtesy; the weaver
wanted to button-hole me and get out of me what old Hammond had said, but
was very friendly and cheerful when Dick warned him off; Annie shook
hands with me, and hoped I had had a pleasant day--so kindly, that I felt
a slight pang as our hands parted; for to say the truth, I liked her
better than Clara, who seemed to be always a little on the defensive,
whereas Annie was as frank as could be, and seemed to get honest pleasure
from everything and everybody about her without the least effort.

We had quite a little feast that evening, partly in my honour, and
partly, I suspect, though nothing was said about it, in honour of Dick
and Clara coming together again.  The wine was of the best; the hall was
redolent of rich summer flowers; and after supper we not only had music
(Annie, to my mind, surpassing all the others for sweetness and clearness
of voice, as well as for feeling and meaning), but at last we even got to
telling stories, and sat there listening, with no other light but that of
the summer moon streaming through the beautiful traceries of the windows,
as if we had belonged to time long passed, when books were scarce and the
art of reading somewhat rare.  Indeed, I may say here, that, though, as
you will have noted, my friends had mostly something to say about books,
yet they were not great readers, considering the refinement of their
manners and the great amount of leisure which they obviously had.  In
fact, when Dick, especially, mentioned a book, he did so with an air of a
man who has accomplished an achievement; as much as to say, "There, you
see, I have actually read that!"

The evening passed all too quickly for me; since that day, for the first
time in my life, I was having my fill of the pleasure of the eyes without
any of that sense of incongruity, that dread of approaching ruin, which
had always beset me hitherto when I had been amongst the beautiful works
of art of the past, mingled with the lovely nature of the present; both
of them, in fact, the result of the long centuries of tradition, which
had compelled men to produce the art, and compelled nature to run into
the mould of the ages.  Here I could enjoy everything without an
afterthought of the injustice and miserable toil which made my leisure;
the ignorance and dulness of life which went to make my keen appreciation
of history; the tyranny and the struggle full of fear and mishap which
went to make my romance.  The only weight I had upon my heart was a vague
fear as it drew toward bed-time concerning the place wherein I should
wake on the morrow: but I choked that down, and went to bed happy, and in
a very few moments was in a dreamless sleep.




CHAPTER XXI: GOING UP THE RIVER


When I did wake, to a beautiful sunny morning, I leapt out of bed with my
over-night apprehension still clinging to me, which vanished delightfully
however in a moment as I looked around my little sleeping chamber and saw
the pale but pure-coloured figures painted on the plaster of the wall,
with verses written underneath them which I knew somewhat over well.  I
dressed speedily, in a suit of blue laid ready for me, so handsome that I
quite blushed when I had got into it, feeling as I did so that excited
pleasure of anticipation of a holiday, which, well remembered as it was,
I had not felt since I was a boy, new come home for the summer holidays.

It seemed quite early in the morning, and I expected to have the hall to
myself when I came into it out of the corridor wherein was my sleeping
chamber; but I met Annie at once, who let fall her broom and gave me a
kiss, quite meaningless I fear, except as betokening friendship, though
she reddened as she did it, not from shyness, but from friendly pleasure,
and then stood and picked up her broom again, and went on with her
sweeping, nodding to me as if to bid me stand out of the way and look on;
which, to say the truth, I thought amusing enough, as there were five
other girls helping her, and their graceful figures engaged in the
leisurely work were worth going a long way to see, and their merry talk
and laughing as they swept in quite a scientific manner was worth going a
long way to hear.  But Annie presently threw me back a word or two as she
went on to the other end of the hall: "Guest," she said, "I am glad that
you are up early, though we wouldn't disturb you; for our Thames is a
lovely river at half-past six on a June morning: and as it would be a
pity for you to lose it, I am told just to give you a cup of milk and a
bit of bread outside there, and put you into the boat: for Dick and Clara
are all ready now.  Wait half a minute till I have swept down this row."

So presently she let her broom drop again, and came and took me by the
hand and led me out on to the terrace above the river, to a little table
under the boughs, where my bread and milk took the form of as dainty a
breakfast as any one could desire, and then sat by me as I ate.  And in a
minute or two Dick and Clara came to me, the latter looking most fresh
and beautiful in a light silk embroidered gown, which to my unused eyes
was extravagantly gay and bright; while Dick was also handsomely dressed
in white flannel prettily embroidered.  Clara raised her gown in her
hands as she gave me the morning greeting, and said laughingly: "Look,
guest! you see we are at least as fine as any of the people you felt
inclined to scold last night; you see we are not going to make the bright
day and the flowers feel ashamed of themselves.  Now scold me!"

Quoth I: "No, indeed; the pair of you seem as if you were born out of the
summer day itself; and I will scold you when I scold it."

"Well, you know," said Dick, "this is a special day--all these days are,
I mean.  The hay-harvest is in some ways better than corn-harvest because
of the beautiful weather; and really, unless you had worked in the hay-
field in fine weather, you couldn't tell what pleasant work it is.  The
women look so pretty at it, too," he said, shyly; "so all things
considered, I think we are right to adorn it in a simple manner."

"Do the women work at it in silk dresses?" said I, smiling.

Dick was going to answer me soberly; but Clara put her hand over his
mouth, and said, "No, no, Dick; not too much information for him, or I
shall think that you are your old kinsman again.  Let him find out for
himself: he will not have long to wait."

"Yes," quoth Annie, "don't make your description of the picture too fine,
or else he will be disappointed when the curtain is drawn.  I don't want
him to be disappointed.  But now it's time for you to be gone, if you are
to have the best of the tide, and also of the sunny morning.  Good-bye,
guest."

She kissed me in her frank friendly way, and almost took away from me my
desire for the expedition thereby; but I had to get over that, as it was
clear that so delightful a woman would hardly be without a due lover of
her own age.  We went down the steps of the landing stage, and got into a
pretty boat, not too light to hold us and our belongings comfortably, and
handsomely ornamented; and just as we got in, down came Boffin and the
weaver to see us off.  The former had now veiled his splendour in a due
suit of working clothes, crowned with a fantail hat, which he took off,
however, to wave us farewell with his grave old-Spanish-like courtesy.
Then Dick pushed off into the stream, and bent vigorously to his sculls,
and Hammersmith, with its noble trees and beautiful water-side houses,
began to slip away from us.

As we went, I could not help putting beside his promised picture of the
hay-field as it was then the picture of it as I remembered it, and
especially the images of the women engaged in the work rose up before me:
the row of gaunt figures, lean, flat-breasted, ugly, without a grace of
form or face about them; dressed in wretched skimpy print gowns, and
hideous flapping sun-bonnets, moving their rakes in a listless mechanical
way.  How often had that marred the loveliness of the June day to me; how
often had I longed to see the hay-fields peopled with men and women
worthy of the sweet abundance of midsummer, of its endless wealth of
beautiful sights, and delicious sounds and scents.  And now, the world
had grown old and wiser, and I was to see my hope realised at last!




CHAPTER XXII: HAMPTON COURT AND A PRAISER OF PAST TIMES


So on we went, Dick rowing in an easy tireless way, and Clara sitting by
my side admiring his manly beauty and heartily good-natured face, and
thinking, I fancy, of nothing else.  As we went higher up the river,
there was less difference between the Thames of that day and Thames as I
remembered it; for setting aside the hideous vulgarity of the cockney
villas of the well-to-do, stockbrokers and other such, which in older
time marred the beauty of the bough-hung banks, even this beginning of
the country Thames was always beautiful; and as we slipped between the
lovely summer greenery, I almost felt my youth come back to me, and as if
I were on one of those water excursions which I used to enjoy so much in
days when I was too happy to think that there could be much amiss
anywhere.

At last we came to a reach of the river where on the left hand a very
pretty little village with some old houses in it came down to the edge of
the water, over which was a ferry; and beyond these houses the elm-beset
meadows ended in a fringe of tall willows, while on the right hand went
the tow-path and a clear space before a row of trees, which rose up
behind huge and ancient, the ornaments of a great park: but these drew
back still further from the river at the end of the reach to make way for
a little town of quaint and pretty houses, some new, some old, dominated
by the long walls and sharp gables of a great red-brick pile of building,
partly of the latest Gothic, partly of the court-style of Dutch William,
but so blended together by the bright sun and beautiful surroundings,
including the bright blue river, which it looked down upon, that even
amidst the beautiful buildings of that new happy time it had a strange
charm about it.  A great wave of fragrance, amidst which the lime-tree
blossom was clearly to be distinguished, came down to us from its unseen
gardens, as Clara sat up in her place, and said:

"O Dick, dear, couldn't we stop at Hampton Court for to-day, and take the
guest about the park a little, and show him those sweet old buildings?
Somehow, I suppose because you have lived so near it, you have seldom
taken me to Hampton Court."

Dick rested on his oars a little, and said: "Well, well, Clara, you are
lazy to-day.  I didn't feel like stopping short of Shepperton for the
night; suppose we just go and have our dinner at the Court, and go on
again about five o'clock?"

"Well," she said, "so be it; but I should like the guest to have spent an
hour or two in the Park."

"The Park!" said Dick; "why, the whole Thames-side is a park this time of
the year; and for my part, I had rather lie under an elm-tree on the
borders of a wheat-field, with the bees humming about me and the corn-
crake crying from furrow to furrow, than in any park in England.
Besides--"

"Besides," said she, "you want to get on to your dearly-loved upper
Thames, and show your prowess down the heavy swathes of the mowing
grass."

She looked at him fondly, and I could tell that she was seeing him in her
mind's eye showing his splendid form at its best amidst the rhymed
strokes of the scythes; and she looked down at her own pretty feet with a
half sigh, as though she were contrasting her slight woman's beauty with
his man's beauty; as women will when they are really in love, and are not
spoiled with conventional sentiment.

As for Dick, he looked at her admiringly a while, and then said at last:
"Well, Clara, I do wish we were there!  But, hilloa! we are getting back
way."  And he set to work sculling again, and in two minutes we were all
standing on the gravelly strand below the bridge, which, as you may
imagine, was no longer the old hideous iron abortion, but a handsome
piece of very solid oak framing.

We went into the Court and straight into the great hall, so well
remembered, where there were tables spread for dinner, and everything
arranged much as in Hammersmith Guest-Hall.  Dinner over, we sauntered
through the ancient rooms, where the pictures and tapestry were still
preserved, and nothing was much changed, except that the people whom we
met there had an indefinable kind of look of being at home and at ease,
which communicated itself to me, so that I felt that the beautiful old
place was mine in the best sense of the word; and my pleasure of past
days seemed to add itself to that of to-day, and filled my whole soul
with content.

Dick (who, in spite of Clara's gibe, knew the place very well) told me
that the beautiful old Tudor rooms, which I remembered had been the
dwellings of the lesser fry of Court flunkies, were now much used by
people coming and going; for, beautiful as architecture had now become,
and although the whole face of the country had quite recovered its
beauty, there was still a sort of tradition of pleasure and beauty which
clung to that group of buildings, and people thought going to Hampton
Court a necessary summer outing, as they did in the days when London was
so grimy and miserable.  We went into some of the rooms looking into the
old garden, and were well received by the people in them, who got
speedily into talk with us, and looked with politely half-concealed
wonder at my strange face.  Besides these birds of passage, and a few
regular dwellers in the place, we saw out in the meadows near the garden,
down "the Long Water," as it used to be called, many gay tents with men,
women, and children round about them.  As it seemed, this pleasure-loving
people were fond of tent-life, with all its inconveniences, which,
indeed, they turned into pleasure also.

We left this old friend by the time appointed, and I made some feeble
show of taking the sculls; but Dick repulsed me, not much to my grief, I
must say, as I found I had quite enough to do between the enjoyment of
the beautiful time and my own lazily blended thoughts.

As to Dick, it was quite right to let him pull, for he was as strong as a
horse, and had the greatest delight in bodily exercise, whatever it was.
We really had some difficulty in getting him to stop when it was getting
rather more than dusk, and the moon was brightening just as we were off
Runnymede.  We landed there, and were looking about for a place whereon
to pitch our tents (for we had brought two with us), when an old man came
up to us, bade us good evening, and asked if we were housed for that that
night; and finding that we were not, bade us home to his house.  Nothing
loth, we went with him, and Clara took his hand in a coaxing way which I
noticed she used with old men; and as we went on our way, made some
commonplace remark about the beauty of the day.  The old man stopped
short, and looked at her and said: "You really like it then?"

"Yes," she said, looking very much astonished, "Don't you?"

"Well," said he, "perhaps I do.  I did, at any rate, when I was younger;
but now I think I should like it cooler."

She said nothing, and went on, the night growing about as dark as it
would be; till just at the rise of the hill we came to a hedge with a
gate in it, which the old man unlatched and led us into a garden, at the
end of which we could see a little house, one of whose little windows was
already yellow with candlelight.  We could see even under the doubtful
light of the moon and the last of the western glow that the garden was
stuffed full of flowers; and the fragrance it gave out in the gathering
coolness was so wonderfully sweet, that it seemed the very heart of the
delight of the June dusk; so that we three stopped instinctively, and
Clara gave forth a little sweet "O," like a bird beginning to sing.

"What's the matter?" said the old man, a little testily, and pulling at
her hand.  "There's no dog; or have you trodden on a thorn and hurt your
foot?"

"No, no, neighbour," she said; "but how sweet, how sweet it is!"

"Of course it is," said he, "but do you care so much for that?"

She laughed out musically, and we followed suit in our gruffer voices;
and then she said: "Of course I do, neighbour; don't you?"

"Well, I don't know," quoth the old fellow; then he added, as if somewhat
ashamed of himself: "Besides, you know, when the waters are out and all
Runnymede is flooded, it's none so pleasant."

"_I_ should like it," quoth Dick.  "What a jolly sail one would get about
here on the floods on a bright frosty January morning!"

"_Would_ you like it?" said our host.  "Well, I won't argue with you,
neighbour; it isn't worth while.  Come in and have some supper."

We went up a paved path between the roses, and straight into a very
pretty room, panelled and carved, and as clean as a new pin; but the
chief ornament of which was a young woman, light-haired and grey-eyed,
but with her face and hands and bare feet tanned quite brown with the
sun.  Though she was very lightly clad, that was clearly from choice, not
from poverty, though these were the first cottage-dwellers I had come
across; for her gown was of silk, and on her wrists were bracelets that
seemed to me of great value.  She was lying on a sheep-skin near the
window, but jumped up as soon as we entered, and when she saw the guests
behind the old man, she clapped her hands and cried out with pleasure,
and when she got us into the middle of the room, fairly danced round us
in delight of our company.

"What!" said the old man, "you are pleased, are you, Ellen?"

The girl danced up to him and threw her arms round him, and said: "Yes I
am, and so ought you to be grandfather."

"Well, well, I am," said he, "as much as I can be pleased.  Guests,
please be seated."

This seemed rather strange to us; stranger, I suspect, to my friends than
to me; but Dick took the opportunity of both the host and his
grand-daughter being out of the room to say to me, softly: "A grumbler:
there are a few of them still.  Once upon a time, I am told, they were
quite a nuisance."

The old man came in as he spoke and sat down beside us with a sigh,
which, indeed, seemed fetched up as if he wanted us to take notice of it;
but just then the girl came in with the victuals, and the carle missed
his mark, what between our hunger generally and that I was pretty busy
watching the grand-daughter moving about as beautiful as a picture.

Everything to eat and drink, though it was somewhat different to what we
had had in London, was better than good, but the old man eyed rather
sulkily the chief dish on the table, on which lay a leash of fine perch,
and said:

"H'm, perch!  I am sorry we can't do better for you, guests.  The time
was when we might have had a good piece of salmon up from London for you;
but the times have grown mean and petty."

"Yes, but you might have had it now," said the girl, giggling, "if you
had known that they were coming."

"It's our fault for not bringing it with us, neighbours," said Dick, good-
humouredly.  "But if the times have grown petty, at any rate the perch
haven't; that fellow in the middle there must have weighed a good two
pounds when he was showing his dark stripes and red fins to the minnows
yonder.  And as to the salmon, why, neighbour, my friend here, who comes
from the outlands, was quite surprised yesterday morning when I told him
we had plenty of salmon at Hammersmith.  I am sure I have heard nothing
of the times worsening."

He looked a little uncomfortable.  And the old man, turning to me, said
very courteously:

"Well, sir, I am happy to see a man from over the water; but I really
must appeal to you to say whether on the whole you are not better off in
your country; where I suppose, from what our guest says, you are brisker
and more alive, because you have not wholly got rid of competition.  You
see, I have read not a few books of the past days, and certainly _they_
are much more alive than those which are written now; and good sound
unlimited competition was the condition under which they were written,--if
we didn't know that from the record of history, we should know it from
the books themselves.  There is a spirit of adventure in them, and signs
of a capacity to extract good out of evil which our literature quite
lacks now; and I cannot help thinking that our moralists and historians
exaggerate hugely the unhappiness of the past days, in which such
splendid works of imagination and intellect were produced."

Clara listened to him with restless eyes, as if she were excited and
pleased; Dick knitted his brow and looked still more uncomfortable, but
said nothing.  Indeed, the old man gradually, as he warmed to his
subject, dropped his sneering manner, and both spoke and looked very
seriously.  But the girl broke out before I could deliver myself of the
answer I was framing:

"Books, books! always books, grandfather!  When will you understand that
after all it is the world we live in which interests us; the world of
which we are a part, and which we can never love too much?  Look!" she
said, throwing open the casement wider and showing us the white light
sparkling between the black shadows of the moonlit garden, through which
ran a little shiver of the summer night-wind, "look! these are our books
in these days!--and these," she said, stepping lightly up to the two
lovers and laying a hand on each of their shoulders; "and the guest
there, with his over-sea knowledge and experience;--yes, and even you,
grandfather" (a smile ran over her face as she spoke), "with all your
grumbling and wishing yourself back again in the good old days,--in
which, as far as I can make out, a harmless and lazy old man like you
would either have pretty nearly starved, or have had to pay soldiers and
people to take the folk's victuals and clothes and houses away from them
by force.  Yes, these are our books; and if we want more, can we not find
work to do in the beautiful buildings that we raise up all over the
country (and I know there was nothing like them in past times), wherein a
man can put forth whatever is in him, and make his hands set forth his
mind and his soul."

She paused a little, and I for my part could not help staring at her, and
thinking that if she were a book, the pictures in it were most lovely.
The colour mantled in her delicate sunburnt cheeks; her grey eyes, light
amidst the tan of her face, kindly looked on us all as she spoke.  She
paused, and said again:

"As for your books, they were well enough for times when intelligent
people had but little else in which they could take pleasure, and when
they must needs supplement the sordid miseries of their own lives with
imaginations of the lives of other people.  But I say flatly that in
spite of all their cleverness and vigour, and capacity for story-telling,
there is something loathsome about them.  Some of them, indeed, do here
and there show some feeling for those whom the history-books call 'poor,'
and of the misery of whose lives we have some inkling; but presently they
give it up, and towards the end of the story we must be contented to see
the hero and heroine living happily in an island of bliss on other
people's troubles; and that after a long series of sham troubles (or
mostly sham) of their own making, illustrated by dreary introspective
nonsense about their feelings and aspirations, and all the rest of it;
while the world must even then have gone on its way, and dug and sewed
and baked and built and carpentered round about these useless--animals."

"There!" said the old man, reverting to his dry sulky manner again.
"There's eloquence!  I suppose you like it?"

"Yes," said I, very emphatically.

"Well," said he, "now the storm of eloquence has lulled for a little,
suppose you answer my question?--that is, if you like, you know," quoth
he, with a sudden access of courtesy.

"What question?" said I.  For I must confess that Ellen's strange and
almost wild beauty had put it out of my head.

Said he: "First of all (excuse my catechising), is there competition in
life, after the old kind, in the country whence you come?"

"Yes," said I, "it is the rule there."  And I wondered as I spoke what
fresh complications I should get into as a result of this answer.

"Question two," said the carle: "Are you not on the whole much freer,
more energetic--in a word, healthier and happier--for it?"

I smiled.  "You wouldn't talk so if you had any idea of our life.  To me
you seem here as if you were living in heaven compared with us of the
country from which I came."

"Heaven?" said he: "you like heaven, do you?"

"Yes," said I--snappishly, I am afraid; for I was beginning rather to
resent his formula.

"Well, I am far from sure that I do," quoth he.  "I think one may do more
with one's life than sitting on a damp cloud and singing hymns."

I was rather nettled by this inconsequence, and said: "Well, neighbour,
to be short, and without using metaphors, in the land whence I come,
where the competition which produced those literary works which you
admire so much is still the rule, most people are thoroughly unhappy;
here, to me at least most people seem thoroughly happy."

"No offence, guest--no offence," said he; "but let me ask you; you like
that, do you?"

His formula, put with such obstinate persistence, made us all laugh
heartily; and even the old man joined in the laughter on the sly.
However, he was by no means beaten, and said presently:

"From all I can hear, I should judge that a young woman so beautiful as
my dear Ellen yonder would have been a lady, as they called it in the old
time, and wouldn't have had to wear a few rags of silk as she does now,
or to have browned herself in the sun as she has to do now.  What do you
say to that, eh?"

Here Clara, who had been pretty much silent hitherto, struck in, and
said: "Well, really, I don't think that you would have mended matters, or
that they want mending.  Don't you see that she is dressed deliciously
for this beautiful weather?  And as for the sun-burning of your
hay-fields, why, I hope to pick up some of that for myself when we get a
little higher up the river.  Look if I don't need a little sun on my
pasty white skin!"

And she stripped up the sleeve from her arm and laid it beside Ellen's
who was now sitting next her.  To say the truth, it was rather amusing to
me to see Clara putting herself forward as a town-bred fine lady, for she
was as well-knit and clean-skinned a girl as might be met with anywhere
at the best.  Dick stroked the beautiful arm rather shyly, and pulled
down the sleeve again, while she blushed at his touch; and the old man
said laughingly: "Well, I suppose you _do_ like that; don't you?"

Ellen kissed her new friend, and we all sat silent for a little, till she
broke out into a sweet shrill song, and held us all entranced with the
wonder of her clear voice; and the old grumbler sat looking at her
lovingly.  The other young people sang also in due time; and then Ellen
showed us to our beds in small cottage chambers, fragrant and clean as
the ideal of the old pastoral poets; and the pleasure of the evening
quite extinguished my fear of the last night, that I should wake up in
the old miserable world of worn-out pleasures, and hopes that were half
fears.




CHAPTER XXIII: AN EARLY MORNING BY RUNNYMEDE


Though there were no rough noises to wake me, I could not lie long abed
the next morning, where the world seemed so well awake, and, despite the
old grumbler, so happy; so I got up, and found that, early as it was,
someone had been stirring, since all was trim and in its place in the
little parlour, and the table laid for the morning meal.  Nobody was
afoot in the house as then, however, so I went out a-doors, and after a
turn or two round the superabundant garden, I wandered down over the
meadow to the river-side, where lay our boat, looking quite familiar and
friendly to me.  I walked up stream a little, watching the light mist
curling up from the river till the sun gained power to draw it all away;
saw the bleak speckling the water under the willow boughs, whence the
tiny flies they fed on were falling in myriads; heard the great chub
splashing here and there at some belated moth or other, and felt almost
back again in my boyhood.  Then I went back again to the boat, and
loitered there a minute or two, and then walked slowly up the meadow
towards the little house.  I noted now that there were four more houses
of about the same size on the slope away from the river.  The meadow in
which I was going was not up for hay; but a row of flake-hurdles ran up
the slope not far from me on each side, and in the field so parted off
from ours on the left they were making hay busily by now, in the simple
fashion of the days when I was a boy.  My feet turned that way
instinctively, as I wanted to see how haymakers looked in these new and
better times, and also I rather expected to see Ellen there.  I came to
the hurdles and stood looking over into the hay-field, and was close to
the end of the long line of haymakers who were spreading the low ridges
to dry off the night dew.  The majority of these were young women clad
much like Ellen last night, though not mostly in silk, but in light
woollen mostly gaily embroidered; the men being all clad in white flannel
embroidered in bright colours.  The meadow looked like a gigantic tulip-
bed because of them.  All hands were working deliberately but well and
steadily, though they were as noisy with merry talk as a grove of autumn
starlings.  Half a dozen of them, men and women, came up to me and shook
hands, gave me the sele of the morning, and asked a few questions as to
whence and whither, and wishing me good luck, went back to their work.
Ellen, to my disappointment, was not amongst them, but presently I saw a
light figure come out of the hay-field higher up the slope, and make for
our house; and that was Ellen, holding a basket in her hand.  But before
she had come to the garden gate, out came Dick and Clara, who, after a
minute's pause, came down to meet me, leaving Ellen in the garden; then
we three went down to the boat, talking mere morning prattle.  We stayed
there a little, Dick arranging some of the matters in her, for we had
only taken up to the house such things as we thought the dew might
damage; and then we went toward the house again; but when we came near
the garden, Dick stopped us by laying a hand on my arm and said,--

"Just look a moment."

I looked, and over the low hedge saw Ellen, shading her eyes against the
sun as she looked toward the hay-field, a light wind stirring in her
tawny hair, her eyes like light jewels amidst her sunburnt face, which
looked as if the warmth of the sun were yet in it.

"Look, guest," said Dick; "doesn't it all look like one of those very
stories out of Grimm that we were talking about up in Bloomsbury?  Here
are we two lovers wandering about the world, and we have come to a fairy
garden, and there is the very fairy herself amidst of it: I wonder what
she will do for us."

Said Clara demurely, but not stiffly: "Is she a good fairy, Dick?"

"O, yes," said he; "and according to the card, she would do better, if it
were not for the gnome or wood-spirit, our grumbling friend of last
night."

We laughed at this; and I said, "I hope you see that you have left me out
of the tale."

"Well," said he, "that's true.  You had better consider that you have got
the cap of darkness, and are seeing everything, yourself invisible."

That touched me on my weak side of not feeling sure of my position in
this beautiful new country; so in order not to make matters worse, I held
my tongue, and we all went into the garden and up to the house together.
I noticed by the way that Clara must really rather have felt the contrast
between herself as a town madam and this piece of the summer country that
we all admired so, for she had rather dressed after Ellen that morning as
to thinness and scantiness, and went barefoot also, except for light
sandals.

The old man greeted us kindly in the parlour, and said: "Well, guests, so
you have been looking about to search into the nakedness of the land: I
suppose your illusions of last night have given way a bit before the
morning light?  Do you still like, it, eh?"

"Very much," said I, doggedly; "it is one of the prettiest places on the
lower Thames."

"Oho!" said he; "so you know the Thames, do you?"

I reddened, for I saw Dick and Clara looking at me, and scarcely knew
what to say.  However, since I had said in our early intercourse with my
Hammersmith friends that I had known Epping Forest, I thought a hasty
generalisation might be better in avoiding complications than a downright
lie; so I said--

"I have been in this country before; and I have been on the Thames in
those days."

"O," said the old man, eagerly, "so you have been in this country before.
Now really, don't you _find_ it (apart from all theory, you know) much
changed for the worse?"

"No, not at all," said I; "I find it much changed for the better."

"Ah," quoth he, "I fear that you have been prejudiced by some theory or
another.  However, of course the time when you were here before must have
been so near our own days that the deterioration might not be very great:
as then we were, of course, still living under the same customs as we are
now.  I was thinking of earlier days than that."

"In short," said Clara, "you have _theories_ about the change which has
taken place."

"I have facts as well," said he.  "Look here! from this hill you can see
just four little houses, including this one.  Well, I know for certain
that in old times, even in the summer, when the leaves were thickest, you
could see from the same place six quite big and fine houses; and higher
up the water, garden joined garden right up to Windsor; and there were
big houses in all the gardens.  Ah!  England was an important place in
those days."

I was getting nettled, and said: "What you mean is that you
de-cockneyised the place, and sent the damned flunkies packing, and that
everybody can live comfortably and happily, and not a few damned thieves
only, who were centres of vulgarity and corruption wherever they were,
and who, as to this lovely river, destroyed its beauty morally, and had
almost destroyed it physically, when they were thrown out of it."

There was silence after this outburst, which for the life of me I could
not help, remembering how I had suffered from cockneyism and its cause on
those same waters of old time.  But at last the old man said, quite
coolly:

"My dear guest, I really don't know what you mean by either cockneys, or
flunkies, or thieves, or damned; or how only a few people could live
happily and comfortably in a wealthy country.  All I can see is that you
are angry, and I fear with me: so if you like we will change the
subject."

I thought this kind and hospitable in him, considering his obstinacy
about his theory; and hastened to say that I did not mean to be angry,
only emphatic.  He bowed gravely, and I thought the storm was over, when
suddenly Ellen broke in:

"Grandfather, our guest is reticent from courtesy; but really what he has
in his mind to say to you ought to be said; so as I know pretty well what
it is, I will say it for him: for as you know, I have been taught these
things by people who--"

"Yes," said the old man, "by the sage of Bloomsbury, and others."

"O," said Dick, "so you know my old kinsman Hammond?"

"Yes," said she, "and other people too, as my grandfather says, and they
have taught me things: and this is the upshot of it.  We live in a little
house now, not because we have nothing grander to do than working in the
fields, but because we please; for if we liked, we could go and live in a
big house amongst pleasant companions."

Grumbled the old man: "Just so!  As if I would live amongst those
conceited fellows; all of them looking down upon me!"

She smiled on him kindly, but went on as if he had not spoken.  "In the
past times, when those big houses of which grandfather speaks were so
plenty, we _must_ have lived in a cottage whether we had liked it or not;
and the said cottage, instead of having in it everything we want, would
have been bare and empty.  We should not have got enough to eat; our
clothes would have been ugly to look at, dirty and frowsy.  You,
grandfather, have done no hard work for years now, but wander about and
read your books and have nothing to worry you; and as for me, I work hard
when I like it, because I like it, and think it does me good, and knits
up my muscles, and makes me prettier to look at, and healthier and
happier.  But in those past days you, grandfather, would have had to work
hard after you were old; and would have been always afraid of having to
be shut up in a kind of prison along with other old men, half-starved and
without amusement.  And as for me, I am twenty years old.  In those days
my middle age would be beginning now, and in a few years I should be
pinched, thin, and haggard, beset with troubles and miseries, so that no
one could have guessed that I was once a beautiful girl.

"Is this what you have had in your mind, guest?" said she, the tears in
her eyes at thought of the past miseries of people like herself.

"Yes," said I, much moved; "that and more.  Often--in my country I have
seen that wretched change you have spoken of, from the fresh handsome
country lass to the poor draggle-tailed country woman."

The old man sat silent for a little, but presently recovered himself and
took comfort in his old phrase of "Well, you like it so, do you?"

"Yes," said Ellen, "I love life better than death."

"O, you do, do you?" said he.  "Well, for my part I like reading a good
old book with plenty of fun in it, like Thackeray's 'Vanity Fair.'  Why
don't you write books like that now?  Ask that question of your
Bloomsbury sage."

Seeing Dick's cheeks reddening a little at this sally, and noting that
silence followed, I thought I had better do something.  So I said: "I am
only the guest, friends; but I know you want to show me your river at its
best, so don't you think we had better be moving presently, as it is
certainly going to be a hot day?"




CHAPTER XXIV: UP THE THAMES: THE SECOND DAY


They were not slow to take my hint; and indeed, as to the mere time of
day, it was best for us to be off, as it was past seven o'clock, and the
day promised to be very hot.  So we got up and went down to our
boat--Ellen thoughtful and abstracted; the old man very kind and
courteous, as if to make up for his crabbedness of opinion.  Clara was
cheerful and natural, but a little subdued, I thought; and she at least
was not sorry to be gone, and often looked shyly and timidly at Ellen and
her strange wild beauty.  So we got into the boat, Dick saying as he took
his place, "Well, it _is_ a fine day!" and the old man answering "What!
you like that, do you?" once more; and presently Dick was sending the
bows swiftly through the slow weed-checked stream.  I turned round as we
got into mid-stream, and waving my hand to our hosts, saw Ellen leaning
on the old man's shoulder, and caressing his healthy apple-red cheek, and
quite a keen pang smote me as I thought how I should never see the
beautiful girl again.  Presently I insisted on taking the sculls, and I
rowed a good deal that day; which no doubt accounts for the fact that we
got very late to the place which Dick had aimed at.  Clara was
particularly affectionate to Dick, as I noticed from the rowing thwart;
but as for him, he was as frankly kind and merry as ever; and I was glad
to see it, as a man of his temperament could not have taken her caresses
cheerfully and without embarrassment if he had been at all entangled by
the fairy of our last night's abode.

I need say little about the lovely reaches of the river here.  I duly
noted that absence of cockney villas which the old man had lamented; and
I saw with pleasure that my old enemies the "Gothic" cast-iron bridges
had been replaced by handsome oak and stone ones.  Also the banks of the
forest that we passed through had lost their courtly game-keeperish
trimness, and were as wild and beautiful as need he, though the trees
were clearly well seen to.  I thought it best, in order to get the most
direct information, to play the innocent about Eton and Windsor; but Dick
volunteered his knowledge to me as we lay in Datchet lock about the
first.  Quoth he:

"Up yonder are some beautiful old buildings, which were built for a great
college or teaching-place by one of the mediaeval kings--Edward the
Sixth, I think" (I smiled to myself at his rather natural blunder).  "He
meant poor people's sons to be taught there what knowledge was going in
his days; but it was a matter of course that in the times of which you
seem to know so much they spoilt whatever good there was in the founder's
intentions.  My old kinsman says that they treated them in a very simple
way, and instead of teaching poor men's sons to know something, they
taught rich men's sons to know nothing.  It seems from what he says that
it was a place for the 'aristocracy' (if you know what that word means; I
have been told its meaning) to get rid of the company of their male
children for a great part of the year.  I daresay old Hammond would give
you plenty of information in detail about it."

"What is it used for now?" said I.

"Well," said he, "the buildings were a good deal spoilt by the last few
generations of aristocrats, who seem to have had a great hatred against
beautiful old buildings, and indeed all records of past history; but it
is still a delightful place.  Of course, we cannot use it quite as the
founder intended, since our ideas about teaching young people are so
changed from the ideas of his time; so it is used now as a dwelling for
people engaged in learning; and folk from round about come and get taught
things that they want to learn; and there is a great library there of the
best books.  So that I don't think that the old dead king would be much
hurt if he were to come to life and see what we are doing there."

"Well," said Clara, laughing, "I think he would miss the boys."

"Not always, my dear," said Dick, "for there are often plenty of boys
there, who come to get taught; and also," said he, smiling, "to learn
boating and swimming.  I wish we could stop there: but perhaps we had
better do that coming down the water."

The lock-gates opened as he spoke, and out we went, and on.  And as for
Windsor, he said nothing till I lay on my oars (for I was sculling then)
in Clewer reach, and looking up, said, "What is all that building up
there?"

Said he: "There, I thought I would wait till you asked, yourself.  That
is Windsor Castle: that also I thought I would keep for you till we come
down the water.  It looks fine from here, doesn't it?  But a great deal
of it has been built or skinned in the time of the Degradation, and we
wouldn't pull the buildings down, since they were there; just as with the
buildings of the Dung-Market.  You know, of course, that it was the
palace of our old mediaeval kings, and was used later on for the same
purpose by the parliamentary commercial sham-kings, as my old kinsman
calls them."

"Yes," said I, "I know all that.  What is it used for now?"

"A great many people live there," said he, "as, with all drawbacks, it is
a pleasant place; there is also a well-arranged store of antiquities of
various kinds that have seemed worth keeping--a museum, it would have
been called in the times you understand so well."

I drew my sculls through the water at that last word, and pulled as if I
were fleeing from those times which I understood so well; and we were
soon going up the once sorely be-cockneyed reaches of the river about
Maidenhead, which now looked as pleasant and enjoyable as the up-river
reaches.

The morning was now getting on, the morning of a jewel of a summer day;
one of those days which, if they were commoner in these islands, would
make our climate the best of all climates, without dispute.  A light wind
blew from the west; the little clouds that had arisen at about our
breakfast time had seemed to get higher and higher in the heavens; and in
spite of the burning sun we no more longed for rain than we feared it.
Burning as the sun was, there was a fresh feeling in the air that almost
set us a-longing for the rest of the hot afternoon, and the stretch of
blossoming wheat seen from the shadow of the boughs.  No one unburdened
with very heavy anxieties could have felt otherwise than happy that
morning: and it must be said that whatever anxieties might lie beneath
the surface of things, we didn't seem to come across any of them.

We passed by several fields where haymaking was going on, but Dick, and
especially Clara, were so jealous of our up-river festival that they
would not allow me to have much to say to them.  I could only notice that
the people in the fields looked strong and handsome, both men and women,
and that so far from there being any appearance of sordidness about their
attire, they seemed to be dressed specially for the occasion,--lightly,
of course, but gaily and with plenty of adornment.

Both on this day as well as yesterday we had, as you may think, met and
passed and been passed by many craft of one kind and another.  The most
part of these were being rowed like ourselves, or were sailing, in the
sort of way that sailing is managed on the upper reaches of the river;
but every now and then we came on barges, laden with hay or other country
produce, or carrying bricks, lime, timber, and the like, and these were
going on their way without any means of propulsion visible to me--just a
man at the tiller, with often a friend or two laughing and talking with
him.  Dick, seeing on one occasion this day, that I was looking rather
hard on one of these, said: "That is one of our force-barges; it is quite
as easy to work vehicles by force by water as by land."

I understood pretty well that these "force vehicles" had taken the place
of our old steam-power carrying; but I took good care not to ask any
questions about them, as I knew well enough both that I should never be
able to understand how they were worked, and that in attempting to do so
I should betray myself, or get into some complication impossible to
explain; so I merely said, "Yes, of course, I understand."

We went ashore at Bisham, where the remains of the old Abbey and the
Elizabethan house that had been added to them yet remained, none the
worse for many years of careful and appreciative habitation.  The folk of
the place, however, were mostly in the fields that day, both men and
women; so we met only two old men there, and a younger one who had stayed
at home to get on with some literary work, which I imagine we
considerably interrupted.  Yet I also think that the hard-working man who
received us was not very sorry for the interruption.  Anyhow, he kept on
pressing us to stay over and over again, till at last we did not get away
till the cool of the evening.

However, that mattered little to us; the nights were light, for the moon
was shining in her third quarter, and it was all one to Dick whether he
sculled or sat quiet in the boat: so we went away a great pace.  The
evening sun shone bright on the remains of the old buildings at
Medmenham; close beside which arose an irregular pile of building which
Dick told us was a very pleasant house; and there were plenty of houses
visible on the wide meadows opposite, under the hill; for, as it seems
that the beauty of Hurley had compelled people to build and live there a
good deal.  The sun very low down showed us Henley little altered in
outward aspect from what I remembered it.  Actual daylight failed us as
we passed through the lovely reaches of Wargrave and Shiplake; but the
moon rose behind us presently.  I should like to have seen with my eyes
what success the new order of things had had in getting rid of the
sprawling mess with which commercialism had littered the banks of the
wide stream about Reading and Caversham: certainly everything smelt too
deliciously in the early night for there to be any of the old careless
sordidness of so-called manufacture; and in answer to my question as to
what sort of a place Reading was, Dick answered:

"O, a nice town enough in its way; mostly rebuilt within the last hundred
years; and there are a good many houses, as you can see by the lights
just down under the hills yonder.  In fact, it is one of the most
populous places on the Thames round about here.  Keep up your spirits,
guest! we are close to our journey's end for the night.  I ought to ask
your pardon for not stopping at one of the houses here or higher up; but
a friend, who is living in a very pleasant house in the Maple-Durham
meads, particularly wanted me and Clara to come and see him on our way up
the Thames; and I thought you wouldn't mind this bit of night
travelling."

He need not have adjured me to keep up my spirits, which were as high as
possible; though the strangeness and excitement of the happy and quiet
life which I saw everywhere around me was, it is true, a little wearing
off, yet a deep content, as different as possible from languid
acquiescence, was taking its place, and I was, as it were, really new-
born.

We landed presently just where I remembered the river making an elbow to
the north towards the ancient house of the Blunts; with the wide meadows
spreading on the right-hand side, and on the left the long line of
beautiful old trees overhanging the water.  As we got out of the boat, I
said to Dick--

"Is it the old house we are going to?"

"No," he said, "though that is standing still in green old age, and is
well inhabited.  I see, by the way, that you know your Thames well.  But
my friend Walter Allen, who asked me to stop here, lives in a house, not
very big, which has been built here lately, because these meadows are so
much liked, especially in summer, that there was getting to be rather too
much of tenting on the open field; so the parishes here about, who rather
objected to that, built three houses between this and Caversham, and
quite a large one at Basildon, a little higher up.  Look, yonder are the
lights of Walter Allen's house!"

So we walked over the grass of the meadows under a flood of moonlight,
and soon came to the house, which was low and built round a quadrangle
big enough to get plenty of sunshine in it.  Walter Allen, Dick's friend,
was leaning against the jamb of the doorway waiting for us, and took us
into the hall without overplus of words.  There were not many people in
it, as some of the dwellers there were away at the haymaking in the
neighbourhood, and some, as Walter told us, were wandering about the
meadow enjoying the beautiful moonlit night.  Dick's friend looked to be
a man of about forty; tall, black-haired, very kind-looking and
thoughtful; but rather to my surprise there was a shade of melancholy on
his face, and he seemed a little abstracted and inattentive to our chat,
in spite of obvious efforts to listen.

Dick looked on him from time to time, and seemed troubled; and at last he
said: "I say, old fellow, if there is anything the matter which we didn't
know of when you wrote to me, don't you think you had better tell us
about it at once?  Or else we shall think we have come here at an unlucky
time, and are not quite wanted."

Walter turned red, and seemed to have some difficulty in restraining his
tears, but said at last: "Of course everybody here is very glad to see
you, Dick, and your friends; but it is true that we are not at our best,
in spite of the fine weather and the glorious hay-crop.  We have had a
death here."

Said Dick: "Well, you should get over that, neighbour: such things must
be."

"Yes," Walter said, "but this was a death by violence, and it seems
likely to lead to at least one more; and somehow it makes us feel rather
shy of one another; and to say the truth, that is one reason why there
are so few of us present to-night."

"Tell us the story, Walter," said Dick; "perhaps telling it will help you
to shake off your sadness."

Said Walter: "Well, I will; and I will make it short enough, though I
daresay it might be spun out into a long one, as used to be done with
such subjects in the old novels.  There is a very charming girl here whom
we all like, and whom some of us do more than like; and she very
naturally liked one of us better than anybody else.  And another of us (I
won't name him) got fairly bitten with love-madness, and used to go about
making himself as unpleasant as he could--not of malice prepense, of
course; so that the girl, who liked him well enough at first, though she
didn't love him, began fairly to dislike him.  Of course, those of us who
knew him best--myself amongst others--advised him to go away, as he was
making matters worse and worse for himself every day.  Well, he wouldn't
take our advice (that also, I suppose, was a matter of course), so we had
to tell him that he _must_ go, or the inevitable sending to Coventry
would follow; for his individual trouble had so overmastered him that we
felt that _we_ must go if he did not.

"He took that better than we expected, when something or other--an
interview with the girl, I think, and some hot words with the successful
lover following close upon it, threw him quite off his balance; and he
got hold of an axe and fell upon his rival when there was no one by; and
in the struggle that followed the man attacked, hit him an unlucky blow
and killed him.  And now the slayer in his turn is so upset that he is
like to kill himself; and if he does, the girl will do as much, I fear.
And all this we could no more help than the earthquake of the year before
last."

"It is very unhappy," said Dick; "but since the man is dead, and cannot
be brought to life again, and since the slayer had no malice in him, I
cannot for the life of me see why he shouldn't get over it before long.
Besides, it was the right man that was killed and not the wrong.  Why
should a man brood over a mere accident for ever?  And the girl?"

"As to her," said Walter, "the whole thing seems to have inspired her
with terror rather than grief.  What you say about the man is true, or it
should be; but then, you see, the excitement and jealousy that was the
prelude to this tragedy had made an evil and feverish element round about
him, from which he does not seem to be able to escape.  However, we have
advised him to go away--in fact, to cross the seas; but he is in such a
state that I do not think he _can_ go unless someone _takes_ him, and I
think it will fall to my lot to do so; which is scarcely a cheerful
outlook for me."

"O, you will find a certain kind of interest in it," said Dick.  "And of
course he _must_ soon look upon the affair from a reasonable point of
view sooner or later."

"Well, at any rate," quoth Walter, "now that I have eased my mind by
making you uncomfortable, let us have an end of the subject for the
present.  Are you going to take your guest to Oxford?"

"Why, of course we must pass through it," said Dick, smiling, "as we are
going into the upper waters: but I thought that we wouldn't stop there,
or we shall be belated as to the haymaking up our way.  So Oxford and my
learned lecture on it, all got at second-hand from my old kinsman, must
wait till we come down the water a fortnight hence."

I listened to this story with much surprise, and could not help wondering
at first that the man who had slain the other had not been put in custody
till it could be proved that he killed his rival in self-defence only.
However, the more I thought of it, the plainer it grew to me that no
amount of examination of witnesses, who had witnessed nothing but the ill-
blood between the two rivals, would have done anything to clear up the
case.  I could not help thinking, also, that the remorse of this homicide
gave point to what old Hammond had said to me about the way in which this
strange people dealt with what I had been used to hear called crimes.
Truly, the remorse was exaggerated; but it was quite clear that the
slayer took the whole consequences of the act upon himself, and did not
expect society to whitewash him by punishing him.  I had no fear any
longer that "the sacredness of human life" was likely to suffer amongst
my friends from the absence of gallows and prison.




CHAPTER XXV: THE THIRD DAY ON THE THAMES


As we went down to the boat next morning, Walter could not quite keep off
the subject of last night, though he was more hopeful than he had been
then, and seemed to think that if the unlucky homicide could not be got
to go over-sea, he might at any rate go and live somewhere in the
neighbourhood pretty much by himself; at any rate, that was what he
himself had proposed.  To Dick, and I must say to me also, this seemed a
strange remedy; and Dick said as much.  Quoth he:

"Friend Walter, don't set the man brooding on the tragedy by letting him
live alone.  That will only strengthen his idea that he has committed a
crime, and you will have him killing himself in good earnest."

Said Clara: "I don't know.  If I may say what I think of it, it is that
he had better have his fill of gloom now, and, so to say, wake up
presently to see how little need there has been for it; and then he will
live happily afterwards.  As for his killing himself, you need not be
afraid of that; for, from all you tell me, he is really very much in love
with the woman; and to speak plainly, until his love is satisfied, he
will not only stick to life as tightly as he can, but will also make the
most of every event of his life--will, so to say, hug himself up in it;
and I think that this is the real explanation of his taking the whole
matter with such an excess of tragedy."

Walter looked thoughtful, and said: "Well, you may be right; and perhaps
we should have treated it all more lightly: but you see, guest" (turning
to me), "such things happen so seldom, that when they do happen, we
cannot help being much taken up with it.  For the rest, we are all
inclined, to excuse our poor friend for making us so unhappy, on the
ground that he does it out of an exaggerated respect for human life and
its happiness.  Well, I will say no more about it; only this: will you
give me a cast up stream, as I want to look after a lonely habitation for
the poor fellow, since he will have it so, and I hear that there is one
which would suit us very well on the downs beyond Streatley; so if you
will put me ashore there I will walk up the hill and look to it."

"Is the house in question empty?" said I.

"No," said Walter, "but the man who lives there will go out of it, of
course, when he hears that we want it.  You see, we think that the fresh
air of the downs and the very emptiness of the landscape will do our
friend good."

"Yes," said Clara, smiling, "and he will not be so far from his beloved
that they cannot easily meet if they have a mind to--as they certainly
will."

This talk had brought us down to the boat, and we were presently afloat
on the beautiful broad stream, Dick driving the prow swiftly through the
windless water of the early summer morning, for it was not yet six
o'clock.  We were at the lock in a very little time; and as we lay rising
and rising on the in-coming water, I could not help wondering that my old
friend the pound-lock, and that of the very simplest and most rural kind,
should hold its place there; so I said:

"I have been wondering, as we passed lock after lock, that you people, so
prosperous as you are, and especially since you are so anxious for
pleasant work to do, have not invented something which would get rid of
this clumsy business of going up-stairs by means of these rude
contrivances."

Dick laughed.  "My dear friend," said he, "as long as water has the
clumsy habit of running down hill, I fear we must humour it by going up-
stairs when we have our faces turned from the sea.  And really I don't
see why you should fall foul of Maple-Durham lock, which I think a very
pretty place."

There was no doubt about the latter assertion, I thought, as I looked up
at the overhanging boughs of the great trees, with the sun coming
glittering through the leaves, and listened to the song of the summer
blackbirds as it mingled with the sound of the backwater near us.  So not
being able to say why I wanted the locks away--which, indeed, I didn't do
at all--I held my peace.  But Walter said--

"You see, guest, this is not an age of inventions.  The last epoch did
all that for us, and we are now content to use such of its inventions as
we find handy, and leaving those alone which we don't want.  I believe,
as a matter of fact, that some time ago (I can't give you a date) some
elaborate machinery was used for the locks, though people did not go so
far as try to make the water run up hill.  However, it was troublesome, I
suppose, and the simple hatches, and the gates, with a big counterpoising
beam, were found to answer every purpose, and were easily mended when
wanted with material always to hand: so here they are, as you see."

"Besides," said Dick, "this kind of lock is pretty, as you can see; and I
can't help thinking that your machine-lock, winding up like a watch,
would have been ugly and would have spoiled the look of the river: and
that is surely reason enough for keeping such locks as these.  Good-bye,
old fellow!" said he to the lock, as he pushed us out through the now
open gates by a vigorous stroke of the boat-hook.  "May you live long,
and have your green old age renewed for ever!"

On we went; and the water had the familiar aspect to me of the days
before Pangbourne had been thoroughly cocknified, as I have seen it.  It
(Pangbourne) was distinctly a village still--_i.e._, a definite group of
houses, and as pretty as might be.  The beech-woods still covered the
hill that rose above Basildon; but the flat fields beneath them were much
more populous than I remembered them, as there were five large houses in
sight, very carefully designed so as not to hurt the character of the
country.  Down on the green lip of the river, just where the water turns
toward the Goring and Streatley reaches, were half a dozen girls playing
about on the grass.  They hailed us as we were about passing them, as
they noted that we were travellers, and we stopped a minute to talk with
them.  They had been bathing, and were light clad and bare-footed, and
were bound for the meadows on the Berkshire side, where the haymaking had
begun, and were passing the time merrily enough till the Berkshire folk
came in their punt to fetch them.  At first nothing would content them
but we must go with them into the hay-field, and breakfast with them; but
Dick put forward his theory of beginning the hay-harvest higher up the
water, and not spoiling my pleasure therein by giving me a taste of it
elsewhere, and they gave way, though unwillingly.  In revenge they asked
me a great many questions about the country I came from and the manners
of life there, which I found rather puzzling to answer; and doubtless
what answers I did give were puzzling enough to them.  I noticed both
with these pretty girls and with everybody else we met, that in default
of serious news, such as we had heard at Maple-Durham, they were eager to
discuss all the little details of life: the weather, the hay-crop, the
last new house, the plenty or lack of such and such birds, and so on; and
they talked of these things not in a fatuous and conventional way, but as
taking, I say, real interest in them.  Moreover, I found that the women
knew as much about all these things as the men: could name a flower, and
knew its qualities; could tell you the habitat of such and such birds and
fish, and the like.

It is almost strange what a difference this intelligence made in my
estimate of the country life of that day; for it used to be said in past
times, and on the whole truly, that outside their daily work country
people knew little of the country, and at least could tell you nothing
about it; while here were these people as eager about all the goings on
in the fields and woods and downs as if they had been Cockneys newly
escaped from the tyranny of bricks and mortar.

I may mention as a detail worth noticing that not only did there seem to
be a great many more birds about of the non-predatory kinds, but their
enemies the birds of prey were also commoner.  A kite hung over our heads
as we passed Medmenham yesterday; magpies were quite common in the
hedgerows; I saw several sparrow-hawks, and I think a merlin; and now
just as we were passing the pretty bridge which had taken the place of
Basildon railway-bridge, a couple of ravens croaked above our boat, as
they sailed off to the higher ground of the downs.  I concluded from all
this that the days of the gamekeeper were over, and did not even need to
ask Dick a question about it.




CHAPTER XXVI: THE OBSTINATE REFUSERS


Before we parted from these girls we saw two sturdy young men and a woman
putting off from the Berkshire shore, and then Dick bethought him of a
little banter of the girls, and asked them how it was that there was
nobody of the male kind to go with them across the water, and where their
boats were gone to.  Said one, the youngest of the party: "O, they have
got the big punt to lead stone from up the water."

"Who do you mean by 'they,' dear child?" said Dick.

Said an older girl, laughing: "You had better go and see them.  Look
there," and she pointed northwest, "don't you see building going on
there?"

"Yes," said Dick, "and I am rather surprised at this time of the year;
why are they not haymaking with you?"

The girls all laughed at this, and before their laugh was over, the
Berkshire boat had run on to the grass and the girls stepped in lightly,
still sniggering, while the new comers gave us the sele of the day.  But
before they were under way again, the tall girl said:

"Excuse us for laughing, dear neighbours, but we have had some friendly
bickering with the builders up yonder, and as we have no time to tell you
the story, you had better go and ask them: they will be glad to see
you--if you don't hinder their work."

They all laughed again at that, and waved us a pretty farewell as the
punters set them over toward the other shore, and left us standing on the
bank beside our boat.

"Let us go and see them," said Clara; "that is, if you are not in a hurry
to get to Streatley, Walter?"

"O no," said Walter, "I shall be glad of the excuse to have a little more
of your company."

So we left the boat moored there, and went on up the slow slope of the
hill; but I said to Dick on the way, being somewhat mystified: "What was
all that laughing about? what was the joke!"

"I can guess pretty well," said Dick; "some of them up there have got a
piece of work which interests them, and they won't go to the haymaking,
which doesn't matter at all, because there are plenty of people to do
such easy-hard work as that; only, since haymaking is a regular festival,
the neighbours find it amusing to jeer good-humouredly at them."

"I see," said I, "much as if in Dickens's time some young people were so
wrapped up in their work that they wouldn't keep Christmas."

"Just so," said Dick, "only these people need not be young either."

"But what did you mean by easy-hard work?" said I.

Quoth Dick: "Did I say that?  I mean work that tries the muscles and
hardens them and sends you pleasantly weary to bed, but which isn't
trying in other ways: doesn't harass you in short.  Such work is always
pleasant if you don't overdo it.  Only, mind you, good mowing requires
some little skill.  I'm a pretty good mower."

This talk brought us up to the house that was a-building, not a large
one, which stood at the end of a beautiful orchard surrounded by an old
stone wall.  "O yes, I see," said Dick; "I remember, a beautiful place
for a house: but a starveling of a nineteenth century house stood there:
I am glad they are rebuilding: it's all stone, too, though it need not
have been in this part of the country: my word, though, they are making a
neat job of it: but I wouldn't have made it all ashlar."

Walter and Clara were already talking to a tall man clad in his mason's
blouse, who looked about forty, but was I daresay older, who had his
mallet and chisel in hand; there were at work in the shed and on the
scaffold about half a dozen men and two women, blouse-clad like the
carles, while a very pretty woman who was not in the work but was dressed
in an elegant suit of blue linen came sauntering up to us with her
knitting in her hand.  She welcomed us and said, smiling: "So you are
come up from the water to see the Obstinate Refusers: where are you going
haymaking, neighbours?"

"O, right up above Oxford," said Dick; "it is rather a late country.  But
what share have you got with the Refusers, pretty neighbour?"

Said she, with a laugh: "O, I am the lucky one who doesn't want to work;
though sometimes I get it, for I serve as model to Mistress Philippa
there when she wants one: she is our head carver; come and see her."

She led us up to the door of the unfinished house, where a rather little
woman was working with mallet and chisel on the wall near by.  She seemed
very intent on what she was doing, and did not turn round when we came
up; but a taller woman, quite a girl she seemed, who was at work near by,
had already knocked off, and was standing looking from Clara to Dick with
delighted eyes.  None of the others paid much heed to us.

The blue-clad girl laid her hand on the carver's shoulder and said: "Now
Philippa, if you gobble up your work like that, you will soon have none
to do; and what will become of you then?"

The carver turned round hurriedly and showed us the face of a woman of
forty (or so she seemed), and said rather pettishly, but in a sweet
voice:

"Don't talk nonsense, Kate, and don't interrupt me if you can help it."
She stopped short when she saw us, then went on with the kind smile of
welcome which never failed us.  "Thank you for coming to see us,
neighbours; but I am sure that you won't think me unkind if I go on with
my work, especially when I tell you that I was ill and unable to do
anything all through April and May; and this open-air and the sun and the
work together, and my feeling well again too, make a mere delight of
every hour to me; and excuse me, I must go on."

She fell to work accordingly on a carving in low relief of flowers and
figures, but talked on amidst her mallet strokes: "You see, we all think
this the prettiest place for a house up and down these reaches; and the
site has been so long encumbered with an unworthy one, that we masons
were determined to pay off fate and destiny for once, and build the
prettiest house we could compass here--and so--and so--"

Here she lapsed into mere carving, but the tall foreman came up and said:
"Yes, neighbours, that is it: so it is going to be all ashlar because we
want to carve a kind of a wreath of flowers and figures all round it; and
we have been much hindered by one thing or other--Philippa's illness
amongst others,--and though we could have managed our wreath without
her--"

"Could you, though?" grumbled the last-named from the face of the wall.

"Well, at any rate, she is our best carver, and it would not have been
kind to begin the carving without her.  So you see," said he, looking at
Dick and me, "we really couldn't go haymaking, could we, neighbours?  But
you see, we are getting on so fast now with this splendid weather, that I
think we may well spare a week or ten days at wheat-harvest; and won't we
go at that work then!  Come down then to the acres that lie north and by
west here at our backs and you shall see good harvesters, neighbours.

"Hurrah, for a good brag!" called a voice from the scaffold above us;
"our foreman thinks that an easier job than putting one stone on
another!"

There was a general laugh at this sally, in which the tall foreman
joined; and with that we saw a lad bringing out a little table into the
shadow of the stone-shed, which he set down there, and then going back,
came out again with the inevitable big wickered flask and tall glasses,
whereon the foreman led us up to due seats on blocks of stone, and said:

"Well, neighbours, drink to my brag coming true, or I shall think you
don't believe me!  Up there!" said he, hailing the scaffold, "are you
coming down for a glass?"  Three of the workmen came running down the
ladder as men with good "building legs" will do; but the others didn't
answer, except the joker (if he must so be called), who called out
without turning round: "Excuse me, neighbours for not getting down.  I
must get on: my work is not superintending, like the gaffer's yonder;
but, you fellows, send us up a glass to drink the haymakers' health."  Of
course, Philippa would not turn away from her beloved work; but the other
woman carver came; she turned out to be Philippa's daughter, but was a
tall strong girl, black-haired and gipsey-like of face and curiously
solemn of manner.  The rest gathered round us and clinked glasses, and
the men on the scaffold turned about and drank to our healths; but the
busy little woman by the door would have none of it all, but only
shrugged her shoulders when her daughter came up to her and touched her.

So we shook hands and turned our backs on the Obstinate Refusers, went
down the slope to our boat, and before we had gone many steps heard the
full tune of tinkling trowels mingle with the humming of the bees and the
singing of the larks above the little plain of Basildon.




CHAPTER XXVII: THE UPPER WATERS


We set Walter ashore on the Berkshire side, amidst all the beauties of
Streatley, and so went our ways into what once would have been the deeper
country under the foot-hills of the White Horse; and though the contrast
between half-cocknified and wholly unsophisticated country existed no
longer, a feeling of exultation rose within me (as it used to do) at
sight of the familiar and still unchanged hills of the Berkshire range.

We stopped at Wallingford for our mid-day meal; of course, all signs of
squalor and poverty had disappeared from the streets of the ancient town,
and many ugly houses had been taken down and many pretty new ones built,
but I thought it curious, that the town still looked like the old place I
remembered so well; for indeed it looked like that ought to have looked.

At dinner we fell in with an old, but very bright and intelligent man,
who seemed in a country way to be another edition of old Hammond.  He had
an extraordinary detailed knowledge of the ancient history of the country-
side from the time of Alfred to the days of the Parliamentary Wars, many
events of which, as you may know, were enacted round about Wallingford.
But, what was more interesting to us, he had detailed record of the
period of the change to the present state of things, and told us a great
deal about it, and especially of that exodus of the people from the town
to the country, and the gradual recovery by the town-bred people on one
side, and the country-bred people on the other, of those arts of life
which they had each lost; which loss, as he told us, had at one time gone
so far that not only was it impossible to find a carpenter or a smith in
a village or small country town, but that people in such places had even
forgotten how to bake bread, and that at Wallingford, for instance, the
bread came down with the newspapers by an early train from London, worked
in some way, the explanation of which I could not understand.  He told us
also that the townspeople who came into the country used to pick up the
agricultural arts by carefully watching the way in which the machines
worked, gathering an idea of handicraft from machinery; because at that
time almost everything in and about the fields was done by elaborate
machines used quite unintelligently by the labourers.  On the other hand,
the old men amongst the labourers managed to teach the younger ones
gradually a little artizanship, such as the use of the saw and the plane,
the work of the smithy, and so forth; for once more, by that time it was
as much as--or rather, more than--a man could do to fix an ash pole to a
rake by handiwork; so that it would take a machine worth a thousand
pounds, a group of workmen, and half a day's travelling, to do five
shillings' worth of work.  He showed us, among other things, an account
of a certain village council who were working hard at all this business;
and the record of their intense earnestness in getting to the bottom of
some matter which in time past would have been thought quite trivial, as,
for example, the due proportions of alkali and oil for soap-making for
the village wash, or the exact heat of the water into which a leg of
mutton should be plunged for boiling--all this joined to the utter
absence of anything like party feeling, which even in a village assembly
would certainly have made its appearance in an earlier epoch, was very
amusing, and at the same time instructive.

This old man, whose name was Henry Morsom, took us, after our meal and a
rest, into a biggish hall which contained a large collection of articles
of manufacture and art from the last days of the machine period to that
day; and he went over them with us, and explained them with great care.
They also were very interesting, showing the transition from the
makeshift work of the machines (which was at about its worst a little
after the Civil War before told of) into the first years of the new
handicraft period.  Of course, there was much overlapping of the periods:
and at first the new handwork came in very slowly.

"You must remember," said the old antiquary, "that the handicraft was not
the result of what used to be called material necessity: on the contrary,
by that time the machines had been so much improved that almost all
necessary work might have been done by them: and indeed many people at
that time, and before it, used to think that machinery would entirely
supersede handicraft; which certainly, on the face of it, seemed more
than likely.  But there was another opinion, far less logical, prevalent
amongst the rich people before the days of freedom, which did not die out
at once after that epoch had begun.  This opinion, which from all I can
learn seemed as natural then, as it seems absurd now, was, that while the
ordinary daily work of the world would be done entirely by automatic
machinery, the energies of the more intelligent part of mankind would be
set free to follow the higher forms of the arts, as well as science and
the study of history.  It was strange, was it not, that they should thus
ignore that aspiration after complete equality which we now recognise as
the bond of all happy human society?"

I did not answer, but thought the more.  Dick looked thoughtful, and
said:

"Strange, neighbour?  Well, I don't know.  I have often heard my old
kinsman say the one aim of all people before our time was to avoid work,
or at least they thought it was; so of course the work which their daily
life forced them to do, seemed more like work than that which they seemed
to choose for themselves."

"True enough," said Morsom.  "Anyhow, they soon began to find out their
mistake, and that only slaves and slave-holders could live solely by
setting machines going."

Clara broke in here, flushing a little as she spoke: "Was not their
mistake once more bred of the life of slavery that they had been
living?--a life which was always looking upon everything, except mankind,
animate and inanimate--'nature,' as people used to call it--as one thing,
and mankind as another, it was natural to people thinking in this way,
that they should try to make 'nature' their slave, since they thought
'nature' was something outside them."

"Surely," said Morsom; "and they were puzzled as to what to do, till they
found the feeling against a mechanical life, which had begun before the
Great Change amongst people who had leisure to think of such things, was
spreading insensibly; till at last under the guise of pleasure that was
not supposed to be work, work that was pleasure began to push out the
mechanical toil, which they had once hoped at the best to reduce to
narrow limits indeed, but never to get rid of; and which, moreover, they
found they could not limit as they had hoped to do."

"When did this new revolution gather head?" said I.

"In the half-century that followed the Great Change," said Morsom, "it
began to be noteworthy; machine after machine was quietly dropped under
the excuse that the machines could not produce works of art, and that
works of art were more and more called for.  Look here," he said, "here
are some of the works of that time--rough and unskilful in handiwork, but
solid and showing some sense of pleasure in the making."

"They are very curious," said I, taking up a piece of pottery from
amongst the specimens which the antiquary was showing us; "not a bit like
the work of either savages or barbarians, and yet with what would once
have been called a hatred of civilisation impressed upon them."

"Yes," said Morsom, "you must not look for delicacy there: in that period
you could only have got that from a man who was practically a slave.  But
now, you see," said he, leading me on a little, "we have learned the
trick of handicraft, and have added the utmost refinement of workmanship
to the freedom of fancy and imagination."

I looked, and wondered indeed at the deftness and abundance of beauty of
the work of men who had at last learned to accept life itself as a
pleasure, and the satisfaction of the common needs of mankind and the
preparation for them, as work fit for the best of the race.  I mused
silently; but at last I said--

"What is to come after this?"

The old man laughed.  "I don't know," said he; "we will meet it when it
comes."

"Meanwhile," quoth Dick, "we have got to meet the rest of our day's
journey; so out into the street and down to the strand!  Will you come a
turn with us, neighbour?  Our friend is greedy of your stories."

"I will go as far as Oxford with you," said he; "I want a book or two out
of the Bodleian Library.  I suppose you will sleep in the old city?"

"No," said Dick, "we are going higher up; the hay is waiting us there,
you know."

Morsom nodded, and we all went into the street together, and got into the
boat a little above the town bridge.  But just as Dick was getting the
sculls into the rowlocks, the bows of another boat came thrusting through
the low arch.  Even at first sight it was a gay little craft
indeed--bright green, and painted over with elegantly drawn flowers.  As
it cleared the arch, a figure as bright and gay-clad as the boat rose up
in it; a slim girl dressed in light blue silk that fluttered in the
draughty wind of the bridge.  I thought I knew the figure, and sure
enough, as she turned her head to us, and showed her beautiful face, I
saw with joy that it was none other than the fairy godmother from the
abundant garden on Runnymede--Ellen, to wit.

We all stopped to receive her.  Dick rose in the boat and cried out a
genial good morrow; I tried to be as genial as Dick, but failed; Clara
waved a delicate hand to her; and Morsom nodded and looked on with
interest.  As to Ellen, the beautiful brown of her face was deepened by a
flush, as she brought the gunwale of her boat alongside ours, and said:

"You see, neighbours, I had some doubt if you would all three come back
past Runnymede, or if you did, whether you would stop there; and besides,
I am not sure whether we--my father and I--shall not be away in a week or
two, for he wants to see a brother of his in the north country, and I
should not like him to go without me.  So I thought I might never see you
again, and that seemed uncomfortable to me, and--and so I came after
you."

"Well," said Dick, "I am sure we are all very glad of that; although you
may be sure that as for Clara and me, we should have made a point of
coming to see you, and of coming the second time, if we had found you
away the first.  But, dear neighbour, there you are alone in the boat,
and you have been sculling pretty hard I should think, and might find a
little quiet sitting pleasant; so we had better part our company into
two."

"Yes," said Ellen, "I thought you would do that, so I have brought a
rudder for my boat: will you help me to ship it, please?"

And she went aft in her boat and pushed along our side till she had
brought the stern close to Dick's hand.  He knelt down in our boat and
she in hers, and the usual fumbling took place over hanging the rudder on
its hooks; for, as you may imagine, no change had taken place in the
arrangement of such an unimportant matter as the rudder of a pleasure-
boat.  As the two beautiful young faces bent over the rudder, they seemed
to me to be very close together, and though it only lasted a moment, a
sort of pang shot through me as I looked on.  Clara sat in her place and
did not look round, but presently she said, with just the least stiffness
in her tone:

"How shall we divide?  Won't you go into Ellen's boat, Dick, since,
without offence to our guest, you are the better sculler?"

Dick stood up and laid his hand on her shoulder, and said: "No, no; let
Guest try what he can do--he ought to be getting into training now.
Besides, we are in no hurry: we are not going far above Oxford; and even
if we are benighted, we shall have the moon, which will give us nothing
worse of a night than a greyer day."

"Besides," said I, "I may manage to do a little more with my sculling
than merely keeping the boat from drifting down stream."

They all laughed at this, as if it had a been very good joke; and I
thought that Ellen's laugh, even amongst the others, was one of the
pleasantest sounds I had ever heard.

To be short, I got into the new-come boat, not a little elated, and
taking the sculls, set to work to show off a little.  For--must I say
it?--I felt as if even that happy world were made the happier for my
being so near this strange girl; although I must say that of all the
persons I had seen in that world renewed, she was the most unfamiliar to
me, the most unlike what I could have thought of.  Clara, for instance,
beautiful and bright as she was, was not unlike a _very_ pleasant and
unaffected young lady; and the other girls also seemed nothing more than
specimens of very much improved types which I had known in other times.
But this girl was not only beautiful with a beauty quite different from
that of "a young lady," but was in all ways so strangely interesting; so
that I kept wondering what she would say or do next to surprise and
please me.  Not, indeed, that there was anything startling in what she
actually said or did; but it was all done in a new way, and always with
that indefinable interest and pleasure of life, which I had noticed more
or less in everybody, but which in her was more marked and more charming
than in anyone else that I had seen.

We were soon under way and going at a fair pace through the beautiful
reaches of the river, between Bensington and Dorchester.  It was now
about the middle of the afternoon, warm rather than hot, and quite
windless; the clouds high up and light, pearly white, and gleaming,
softened the sun's burning, but did not hide the pale blue in most
places, though they seemed to give it height and consistency; the sky, in
short, looked really like a vault, as poets have sometimes called it, and
not like mere limitless air, but a vault so vast and full of light that
it did not in any way oppress the spirits.  It was the sort of afternoon
that Tennyson must have been thinking about, when he said of the Lotos-
Eaters' land that it was a land where it was always afternoon.

Ellen leaned back in the stern and seemed to enjoy herself thoroughly.  I
could see that she was really looking at things and let nothing escape
her, and as I watched her, an uncomfortable feeling that she had been a
little touched by love of the deft, ready, and handsome Dick, and that
she had been constrained to follow us because of it, faded out of my
mind; since if it had been so, she surely could not have been so
excitedly pleased, even with the beautiful scenes we were passing
through.  For some time she did not say much, but at last, as we had
passed under Shillingford Bridge (new built, but somewhat on its old
lines), she bade me hold the boat while she had a good look at the
landscape through the graceful arch.  Then she turned about to me and
said:

"I do not know whether to be sorry or glad that this is the first time
that I have been in these reaches.  It is true that it is a great
pleasure to see all this for the first time; but if I had had a year or
two of memory of it, how sweetly it would all have mingled with my life,
waking or dreaming!  I am so glad Dick has been pulling slowly, so as to
linger out the time here.  How do you feel about your first visit to
these waters?"

I do not suppose she meant a trap for me, but anyhow I fell into it, and
said: "My first visit!  It is not my first visit by many a time.  I know
these reaches well; indeed, I may say that I know every yard of the
Thames from Hammersmith to Cricklade."

I saw the complications that might follow, as her eyes fixed mine with a
curious look in them, that I had seen before at Runnymede, when I had
said something which made it difficult for others to understand my
present position amongst these people.  I reddened, and said, in order to
cover my mistake: "I wonder you have never been up so high as this, since
you live on the Thames, and moreover row so well that it would be no
great labour to you.  Let alone," quoth I, insinuatingly, "that anybody
would be glad to row you."

She laughed, clearly not at my compliment (as I am sure she need not have
done, since it was a very commonplace fact), but at something which was
stirring in her mind; and she still looked at me kindly, but with the
above-said keen look in her eyes, and then she said:

"Well, perhaps it is strange, though I have a good deal to do at home,
what with looking after my father, and dealing with two or three young
men who have taken a special liking to me, and all of whom I cannot
please at once.  But you, dear neighbour; it seems to me stranger that
you should know the upper river, than that I should not know it; for, as
I understand, you have only been in England a few days.  But perhaps you
mean that you have read about it in books, and seen pictures of
it?--though that does not come to much, either."

"Truly," said I.  "Besides, I have not read any books about the Thames:
it was one of the minor stupidities of our time that no one thought fit
to write a decent book about what may fairly be called our only English
river."

The words were no sooner out of my mouth than I saw that I had made
another mistake; and I felt really annoyed with myself, as I did not want
to go into a long explanation just then, or begin another series of
Odyssean lies.  Somehow, Ellen seemed to see this, and she took no
advantage of my slip; her piercing look changed into one of mere frank
kindness, and she said:

"Well, anyhow I am glad that I am travelling these waters with you, since
you know our river so well, and I know little of it past Pangbourne, for
you can tell me all I want to know about it."  She paused a minute, and
then said: "Yet you must understand that the part I do know, I know as
thoroughly as you do.  I should be sorry for you to think that I am
careless of a thing so beautiful and interesting as the Thames."

She said this quite earnestly, and with an air of affectionate appeal to
me which pleased me very much; but I could see that she was only keeping
her doubts about me for another time.

Presently we came to Day's Lock, where Dick and his two sitters had
waited for us.  He would have me go ashore, as if to show me something
which I had never seen before; and nothing loth I followed him, Ellen by
my side, to the well-remembered Dykes, and the long church beyond them,
which was still used for various purposes by the good folk of Dorchester:
where, by the way, the village guest-house still had the sign of the
Fleur-de-luce which it used to bear in the days when hospitality had to
be bought and sold.  This time, however, I made no sign of all this being
familiar to me: though as we sat for a while on the mound of the Dykes
looking up at Sinodun and its clear-cut trench, and its sister _mamelon_
of Whittenham, I felt somewhat uncomfortable under Ellen's serious
attentive look, which almost drew from me the cry, "How little anything
is changed here!"

We stopped again at Abingdon, which, like Wallingford, was in a way both
old and new to me, since it had been lifted out of its nineteenth-century
degradation, and otherwise was as little altered as might be.

Sunset was in the sky as we skirted Oxford by Oseney; we stopped a minute
or two hard by the ancient castle to put Henry Morsom ashore.  It was a
matter of course that so far as they could be seen from the river, I
missed none of the towers and spires of that once don-beridden city; but
the meadows all round, which, when I had last passed through them, were
getting daily more and more squalid, more and more impressed with the
seal of the "stir and intellectual life of the nineteenth century," were
no longer intellectual, but had once again become as beautiful as they
should be, and the little hill of Hinksey, with two or three very pretty
stone houses new-grown on it (I use the word advisedly; for they seemed
to belong to it) looked down happily on the full streams and waving
grass, grey now, but for the sunset, with its fast-ripening seeds.

The railway having disappeared, and therewith the various level bridges
over the streams of Thames, we were soon through Medley Lock and in the
wide water that washes Port Meadow, with its numerous population of geese
nowise diminished; and I thought with interest how its name and use had
survived from the older imperfect communal period, through the time of
the confused struggle and tyranny of the rights of property, into the
present rest and happiness of complete Communism.

I was taken ashore again at Godstow, to see the remains of the old
nunnery, pretty nearly in the same condition as I had remembered them;
and from the high bridge over the cut close by, I could see, even in the
twilight, how beautiful the little village with its grey stone houses had
become; for we had now come into the stone-country, in which every house
must be either built, walls and roof, of grey stone or be a blot on the
landscape.

We still rowed on after this, Ellen taking the sculls in my boat; we
passed a weir a little higher up, and about three miles beyond it came by
moonlight again to a little town, where we slept at a house thinly
inhabited, as its folk were mostly tented in the hay-fields.




CHAPTER XXVIII: THE LITTLE RIVER


We started before six o'clock the next morning, as we were still twenty-
five miles from our resting place, and Dick wanted to be there before
dusk.  The journey was pleasant, though to those who do not know the
upper Thames, there is little to say about it.  Ellen and I were once
more together in her boat, though Dick, for fairness' sake, was for
having me in his, and letting the two women scull the green toy.  Ellen,
however, would not allow this, but claimed me as the interesting person
of the company.  "After having come so far," said she, "I will not be put
off with a companion who will be always thinking of somebody else than
me: the guest is the only person who can amuse me properly.  I mean that
really," said she, turning to me, "and have not said it merely as a
pretty saying."

Clara blushed and looked very happy at all this; for I think up to this
time she had been rather frightened of Ellen.  As for me I felt young
again, and strange hopes of my youth were mingling with the pleasure of
the present; almost destroying it, and quickening it into something like
pain.

As we passed through the short and winding reaches of the now quickly
lessening stream, Ellen said: "How pleasant this little river is to me,
who am used to a great wide wash of water; it almost seems as if we shall
have to stop at every reach-end.  I expect before I get home this evening
I shall have realised what a little country England is, since we can so
soon get to the end of its biggest river."

"It is not big," said I, "but it is pretty."

"Yes," she said, "and don't you find it difficult to imagine the times
when this little pretty country was treated by its folk as if it had been
an ugly characterless waste, with no delicate beauty to be guarded, with
no heed taken of the ever fresh pleasure of the recurring seasons, and
changeful weather, and diverse quality of the soil, and so forth?  How
could people be so cruel to themselves?"

"And to each other," said I.  Then a sudden resolution took hold of me,
and I said: "Dear neighbour, I may as well tell you at once that I find
it easier to imagine all that ugly past than you do, because I myself
have been part of it.  I see both that you have divined something of this
in me; and also I think you will believe me when I tell you of it, so
that I am going to hide nothing from you at all."

She was silent a little, and then she said: "My friend, you have guessed
right about me; and to tell you the truth I have followed you up from
Runnymede in order that I might ask you many questions, and because I saw
that you were not one of us; and that interested and pleased me, and I
wanted to make you as happy as you could be.  To say the truth, there was
a risk in it," said she, blushing--"I mean as to Dick and Clara; for I
must tell you, since we are going to be such close friends, that even
amongst us, where there are so many beautiful women, I have often
troubled men's minds disastrously.  That is one reason why I was living
alone with my father in the cottage at Runnymede.  But it did not answer
on that score; for of course people came there, as the place is not a
desert, and they seemed to find me all the more interesting for living
alone like that, and fell to making stories of me to themselves--like I
know you did, my friend.  Well, let that pass.  This evening, or
to-morrow morning, I shall make a proposal to you to do something which
would please me very much, and I think would not hurt you."

I broke in eagerly, saying that I would do anything in the world for her;
for indeed, in spite of my years and the too obvious signs of them
(though that feeling of renewed youth was not a mere passing sensation, I
think)--in spite of my years, I say, I felt altogether too happy in the
company of this delightful girl, and was prepared to take her confidences
for more than they meant perhaps.

She laughed now, but looked very kindly on me.  "Well," she said,
"meantime for the present we will let it be; for I must look at this new
country that we are passing through.  See how the river has changed
character again: it is broad now, and the reaches are long and very slow-
running.  And look, there is a ferry!"

I told her the name of it, as I slowed off to put the ferry-chain over
our heads; and on we went passing by a bank clad with oak trees on our
left hand, till the stream narrowed again and deepened, and we rowed on
between walls of tall reeds, whose population of reed sparrows and
warblers were delightfully restless, twittering and chuckling as the wash
of the boats stirred the reeds from the water upwards in the still, hot
morning.

She smiled with pleasure, and her lazy enjoyment of the new scene seemed
to bring out her beauty doubly as she leaned back amidst the cushions,
though she was far from languid; her idleness being the idleness of a
person, strong and well-knit both in body and mind, deliberately resting.

"Look!" she said, springing up suddenly from her place without any
obvious effort, and balancing herself with exquisite grace and ease;
"look at the beautiful old bridge ahead!"

"I need scarcely look at that," said I, not turning my head away from her
beauty.  "I know what it is; though" (with a smile) "we used not to call
it the Old Bridge time agone."

She looked down upon me kindly, and said, "How well we get on now you are
no longer on your guard against me!"

And she stood looking thoughtfully at me still, till she had to sit down
as we passed under the middle one of the row of little pointed arches of
the oldest bridge across the Thames.

"O the beautiful fields!" she said; "I had no idea of the charm of a very
small river like this.  The smallness of the scale of everything, the
short reaches, and the speedy change of the banks, give one a feeling of
going somewhere, of coming to something strange, a feeling of adventure
which I have not felt in bigger waters."

I looked up at her delightedly; for her voice, saying the very thing
which I was thinking, was like a caress to me.  She caught my eye and her
cheeks reddened under their tan, and she said simply:

"I must tell you, my friend, that when my father leaves the Thames this
summer he will take me away to a place near the Roman wall in Cumberland;
so that this voyage of mine is farewell to the south; of course with my
goodwill in a way; and yet I am sorry for it.  I hadn't the heart to tell
Dick yesterday that we were as good as gone from the Thames-side; but
somehow to you I must needs tell it."

She stopped and seemed very thoughtful for awhile, and then said smiling:

"I must say that I don't like moving about from one home to another; one
gets so pleasantly used to all the detail of the life about one; it fits
so harmoniously and happily into one's own life, that beginning again,
even in a small way, is a kind of pain.  But I daresay in the country
which you come from, you would think this petty and unadventurous, and
would think the worse of me for it."

She smiled at me caressingly as she spoke, and I made haste to answer:
"O, no, indeed; again you echo my very thoughts.  But I hardly expected
to hear you speak so.  I gathered from all I have heard that there was a
great deal of changing of abode amongst you in this country."

"Well," she said, "of course people are free to move about; but except
for pleasure-parties, especially in harvest and hay-time, like this of
ours, I don't think they do so much.  I admit that I also have other
moods than that of stay-at-home, as I hinted just now, and I should like
to go with you all through the west country--thinking of nothing,"
concluded she smiling.

"I should have plenty to think of," said I.




CHAPTER XXIX: A RESTING-PLACE ON THE UPPER THAMES


Presently at a place where the river flowed round a headland of the
meadows, we stopped a while for rest and victuals, and settled ourselves
on a beautiful bank which almost reached the dignity of a hill-side: the
wide meadows spread before us, and already the scythe was busy amidst the
hay.  One change I noticed amidst the quiet beauty of the fields--to wit,
that they were planted with trees here and there, often fruit-trees, and
that there was none of the niggardly begrudging of space to a handsome
tree which I remembered too well; and though the willows were often
polled (or shrowded, as they call it in that country-side), this was done
with some regard to beauty: I mean that there was no polling of rows on
rows so as to destroy the pleasantness of half a mile of country, but a
thoughtful sequence in the cutting, that prevented a sudden bareness
anywhere.  To be short, the fields were everywhere treated as a garden
made for the pleasure as well as the livelihood of all, as old Hammond
told me was the case.

On this bank or bent of the hill, then, we had our mid-day meal; somewhat
early for dinner, if that mattered, but we had been stirring early: the
slender stream of the Thames winding below us between the garden of a
country I have been telling of; a furlong from us was a beautiful little
islet begrown with graceful trees; on the slopes westward of us was a
wood of varied growth overhanging the narrow meadow on the south side of
the river; while to the north was a wide stretch of mead rising very
gradually from the river's edge.  A delicate spire of an ancient building
rose up from out of the trees in the middle distance, with a few grey
houses clustered about it; while nearer to us, in fact not half a furlong
from the water, was a quite modern stone house--a wide quadrangle of one
story, the buildings that made it being quite low.  There was no garden
between it and the river, nothing but a row of pear-trees still quite
young and slender; and though there did not seem to be much ornament
about it, it had a sort of natural elegance, like that of the trees
themselves.

As we sat looking down on all this in the sweet June day, rather happy
than merry, Ellen, who sat next me, her hand clasped about one knee,
leaned sideways to me, and said in a low voice which Dick and Clara might
have noted if they had not been busy in happy wordless love-making:
"Friend, in your country were the houses of your field-labourers anything
like that?"

I said: "Well, at any rate the houses of our rich men were not; they were
mere blots upon the face of the land."

"I find that hard to understand," she said.  "I can see why the workmen,
who were so oppressed, should not have been able to live in beautiful
houses; for it takes time and leisure, and minds not over-burdened with
care, to make beautiful dwellings; and I quite understand that these poor
people were not allowed to live in such a way as to have these (to us)
necessary good things.  But why the rich men, who had the time and the
leisure and the materials for building, as it would be in this case,
should not have housed themselves well, I do not understand as yet.  I
know what you are meaning to say to me," she said, looking me full in the
eyes and blushing, "to wit that their houses and all belonging to them
were generally ugly and base, unless they chanced to be ancient like
yonder remnant of our forefathers' work" (pointing to the spire); "that
they were--let me see; what is the word?"

"Vulgar," said I.  "We used to say," said I, "that the ugliness and
vulgarity of the rich men's dwellings was a necessary reflection from the
sordidness and bareness of life which they forced upon the poor people."

She knit her brows as in thought; then turned a brightened face on me, as
if she had caught the idea, and said: "Yes, friend, I see what you mean.
We have sometimes--those of us who look into these things--talked this
very matter over; because, to say the truth, we have plenty of record of
the so-called arts of the time before Equality of Life; and there are not
wanting people who say that the state of that society was not the cause
of all that ugliness; that they were ugly in their life because they
liked to be, and could have had beautiful things about them if they had
chosen; just as a man or body of men now may, if they please, make things
more or less beautiful--Stop!  I know what you are going to say."

"Do you?" said I, smiling, yet with a beating heart.

"Yes," she said; "you are answering me, teaching me, in some way or
another, although you have not spoken the words aloud.  You were going to
say that in times of inequality it was an essential condition of the life
of these rich men that they should not themselves make what they wanted
for the adornment of their lives, but should force those to make them
whom they forced to live pinched and sordid lives; and that as a
necessary consequence the sordidness and pinching, the ugly barrenness of
those ruined lives, were worked up into the adornment of the lives of the
rich, and art died out amongst men?  Was that what you would say, my
friend?"

"Yes, yes," I said, looking at her eagerly; for she had risen and was
standing on the edge of the bent, the light wind stirring her dainty
raiment, one hand laid on her bosom, the other arm stretched downward and
clenched in her earnestness.

"It is true," she said, "it is true!  We have proved it true!"

I think amidst my--something more than interest in her, and admiration
for her, I was beginning to wonder how it would all end.  I had a
glimmering of fear of what might follow; of anxiety as to the remedy
which this new age might offer for the missing of something one might set
one's heart on.  But now Dick rose to his feet and cried out in his
hearty manner: "Neighbour Ellen, are you quarrelling with the guest, or
are you worrying him to tell you things which he cannot properly explain
to our ignorance?"

"Neither, dear neighbour," she said.  "I was so far from quarrelling with
him that I think I have been making him good friends both with himself
and me.  Is it so, dear guest?" she said, looking down at me with a
delightful smile of confidence in being understood.

"Indeed it is," said I.

"Well, moreover," she said, "I must say for him that he has explained
himself to me very well indeed, so that I quite understand him."

"All right," quoth Dick.  "When I first set eyes on you at Runnymede I
knew that there was something wonderful in your keenness of wits.  I
don't say that as a mere pretty speech to please you," said he quickly,
"but because it is true; and it made me want to see more of you.  But,
come, we ought to be going; for we are not half way, and we ought to be
in well before sunset."

And therewith he took Clara's hand, and led her down the bent.  But Ellen
stood thoughtfully looking down for a little, and as I took her hand to
follow Dick, she turned round to me and said:

"You might tell me a great deal and make many things clear to me, if you
would."

"Yes," said I, "I am pretty well fit for that,--and for nothing else--an
old man like me."

She did not notice the bitterness which, whether I liked it or not, was
in my voice as I spoke, but went on: "It is not so much for myself; I
should be quite content to dream about past times, and if I could not
idealise them, yet at least idealise some of the people who lived in
them.  But I think sometimes people are too careless of the history of
the past--too apt to leave it in the hands of old learned men like
Hammond.  Who knows?  Happy as we are, times may alter; we may be bitten
with some impulse towards change, and many things may seem too wonderful
for us to resist, too exciting not to catch at, if we do not know that
they are but phases of what has been before; and withal ruinous,
deceitful, and sordid."

As we went slowly down toward the boats she said again: "Not for myself
alone, dear friend; I shall have children; perhaps before the end a good
many;--I hope so.  And though of course I cannot force any special kind
of knowledge upon them, yet, my Friend, I cannot help thinking that just
as they might be like me in body, so I might impress upon them some part
of my ways of thinking; that is, indeed, some of the essential part of
myself; that part which was not mere moods, created by the matters and
events round about me.  What do you think?"

Of one thing I was sure, that her beauty and kindness and eagerness
combined, forced me to think as she did, when she was not earnestly
laying herself open to receive my thoughts.  I said, what at the time was
true, that I thought it most important; and presently stood entranced by
the wonder of her grace as she stepped into the light boat, and held out
her hand to me.  And so on we went up the Thames still--or whither?




CHAPTER XXX: THE JOURNEY'S END


On we went.  In spite of my new-born excitement about Ellen, and my
gathering fear of where it would land me, I could not help taking
abundant interest in the condition of the river and its banks; all the
more as she never seemed weary of the changing picture, but looked at
every yard of flowery bank and gurgling eddy with the same kind of
affectionate interest which I myself once had so fully, as I used to
think, and perhaps had not altogether lost even in this strangely changed
society with all its wonders.  Ellen seemed delighted with my pleasure at
this, that, or the other piece of carefulness in dealing with the river:
the nursing of pretty corners; the ingenuity in dealing with difficulties
of water-engineering, so that the most obviously useful works looked
beautiful and natural also.  All this, I say, pleased me hugely, and she
was pleased at my pleasure--but rather puzzled too.

"You seem astonished," she said, just after we had passed a mill {2}
which spanned all the stream save the water-way for traffic, but which
was as beautiful in its way as a Gothic cathedral--"You seem astonished
at this being so pleasant to look at."

"Yes," I said, "in a way I am; though I don't see why it should not be."

"Ah!" she said, looking at me admiringly, yet with a lurking smile in her
face, "you know all about the history of the past.  Were they not always
careful about this little stream which now adds so much pleasantness to
the country side?  It would always be easy to manage this little river.
Ah!  I forgot, though," she said, as her eye caught mine, "in the days we
are thinking of pleasure was wholly neglected in such matters.  But how
did they manage the river in the days that you--"  Lived in she was going
to say; but correcting herself, said--"in the days of which you have
record?"

"They _mis_managed it," quoth I.  "Up to the first half of the nineteenth
century, when it was still more or less of a highway for the country
people, some care was taken of the river and its banks; and though I
don't suppose anyone troubled himself about its aspect, yet it was trim
and beautiful.  But when the railways--of which no doubt you have
heard--came into power, they would not allow the people of the country to
use either the natural or artificial waterways, of which latter there
were a great many.  I suppose when we get higher up we shall see one of
these; a very important one, which one of these railways entirely closed
to the public, so that they might force people to send their goods by
their private road, and so tax them as heavily as they could."

Ellen laughed heartily.  "Well," she said, "that is not stated clearly
enough in our history-books, and it is worth knowing.  But certainly the
people of those days must have been a curiously lazy set.  We are not
either fidgety or quarrelsome now, but if any one tried such a piece of
folly on us, we should use the said waterways, whoever gainsaid us:
surely that would be simple enough.  However, I remember other cases of
this stupidity: when I was on the Rhine two years ago, I remember they
showed us ruins of old castles, which, according to what we heard, must
have been made for pretty much the same purpose as the railways were.  But
I am interrupting your history of the river: pray go on."

"It is both short and stupid enough," said I.  "The river having lost its
practical or commercial value--that is, being of no use to make money
of--"

She nodded.  "I understand what that queer phrase means," said she.  "Go
on!"

"Well, it was utterly neglected, till at last it became a nuisance--"

"Yes," quoth Ellen, "I understand: like the railways and the robber
knights.  Yes?"

"So then they turned the makeshift business on to it, and handed it over
to a body up in London, who from time to time, in order to show that they
had something to do, did some damage here and there,--cut down trees,
destroying the banks thereby; dredged the river (where it was not needed
always), and threw the dredgings on the fields so as to spoil them; and
so forth.  But for the most part they practised 'masterly inactivity,' as
it was then called--that is, they drew their salaries, and let things
alone."

"Drew their salaries," she said.  "I know that means that they were
allowed to take an extra lot of other people's goods for doing nothing.
And if that had been all, it really might have been worth while to let
them do so, if you couldn't find any other way of keeping them quiet; but
it seems to me that being so paid, they could not help doing something,
and that something was bound to be mischief,--because," said she,
kindling with sudden anger, "the whole business was founded on lies and
false pretensions.  I don't mean only these river-guardians, but all
these master-people I have read of."

"Yes," said I, "how happy you are to have got out of the parsimony of
oppression!"

"Why do you sigh?" she said, kindly and somewhat anxiously.  "You seem to
think that it will not last?"

"It will last for you," quoth I.

"But why not for you?" said she.  "Surely it is for all the world; and if
your country is somewhat backward, it will come into line before long.
Or," she said quickly, "are you thinking that you must soon go back
again?  I will make my proposal which I told you of at once, and so
perhaps put an end to your anxiety.  I was going to propose that you
should live with us where we are going.  I feel quite old friends with
you, and should be sorry to lose you."  Then she smiled on me, and said:
"Do you know, I begin to suspect you of wanting to nurse a sham sorrow,
like the ridiculous characters in some of those queer old novels that I
have come across now and then."

I really had almost begun to suspect it myself, but I refused to admit so
much; so I sighed no more, but fell to giving my delightful companion
what little pieces of history I knew about the river and its borderlands;
and the time passed pleasantly enough; and between the two of us (she was
a better sculler than I was, and seemed quite tireless) we kept up fairly
well with Dick, hot as the afternoon was, and swallowed up the way at a
great rate.  At last we passed under another ancient bridge; and through
meadows bordered at first with huge elm-trees mingled with sweet chestnut
of younger but very elegant growth; and the meadows widened out so much
that it seemed as if the trees must now be on the bents only, or about
the houses, except for the growth of willows on the immediate banks; so
that the wide stretch of grass was little broken here.  Dick got very
much excited now, and often stood up in the boat to cry out to us that
this was such and such a field, and so forth; and we caught fire at his
enthusiasm for the hay-field and its harvest, and pulled our best.

At last as we were passing through a reach of the river where on the side
of the towing-path was a highish bank with a thick whispering bed of
reeds before it, and on the other side a higher bank, clothed with
willows that dipped into the stream and crowned by ancient elm-trees, we
saw bright figures coming along close to the bank, as if they were
looking for something; as, indeed, they were, and we--that is, Dick and
his company--were what they were looking for.  Dick lay on his oars, and
we followed his example.  He gave a joyous shout to the people on the
bank, which was echoed back from it in many voices, deep and sweetly
shrill; for there were above a dozen persons, both men, women, and
children.  A tall handsome woman, with black wavy hair and deep-set grey
eyes, came forward on the bank and waved her hand gracefully to us, and
said:

"Dick, my friend, we have almost had to wait for you!  What excuse have
you to make for your slavish punctuality?  Why didn't you take us by
surprise, and come yesterday?"

"O," said Dick, with an almost imperceptible jerk of his head toward our
boat, "we didn't want to come too quick up the water; there is so much to
see for those who have not been up here before."

"True, true," said the stately lady, for stately is the word that must be
used for her; "and we want them to get to know the wet way from the east
thoroughly well, since they must often use it now.  But come ashore at
once, Dick, and you, dear neighbours; there is a break in the reeds and a
good landing-place just round the corner.  We can carry up your things,
or send some of the lads after them."

"No, no," said Dick; "it is easier going by water, though it is but a
step.  Besides, I want to bring my friend here to the proper place.  We
will go on to the Ford; and you can talk to us from the bank as we paddle
along."

He pulled his sculls through the water, and on we went, turning a sharp
angle and going north a little.  Presently we saw before us a bank of elm-
trees, which told us of a house amidst them, though I looked in vain for
the grey walls that I expected to see there.  As we went, the folk on the
bank talked indeed, mingling their kind voices with the cuckoo's song,
the sweet strong whistle of the blackbirds, and the ceaseless note of the
corn-crake as he crept through the long grass of the mowing-field; whence
came waves of fragrance from the flowering clover amidst of the ripe
grass.

In a few minutes we had passed through a deep eddying pool into the sharp
stream that ran from the ford, and beached our craft on a tiny strand of
limestone-gravel, and stepped ashore into the arms of our up-river
friends, our journey done.

I disentangled myself from the merry throng, and mounting on the cart-
road that ran along the river some feet above the water, I looked round
about me.  The river came down through a wide meadow on my left, which
was grey now with the ripened seeding grasses; the gleaming water was
lost presently by a turn of the bank, but over the meadow I could see the
mingled gables of a building where I knew the lock must be, and which now
seemed to combine a mill with it.  A low wooded ridge bounded the river-
plain to the south and south-east, whence we had come, and a few low
houses lay about its feet and up its slope.  I turned a little to my
right, and through the hawthorn sprays and long shoots of the wild roses
could see the flat country spreading out far away under the sun of the
calm evening, till something that might be called hills with a look of
sheep-pastures about them bounded it with a soft blue line.  Before me,
the elm-boughs still hid most of what houses there might be in this river-
side dwelling of men; but to the right of the cart-road a few grey
buildings of the simplest kind showed here and there.

There I stood in a dreamy mood, and rubbed my eyes as if I were not
wholly awake, and half expected to see the gay-clad company of beautiful
men and women change to two or three spindle-legged back-bowed men and
haggard, hollow-eyed, ill-favoured women, who once wore down the soil of
this land with their heavy hopeless feet, from day to day, and season to
season, and year to year.  But no change came as yet, and my heart
swelled with joy as I thought of all the beautiful grey villages, from
the river to the plain and the plain to the uplands, which I could
picture to myself so well, all peopled now with this happy and lovely
folk, who had cast away riches and attained to wealth.




CHAPTER XXXI: AN OLD HOUSE AMONGST NEW FOLK


As I stood there Ellen detached herself from our happy friends who still
stood on the little strand and came up to me.  She took me by the hand,
and said softly, "Take me on to the house at once; we need not wait for
the others: I had rather not."

I had a mind to say that I did not know the way thither, and that the
river-side dwellers should lead; but almost without my will my feet moved
on along the road they knew.  The raised way led us into a little field
bounded by a backwater of the river on one side; on the right hand we
could see a cluster of small houses and barns, new and old, and before us
a grey stone barn and a wall partly overgrown with ivy, over which a few
grey gables showed.  The village road ended in the shallow of the
aforesaid backwater.  We crossed the road, and again almost without my
will my hand raised the latch of a door in the wall, and we stood
presently on a stone path which led up to the old house to which fate in
the shape of Dick had so strangely brought me in this new world of men.
My companion gave a sigh of pleased surprise and enjoyment; nor did I
wonder, for the garden between the wall and the house was redolent of the
June flowers, and the roses were rolling over one another with that
delicious superabundance of small well-tended gardens which at first
sight takes away all thought from the beholder save that of beauty.  The
blackbirds were singing their loudest, the doves were cooing on the roof-
ridge, the rooks in the high elm-trees beyond were garrulous among the
young leaves, and the swifts wheeled whining about the gables.  And the
house itself was a fit guardian for all the beauty of this heart of
summer.

Once again Ellen echoed my thoughts as she said:

"Yes, friend, this is what I came out for to see; this many-gabled old
house built by the simple country-folk of the long-past times, regardless
of all the turmoil that was going on in cities and courts, is lovely
still amidst all the beauty which these latter days have created; and I
do not wonder at our friends tending it carefully and making much of it.
It seems to me as if it had waited for these happy days, and held in it
the gathered crumbs of happiness of the confused and turbulent past."

She led me up close to the house, and laid her shapely sun-browned hand
and arm on the lichened wall as if to embrace it, and cried out, "O me!  O
me!  How I love the earth, and the seasons, and weather, and all things
that deal with it, and all that grows out of it,--as this has done!"

I could not answer her, or say a word.  Her exultation and pleasure were
so keen and exquisite, and her beauty, so delicate, yet so interfused
with energy, expressed it so fully, that any added word would have been
commonplace and futile.  I dreaded lest the others should come in
suddenly and break the spell she had cast about me; but we stood there a
while by the corner of the big gable of the house, and no one came.  I
heard the merry voices some way off presently, and knew that they were
going along the river to the great meadow on the other side of the house
and garden.

We drew back a little, and looked up at the house: the door and the
windows were open to the fragrant sun-cured air; from the upper window-
sills hung festoons of flowers in honour of the festival, as if the
others shared in the love for the old house.

"Come in," said Ellen.  "I hope nothing will spoil it inside; but I don't
think it will.  Come! we must go back presently to the others.  They have
gone on to the tents; for surely they must have tents pitched for the
haymakers--the house would not hold a tithe of the folk, I am sure."

She led me on to the door, murmuring little above her breath as she did
so, "The earth and the growth of it and the life of it!  If I could but
say or show how I love it!"

We went in, and found no soul in any room as we wandered from room to
room,--from the rose-covered porch to the strange and quaint garrets
amongst the great timbers of the roof, where of old time the tillers and
herdsmen of the manor slept, but which a-nights seemed now, by the small
size of the beds, and the litter of useless and disregarded
matters--bunches of dying flowers, feathers of birds, shells of
starling's eggs, caddis worms in mugs, and the like--seemed to be
inhabited for the time by children.

Everywhere there was but little furniture, and that only the most
necessary, and of the simplest forms.  The extravagant love of ornament
which I had noted in this people elsewhere seemed here to have given
place to the feeling that the house itself and its associations was the
ornament of the country life amidst which it had been left stranded from
old times, and that to re-ornament it would but take away its use as a
piece of natural beauty.

We sat down at last in a room over the wall which Ellen had caressed, and
which was still hung with old tapestry, originally of no artistic value,
but now faded into pleasant grey tones which harmonised thoroughly well
with the quiet of the place, and which would have been ill supplanted by
brighter and more striking decoration.

I asked a few random questions of Ellen as we sat there, but scarcely
listened to her answers, and presently became silent, and then scarce
conscious of anything, but that I was there in that old room, the doves
crooning from the roofs of the barn and dovecot beyond the window
opposite to me.

My thought returned to me after what I think was but a minute or two, but
which, as in a vivid dream, seemed as if it had lasted a long time, when
I saw Ellen sitting, looking all the fuller of life and pleasure and
desire from the contrast with the grey faded tapestry with its futile
design, which was now only bearable because it had grown so faint and
feeble.

She looked at me kindly, but as if she read me through and through.  She
said: "You have begun again your never-ending contrast between the past
and this present.  Is it not so?"

"True," said I.  "I was thinking of what you, with your capacity and
intelligence, joined to your love of pleasure, and your impatience of
unreasonable restraint--of what you would have been in that past.  And
even now, when all is won and has been for a long time, my heart is
sickened with thinking of all the waste of life that has gone on for so
many years."

"So many centuries," she said, "so many ages!"

"True," I said; "too true," and sat silent again.

She rose up and said: "Come, I must not let you go off into a dream again
so soon.  If we must lose you, I want you to see all that you can see
first before you go back again."

"Lose me?" I said--"go back again?  Am I not to go up to the North with
you?  What do you mean?"

She smiled somewhat sadly, and said: "Not yet; we will not talk of that
yet.  Only, what were you thinking of just now?"

I said falteringly: "I was saying to myself, The past, the present?
Should she not have said the contrast of the present with the future: of
blind despair with hope?"

"I knew it," she said.  Then she caught my hand and said excitedly,
"Come, while there is yet time!  Come!" And she led me out of the room;
and as we were going downstairs and out of the house into the garden by a
little side door which opened out of a curious lobby, she said in a calm
voice, as if she wished me to forget her sudden nervousness: "Come! we
ought to join the others before they come here looking for us.  And let
me tell you, my friend, that I can see you are too apt to fall into mere
dreamy musing: no doubt because you are not yet used to our life of
repose amidst of energy; of work which is pleasure and pleasure which is
work."

She paused a little, and as we came out into the lovely garden again, she
said: "My friend, you were saying that you wondered what I should have
been if I had lived in those past days of turmoil and oppression.  Well,
I think I have studied the history of them to know pretty well.  I should
have been one of the poor, for my father when he was working was a mere
tiller of the soil.  Well, I could not have borne that; therefore my
beauty and cleverness and brightness" (she spoke with no blush or simper
of false shame) "would have been sold to rich men, and my life would have
been wasted indeed; for I know enough of that to know that I should have
had no choice, no power of will over my life; and that I should never
have bought pleasure from the rich men, or even opportunity of action,
whereby I might have won some true excitement.  I should have wrecked and
wasted in one way or another, either by penury or by luxury.  Is it not
so?"

"Indeed it is," said I.

She was going to say something else, when a little gate in the fence,
which led into a small elm-shaded field, was opened, and Dick came with
hasty cheerfulness up the garden path, and was presently standing between
us, a hand laid on the shoulder of each.  He said: "Well, neighbours, I
thought you two would like to see the old house quietly without a crowd
in it.  Isn't it a jewel of a house after its kind?  Well, come along,
for it is getting towards dinner-time.  Perhaps you, guest, would like a
swim before we sit down to what I fancy will be a pretty long feast?"

"Yes," I said, "I should like that."

"Well, good-bye for the present, neighbour Ellen," said Dick.  "Here
comes Clara to take care of you, as I fancy she is more at home amongst
our friends here."

Clara came out of the fields as he spoke; and with one look at Ellen I
turned and went with Dick, doubting, if I must say the truth, whether I
should see her again.




CHAPTER XXXII: THE FEAST'S BEGINNING--THE END


Dick brought me at once into the little field which, as I had seen from
the garden, was covered with gaily-coloured tents arranged in orderly
lanes, about which were sitting and lying on the grass some fifty or
sixty men, women, and children, all of them in the height of good temper
and enjoyment--with their holiday mood on, so to say.

"You are thinking that we don't make a great show as to numbers," said
Dick; "but you must remember that we shall have more to-morrow; because
in this haymaking work there is room for a great many people who are not
over-skilled in country matters: and there are many who lead sedentary
lives, whom it would be unkind to deprive of their pleasure in the hay-
field--scientific men and close students generally: so that the skilled
workmen, outside those who are wanted as mowers, and foremen of the
haymaking, stand aside, and take a little downright rest, which you know
is good for them, whether they like it or not: or else they go to other
countrysides, as I am doing here.  You see, the scientific men and
historians, and students generally, will not be wanted till we are fairly
in the midst of the tedding, which of course will not be till the day
after to-morrow."  With that he brought me out of the little field on to
a kind of causeway above the river-side meadow, and thence turning to the
left on to a path through the mowing grass, which was thick and very
tall, led on till we came to the river above the weir and its mill.  There
we had a delightful swim in the broad piece of water above the lock,
where the river looked much bigger than its natural size from its being
dammed up by the weir.

"Now we are in a fit mood for dinner," said Dick, when we had dressed and
were going through the grass again; "and certainly of all the cheerful
meals in the year, this one of haysel is the cheerfullest; not even
excepting the corn-harvest feast; for then the year is beginning to fail,
and one cannot help having a feeling behind all the gaiety, of the coming
of the dark days, and the shorn fields and empty gardens; and the spring
is almost too far off to look forward to.  It is, then, in the autumn,
when one almost believes in death."

"How strangely you talk," said I, "of such a constantly recurring and
consequently commonplace matter as the sequence of the seasons." And
indeed these people were like children about such things, and had what
seemed to me a quite exaggerated interest in the weather, a fine day, a
dark night, or a brilliant one, and the like.

"Strangely?" said he.  "Is it strange to sympathise with the year and its
gains and losses?"

"At any rate," said I, "if you look upon the course of the year as a
beautiful and interesting drama, which is what I think you do, you should
be as much pleased and interested with the winter and its trouble and
pain as with this wonderful summer luxury."

"And am I not?" said Dick, rather warmly; "only I can't look upon it as
if I were sitting in a theatre seeing the play going on before me, myself
taking no part of it.  It is difficult," said he, smiling
good-humouredly, "for a non-literary man like me to explain myself
properly, like that dear girl Ellen would; but I mean that I am part of
it all, and feel the pain as well as the pleasure in my own person.  It
is not done for me by somebody else, merely that I may eat and drink and
sleep; but I myself do my share of it."

In his way also, as Ellen in hers, I could see that Dick had that
passionate love of the earth which was common to but few people at least,
in the days I knew; in which the prevailing feeling amongst intellectual
persons was a kind of sour distaste for the changing drama of the year,
for the life of earth and its dealings with men.  Indeed, in those days
it was thought poetic and imaginative to look upon life as a thing to be
borne, rather than enjoyed.

So I mused till Dick's laugh brought me back into the Oxfordshire hay-
fields.  "One thing seems strange to me," said he--"that I must needs
trouble myself about the winter and its scantiness, in the midst of the
summer abundance.  If it hadn't happened to me before, I should have
thought it was your doing, guest; that you had thrown a kind of evil
charm over me.  Now, you know," said he, suddenly, "that's only a joke,
so you mustn't take it to heart."

"All right," said I; "I don't."  Yet I did feel somewhat uneasy at his
words, after all.

We crossed the causeway this time, and did not turn back to the house,
but went along a path beside a field of wheat now almost ready to
blossom.  I said:

"We do not dine in the house or garden, then?--as indeed I did not expect
to do.  Where do we meet, then?  For I can see that the houses are mostly
very small."

"Yes," said Dick, "you are right, they are small in this country-side:
there are so many good old houses left, that people dwell a good deal in
such small detached houses.  As to our dinner, we are going to have our
feast in the church.  I wish, for your sake, it were as big and handsome
as that of the old Roman town to the west, or the forest town to the
north; {3} but, however, it will hold us all; and though it is a little
thing, it is beautiful in its way."

This was somewhat new to me, this dinner in a church, and I thought of
the church-ales of the Middle Ages; but I said nothing, and presently we
came out into the road which ran through the village.  Dick looked up and
down it, and seeing only two straggling groups before us, said: "It seems
as if we must be somewhat late; they are all gone on; and they will be
sure to make a point of waiting for you, as the guest of guests, since
you come from so far."

He hastened as he spoke, and I kept up with him, and presently we came to
a little avenue of lime-trees which led us straight to the church porch,
from whose open door came the sound of cheerful voices and laughter, and
varied merriment.

"Yes," said Dick, "it's the coolest place for one thing, this hot
evening.  Come along; they will be glad to see you."

Indeed, in spite of my bath, I felt the weather more sultry and
oppressive than on any day of our journey yet.

We went into the church, which was a simple little building with one
little aisle divided from the nave by three round arches, a chancel, and
a rather roomy transept for so small a building, the windows mostly of
the graceful Oxfordshire fourteenth century type.  There was no modern
architectural decoration in it; it looked, indeed, as if none had been
attempted since the Puritans whitewashed the mediaeval saints and
histories on the wall.  It was, however, gaily dressed up for this latter-
day festival, with festoons of flowers from arch to arch, and great
pitchers of flowers standing about on the floor; while under the west
window hung two cross scythes, their blades polished white, and gleaming
from out of the flowers that wreathed them.  But its best ornament was
the crowd of handsome, happy-looking men and women that were set down to
table, and who, with their bright faces and rich hair over their gay
holiday raiment, looked, as the Persian poet puts it, like a bed of
tulips in the sun.  Though the church was a small one, there was plenty
of room; for a small church makes a biggish house; and on this evening
there was no need to set cross tables along the transepts; though
doubtless these would be wanted next day, when the learned men of whom
Dick has been speaking should be come to take their more humble part in
the haymaking.

I stood on the threshold with the expectant smile on my face of a man who
is going to take part in a festivity which he is really prepared to
enjoy.  Dick, standing by me was looking round the company with an air of
proprietorship in them, I thought.  Opposite me sat Clara and Ellen, with
Dick's place open between them: they were smiling, but their beautiful
faces were each turned towards the neighbours on either side, who were
talking to them, and they did not seem to see me.  I turned to Dick,
expecting him to lead me forward, and he turned his face to me; but
strange to say, though it was as smiling and cheerful as ever, it made no
response to my glance--nay, he seemed to take no heed at all of my
presence, and I noticed that none of the company looked at me.  A pang
shot through me, as of some disaster long expected and suddenly realised.
Dick moved on a little without a word to me.  I was not three yards from
the two women who, though they had been my companions for such a short
time, had really, as I thought, become my friends.  Clara's face was
turned full upon me now, but she also did not seem to see me, though I
know I was trying to catch her eye with an appealing look.  I turned to
Ellen, and she _did_ seem to recognise me for an instant; but her bright
face turned sad directly, and she shook her head with a mournful look,
and the next moment all consciousness of my presence had faded from her
face.

I felt lonely and sick at heart past the power of words to describe.  I
hung about a minute longer, and then turned and went out of the porch
again and through the lime-avenue into the road, while the blackbirds
sang their strongest from the bushes about me in the hot June evening.

Once more without any conscious effort of will I set my face toward the
old house by the ford, but as I turned round the corner which led to the
remains of the village cross, I came upon a figure strangely contrasting
with the joyous, beautiful people I had left behind in the church.  It
was a man who looked old, but whom I knew from habit, now half forgotten,
was really not much more than fifty.  His face was rugged, and grimed
rather than dirty; his eyes dull and bleared; his body bent, his calves
thin and spindly, his feet dragging and limping.  His clothing was a
mixture of dirt and rags long over-familiar to me.  As I passed him he
touched his hat with some real goodwill and courtesy, and much servility.

Inexpressibly shocked, I hurried past him and hastened along the road
that led to the river and the lower end of the village; but suddenly I
saw as it were a black cloud rolling along to meet me, like a nightmare
of my childish days; and for a while I was conscious of nothing else than
being in the dark, and whether I was walking, or sitting, or lying down,
I could not tell.

*  * *

I lay in my bed in my house at dingy Hammersmith thinking about it all;
and trying to consider if I was overwhelmed with despair at finding I had
been dreaming a dream; and strange to say, I found that I was not so
despairing.

Or indeed _was_ it a dream?  If so, why was I so conscious all along that
I was really seeing all that new life from the outside, still wrapped up
in the prejudices, the anxieties, the distrust of this time of doubt and
struggle?

All along, though those friends were so real to me, I had been feeling as
if I had no business amongst them: as though the time would come when
they would reject me, and say, as Ellen's last mournful look seemed to
say, "No, it will not do; you cannot be of us; you belong so entirely to
the unhappiness of the past that our happiness even would weary you.  Go
back again, now you have seen us, and your outward eyes have learned that
in spite of all the infallible maxims of your day there is yet a time of
rest in store for the world, when mastery has changed into fellowship--but
not before.  Go back again, then, and while you live you will see all
round you people engaged in making others live lives which are not their
own, while they themselves care nothing for their own real lives--men who
hate life though they fear death.  Go back and be the happier for having
seen us, for having added a little hope to your struggle.  Go on living
while you may, striving, with whatsoever pain and labour needs must be,
to build up little by little the new day of fellowship, and rest, and
happiness."

Yes, surely! and if others can see it as I have seen it, then it may be
called a vision rather than a dream.




﻿

THE STORY OF GRETTIR THE STRONG.


<i>This First Part tells of the forefathers of Grettir in Norway, and
how they fled away before Harald Fairhair, and settled in Iceland; and
of their deeds in Iceland before Grettir was born</i>.




CHAP. I.


There was a man named Onund, who was the son of Ufeigh Clubfoot, the
son of Ivar the Smiter; Onund was brother of Gudbiorg, the mother of
Gudbrand Ball, the father of Asta, the mother of King Olaf the Saint.
Onund was an Uplander by the kin of his mother; but the kin of his
father dwelt chiefly about Rogaland and Hordaland. He was a great
viking, and went harrying west over the Sea.[4] Balk of Sotanes, the
son of Blaeng, was with him herein, and Orm the Wealthy withal, and
Hallvard was the name of the third of them. They had five ships, all
well manned, and therewith they harried in the South-isles;[5] and
when they came to Barra, they found there a king, called Kiarval, and
he, too, had five ships. They gave him battle, and a hard fray there
was. The men of Onund were of the eagerest, and on either side many
fell; but the end of it was that the king fled with only one ship.
So there the men of Onund took both ships and much wealth, and abode
there through the winter. For three summers they harried throughout
Ireland and Scotland, and thereafter went to Norway.

[Footnote 4: "West over the Sea," means in the Sagas the British
isles, and the islands about them--the Hebrides, Orkneys, &c.]

[Footnote 5: South-isles are the Hebrides, and the other islands down
to Man.]




CHAP. II.


In those days were there great troubles in Norway. Harald the
Unshorn,[6] son of Halfdan the Black, was pushing forth for the
kingdom. Before that he was King of the Uplands; then he went north
through the land, and had many battles there, and ever won the day.
Thereafter he harried south in the land, and wheresoever he came,
laid all under him; but when he came to Hordaland, swarms of folk came
thronging against him; and their captains were Kiotvi the Wealthy, and
Thorir Longchin, and those of South Rogaland, and King Sulki. Geirmund
Helskin was then in the west over the Sea; nor was he in that battle,
though he had a kingdom in Hordaland.

[Footnote 6: "Harald the Unshorn:" he was so called at first because
he made a vow not to cut his hair till he was sole king of Norway.
When he had attained to this, and Earl Rognvald had taken him to the
bath and trimmed his hair, he was called "Fair-hair," from its length
and beauty.]

Now that autumn Onund and his fellows came from the west over the Sea;
and when Thorir Longchin and King Kiotvi heard thereof, they sent men
to meet them, and prayed them for help, and promised them honours.
Then they entered into fellowship with Thorir and his men; for they
were exceeding fain to try their strength, and said that there would
they be whereas the fight was hottest.

Now was the meeting with Harald the King in Rogaland, in that firth
which is called Hafrsfirth; and both sides had many men. This was the
greatest battle that has ever been fought in Norway, and hereof most
Sagas tell; for of those is ever most told, of whom the Sagas are
made; and thereto came folk from all the land, and many from other
lands and swarms of vikings.

Now Onund laid his ship alongside one board of the ship of Thorir
Longchin, about the midst of the fleet, but King Harald laid his on
the other board, because Thorir was the greatest bearserk, and the
stoutest of men; so the fight was of the fiercest on either side. Then
the king cried on his bearserks for an onslaught, and they were called
the Wolf-coats, for on them would no steel bite, and when they set
on nought might withstand them. Thorir defended him very stoutly, and
fell in all hardihood on board his ship; then was it cleared from stem
to stern, and cut from the grapplings, and let drift astern betwixt
the other ships. Thereafter the king's men laid their ship alongside
Onund's, and he was in the forepart thereof and fought manly; then the
king's folk said, "Lo, a forward man in the forecastle there, let him
have somewhat to mind him how that he was in this battle." Now Onund
put one foot out over the bulwark and dealt a blow at a man, and even
therewith a spear was aimed at him, and as he put the blow from him
he bent backward withal, and one of the king's forecastle men smote
at him, and the stroke took his leg below the knee and sheared it off,
and forthwith made him unmeet for fight. Then fell the more part of
the folk on board his ship; but Onund was brought to the ship of him
who is called Thrand; he was the son of Biorn, and brother of Eyvind
the Eastman; he was in the fight against King Harald and lay on the
other board of Onund's ship.

But now, after these things, the more part of the fleet scattered in
flight; Thrand and his men, with the other vikings, got them away each
as he might, and sailed west over the Sea; Onund went with him, and
Balk and Hallvard Sweeping; Onund was healed, but went with a wooden
leg all his life after; therefore as long as he lived was he called
Onund Treefoot.




CHAP. III.


At that time were many great men west over the Sea, such as had fled
from their lands in Norway before King Harald, because he had made
all those outlaws, who had met him in battle, and taken to him their
possessions. So, when Onund was healed of his wounds, he and Thrand
went to meet Geirmund Helskin, because he was the most famed of
vikings west there over the Sea, and they asked him whether he had any
mind to seek after that kingdom which he had in Hordaland, and offered
him their fellowship herein; for they deemed they had a sore loss of
their lands there, since Onund was both mighty and of great kin.

Geirmund said that so great had grown the strength of King Harald,
that he deemed there was little hope that they would win honour in
their war with him when men had been worsted, even when all the folk
of the land had been drawn together; and yet withal that he was loth
to become a king's thrall and pray for that which was his own; that
he would find somewhat better to do than that; and now, too, he was no
longer young. So Onund and his fellows went back to the South-isles,
and there met many of their friends.

There was a man, Ufeigh by name, who was bynamed Grettir; he was the
son of Einar, the son of Olvir Bairn-Carle; he was brother to Oleif
the Broad, the father of Thormod Shaft; Steinulf was the name of
Olvir Bairn-Carle's son, he was the father of Una whom Thorbiorn
Salmon-Carle had to wife. Another son of Olvir Bairn-Carle was
Steinmod, the father of Konal, who was the father of Aldis of Barra.
The son of Konal was Steinmod, the father of Haldora, the wife of
Eilif, the son of Ketil the Onehanded. Ufeigh Grettir had to wife
Asny, the daughter of Vestar Haengson; and Asmund the Beardless and
Asbiorn were the sons of Ufeigh Grettir, but his daughters were these,
Aldis, and Asa, and Asvor. Ufeigh had fled away west over the Sea
before Harald the king, and so had Thormod Shaft his kinsman, and had
with them their kith and kin; and they harried in Scotland, and far
and wide west beyond the sea.

Now Thrand and Onund Treefoot made west for Ireland to find Eyvind
the Eastman, Thrand's brother, who was Land-ward along the coasts of
Ireland; the mother of Eyvind was Hlif, the daughter of Rolf, son of
Ingiald, the son of King Frodi; but Thrand's mother was Helga, the
daughter of Ondott the Crow; Biorn was the name of the father of
Eyvind and Thrand, he was the son of Rolf from Am; he had had to
flee from Gothland, for that he had burned in his house Sigfast, the
son-in-law of King Solver; and thereafter had he gone to Norway, and
was the next winter with Grim the hersir, the son of Kolbiorn the
Abasher. Now Grim had a mind to murder Biorn for his money, so he
fled thence to Ondott the Crow, who dwelt in Hvinisfirth in Agdir; he
received Biorn well, and Biorn was with him in the winter, but was
in warfare in summer-tide, until Hlif his wife died; and after that
Ondott gave Biorn Helga his daughter, and then Biorn left off warring.

Now thereon Eyvind took to him the war-ships of his father, and
was become a great chief west over the Sea; he wedded Rafarta, the
daughter of Kiarval, King of Ireland; their sons were Helgi the Lean
and Snaebiorn.

So when Thrand and Onund came to the South-isles, there they met
Ufeigh Grettir and Thormod Shaft, and great friendship grew up betwixt
them, for each thought he had gained from hell the last who had been
left behind in Norway while the troubles there were at the highest.
But Onund was exceeding moody, and when Thrand marked it, he asked
what he was brooding over in his mind. Onund answered, and sang this
stave--

  "What joy since that day can I get
  When shield-fire's thunder last I met;
  Ah, too soon clutch the claws of ill;
  For that axe-edge shall grieve me still.
  In eyes of fighting man and thane,
  My strength and manhood are but vain,
  This is the thing that makes me grow
  A joyless man; is it enow?"

Thrand answered that whereso he was, he would still be deemed a brave
man, "And now it is meet for thee to settle down and get married,
and I would put forth my word and help, if I but knew whereto thou
lookest."

Onund said he did in manly wise, but that his good hope for matches of
any gain was gone by now.

Thrand answered, "Ufeigh has a daughter who is called Asa, thitherward
will we turn if it seem good to thee." Onund showed that he was
willing enough hereto; so afterwards they talked the matter over with
Ufeigh; he answered well, and said that he knew how that Onund was a
man of great kin and rich of chattels; "but his lands," said he, "I
put at low worth, nor do I deem him to be a hale man, and withal my
daughter is but a child."

Thrand said, that Onund was a brisker man yet than many who were hale
of both legs, and so by Thrand's help was this bargain struck; Ufeigh
was to give his daughter but chattels for dowry, because those lands
that were in Norway neither would lay down any money for.

A little after Thrand wooed the daughter of Thormod Shaft, and both
were to sit in troth for three winters.

So thereafter they went a harrying in the summer, but were in Barra in
the winter-tide.




CHAP. IV.


There were two vikings called Vigbiod and Vestmar; they were
South-islanders, and lay out both winter and summer; they had thirteen
ships, and harried mostly in Ireland, and did many an ill deed there
till Eyvind the Eastman took the land-wardship; thereafter they got
them gone to the South-isles, and harried there and all about the
firths of Scotland: against these went Thrand and Onund, and heard
that they had sailed to that island, which is called Bute. Now Onund
and his folk came there with five ships; and when the vikings see
their ships and know how many they are, they deem they have enough
strength gathered there, and take their weapons and lay their ships in
the midst betwixt two cliffs, where was a great and deep sound; only
on one side could they be set on, and that with but five ships at
once. Now Onund was the wisest of men, and bade lay five ships up into
the sound, so that he and his might have back way when they would, for
there was plenty of sea-room astern. On one board of them too was a
certain island, and under the lee thereof he let one ship lie, and his
men brought many great stones forth on to the sheer cliffs above, yet
might not be seen withal from the ships.

Now the vikings laid their ships boldly enough for the attack, and
thought that the others quailed; and Vigbiod asked who they were that
were in such jeopardy. Thrand said that he was the brother of Eyvind
the Eastman, "and here beside me is Onund Treefoot my fellow."

Then laughed the vikings, and shouted--

  "Treefoot, Treefoot, foot of tree,
  Trolls take thee and thy company."

"Yea, a sight it is seldom seen of us, that such men should go into
battle as have no might over themselves."

Onund said that they could know nought thereof ere it were tried; and
withal they laid their ships alongside one of the other, and there
began a great fight, and either side did boldly. But when they came
to handy blows, Onund gave back toward the cliff, and when the vikings
saw this, they deemed he was minded to flee, and made towards his
ship, and came as nigh to the cliff as they might. But in that very
point of time those came forth on to the edge of the cliff who were
appointed so to do, and sent at the vikings so great a flight of
stones that they might not withstand it.

Then fell many of the viking-folk, and others were hurt so that they
might not bear weapon; and withal they were fain to draw back, and
might not, because their ships were even then come into the narrowest
of the sound, and they were huddled together both by the ships and the
stream; but Onund and his men set on fiercely, whereas Vigbiod was,
but Thrand set on Vestmar, and won little thereby; so, when the folk
were thinned on Vigbiod's ship, Onund's men and Onund himself got
ready to board her: that Vigbiod saw, and cheered on his men without
stint: then he turned to meet Onund, and the more part fled before
him; but Onund bade his men mark how it went between them; for he was
of huge strength. Now they set a log of wood under Onund's knee, so
that he stood firmly enow; the viking fought his way forward along the
ship till he reached Onund, and he smote at him with his sword, and
the stroke took the shield, and sheared off all it met; and then the
sword drove into the log that Onund had under his knee, and stuck fast
therein; and Vigbiod stooped in drawing it out, and even therewith
Onund smote at his shoulder in such wise, that he cut the arm from off
him, and then was the viking unmeet for battle.

But when Vestmar knew that his fellow was fallen, he leaped into
the furthermost ship and fled with all those who might reach her.
Thereafter they ransacked the fallen men; and by then was Vigbiod nigh
to his death: Onund went up to him, and sang--

  "Yea, seest thou thy wide wounds bleed?
  What of shrinking didst thou heed
  In the one-foot sling of gold?
  What scratch here dost thou behold?
  And in e'en such wise as this
  Many an axe-breaker there is
  Strong of tongue and weak of hand:
  Tried thou wert, and might'st not stand."

So there they took much spoil and sailed back to Barra in the autumn.




CHAP. V.


The summer after this they made ready to fare west to Ireland. But at
that time Balk and Hallvard betook themselves from the lands west over
the sea, and went out to Iceland, for from thence came tales of land
good to choose. Balk settled land in Ramfirth and dwelt at either
Balkstead; Hallvard settled Sweepingsfirth, and Hallwick out to the
Stair, and dwelt there.

Now Thrand and Onund met Eyvind the Eastman, and he received his
brother well; but when he knew that Onund was come with him, then he
waxed wroth, and would fain set on him. Thrand bade him do it not, and
said that it was not for him to wage war against Northmen, and
least of all such men as fared peaceably. Eyvind said that he fared
otherwise before, and had broken the peace of Kiarval the King, and
that he should now pay for all. Many words the brothers had over this,
till Thrand said at last that one fate should befall both him and
Onund; and then Eyvind let himself be appeased.

So they dwelt there long that summer, and went on warfare with Eyvind,
who found Onund to be the bravest of men. In the autumn they fared to
the South-isles, and Eyvind gave to Thrand to take all the heritage of
their father, if Biorn should die before Thrand.

Now were the twain in the South-isles until they wedded their wives,
and some winters after withal.




CHAP. VI.


And now it came to pass that Biorn, the father of Thrand, died; and
when Grim the hersir hears thereof he went to meet Ondott Crow, and
claimed the goods left by Biorn; but Ondott said that Thrand had the
heritage after his father; Grim said that Thrand was west over seas,
and that Biorn was a Gothlander of kin, and that the king took the
heritage of all outland men. Ondott said that he should keep the goods
for the hands of Thrand, his daughter's son; and therewith Grim gat
him gone, and had nought for his claiming the goods.

Now Thrand had news of his father's death, and straightway got ready
to go from the South-isles, and Onund Treefoot with him; but Ufeigh
Grettir and Thormod Shaft went out to Iceland with their kith and kin,
and came out to the Eres in the south country, and dwelt the first
winter with Thorbiorn Salmon-Carle.

Thereafter they settled Gnup-Wards'-rape, Ufeigh, the outward part,
between Thwart-river and Kalf-river, and he dwelt at Ufeigh's-stead
by Stone-holt; but Thormod settled the eastward part, and abode at
Shaft-holt.

The daughters of Thormod were these: Thorvor, mother of Thorod the
Godi[7] of Hailti, and Thora, mother of Thorstein, the Godi, the
father of Biarni the Sage.

[Footnote 7: "Godi" is the name for the rulers of the thirty-nine
districts into which the republic of Iceland was anciently divided.
While the ancient religion lasted, their office combined in itself the
highest civil and sacerdotal functions.]

Now it is to be said of Thrand and Onund that they sailed from the
lands west over the Sea toward Norway, and had fair wind, and such
speed, that no rumour of their voyage was abroad till they came to
Ondott Crow.

He gave Thrand good welcome, and told him how Grim the hersir had
claimed the heritage left by Biorn. "Meeter it seems to me,
kinsman," said he, "that thou take the heritage of thy father and not
king's-thralls; good luck has befallen thee, in that none knows of thy
coming, but it misdoubts me that Grim will come upon one or other
of us if he may; therefore I would that thou shouldst take the
inheritance to thee, and get thee gone to other lands."

Thrand said that so he would do, he took to him the chattels and got
away from Norway at his speediest; but before he sailed into the sea,
he asked Onund Treefoot whether he would not make for Iceland with
him; Onund said he would first go see his kin and friends in the south
country.

Thrand said, "Then must we part now, but I would that thou shouldst
aid my kin, for on them will vengeance fall if I get off clear; but
to Iceland shall I go, and I would that thou withal shouldst make that
journey."

Onund gave his word to all, and they parted in good love. So Thrand
went to Iceland, and Ufeigh and Thormod Shaft received him well.
Thrand dwelt at Thrand's-holt, which is west of Steer's-river.




CHAP. VII.


Onund went south to Rogaland, and met there many of his kin and
friends; he dwelt there in secret at a man's called Kolbein. Now he
heard that the king had taken his lands to him and set a man thereover
who was called Harek, who was a farmer of the king's; so on a night
Onund went to him, and took him in his house; there Harek was led out
and cut down, and Onund took all the chattels they found and burnt the
homestead; and thereafter he abode in many places that winter.

But that autumn Grim the hersir slew Ondott Crow, because he might
not get the heritage-money for the king; and that same night of his
slaying, Signy, his wife, brought aboard ship all her chattels, and
fared with her sons, Asmund and Asgrim, to Sighvat her father; but a
little after sent her sons to Soknadale to Hedin her foster-father;
but that seemed good to them but for a little while, and they would
fain go back again to their mother; so they departed and came at
Yule-tide to Ingiald the Trusty at Hvin; he took them in because of
the urgency of Gyda his wife, and they were there the winter through.
But in spring came Onund north to Agdir, because he had heard of the
slaying of Ondott Crow; but when he found Signy he asked her what help
she would have of him.

She said that she would fain have vengeance on Grim the hersir for
the slaying of Ondott. Then were the sons of Ondott sent for, and when
they met Onund Treefoot, they made up one fellowship together, and
had spies abroad on the doings of Grim. Now in the summer was a great
ale-drinking held at Grim's, because he had bidden to him Earl Audun;
and when Onund and the sons of Ondott knew thereof they went to
Grim's homestead and laid fire to the house, for they were come there
unawares, and burnt Grim the hersir therein, and nigh thirty men, and
many good things they took there withal. Then went Onund to the
woods, but the sons of Ondott took a boat of Ingiald's, their
foster-father's, and rowed away therein, and lay hid a little way off
the homestead. Earl Audun came to the feast, even as had been settled
afore, and there "missed friend from stead." Then he gathered men to
him, and dwelt there some nights, but nought was heard of Onund and
his fellows; and the Earl slept in a loft with two men.

Onund had full tidings from the homestead, and sent after those
brothers; and, when they met, Onund asked them whether they would
watch the farm or fall on the Earl; but they chose to set on the Earl.
So they drove beams at the loft-doors and broke them in; then Asmund
caught hold of the two who were with the Earl, and cast them down so
hard that they were well-nigh slain; but Asgrim ran at the Earl, and
bade him render up weregild for his father, since he had been in
the plot and the onslaught with Grim the hersir when Ondott Crow was
slain. The Earl said he had no money with him there, and prayed for
delay of that payment. Then Asgrim set his spear-point to the Earl's
breast and bade him pay there and then; so the Earl took a chain from
his neck, and three gold rings, and a cloak of rich web, and gave them
up. Asgrim took the goods and gave the Earl a name, and called him
Audun Goaty.

But when the bonders and neighbouring folk were ware that war was come
among them, they went abroad and would bring help to the Earl, and a
hard fight there was, for Onund had many men, and there fell many good
bonders and courtmen of the Earl. Now came the brothers, and told how
they had fared with the Earl, and Onund said that it was ill that he
was not slain, "that would have been somewhat of a revenge on the King
for our loss at his hands of fee and friends." They said that this
was a greater shame to the Earl; and therewith they went away up to
Sorreldale to Eric Alefain, a king's lord, and he took them in for all
the winter.

Now at Yule they drank turn and turn about with a man called
Hallstein, who was bynamed Horse; Eric gave the first feast, well and
truly, and then Hallstein gave his, but thereat was there bickering
between them, and Hallstein smote Eric with a deer-horn; Eric gat no
revenge therefor, but went home straightway. This sore misliked
the sons of Ondott, and a little after Asgrim fared to Hallstein's
homestead, and went in alone, and gave him a great wound, but those
who were therein sprang up and set on Asgrim. Asgrim defended himself
well and got out of their hands in the dark; but they deemed they had
slain him.

Onund and Asmund heard thereof and supposed him dead, but deemed they
might do nought. Eric counselled them to make for Iceland, and said
that would be of no avail to abide there in the land (i.e. in Norway),
as soon as the king should bring matters about to his liking. So
this they did, and made them ready for Iceland and had each one ship.
Hallstein lay wounded, and died before Onund and his folk sailed.
Kolbein withal, who is afore mentioned, went abroad with Onund.




CHAP. VIII.


Now Onund and Asmund sailed into the sea when they were ready, and
held company together; then sang Onund this stave--

  "Meet was I in days agone
  For storm, wherein the Sweeping One,
  Midst rain of swords, and the darts' breath,
  Blew o'er all a gale of death.
  Now a maimed, one-footed man
  On rollers' steed through waters wan
  Out to Iceland must I go;
  Ah, the skald is sinking low."

They had a hard voyage of it and much of baffling gales from the
south, and drove north into the main; but they made Iceland, and were
by then come to the north off Longness when they found where they
were: so little space there was betwixt them that they spake together;
and Asmund said that they had best sail to Islefirth, and thereto they
both agreed; then they beat up toward the land, and a south-east wind
sprang up; but when Onund and his folk laid the ship close to the
wind, the yard was sprung; then they took in sail, and therewith were
driven off to sea; but Asmund got under the lee of Brakeisle, and
there lay till a fair wind brought him into Islefirth; Helgi the Lean
gave him all Kraeklings' lithe, and he dwelt at South Glass-river;
Asgrim his brother came out some winters later and abode at North
Glass-river; he was the father of Ellida-Grim, the father of Asgrim
Ellida-Grimson.




CHAP. IX.


Now it is to be told of Onund Treefoot that he drave out to sea for
certain days, but at last the wind got round to the north, and they
sailed for land: then those knew who had been there before that they
had come west off the Skagi; then they sailed into Strand-Bay, and
near to the South-Strands, and there rowed toward them six men in
a ten-oared boat, who hailed the big ship, and asked who was their
captain; Onund named himself, and asked whence they came; they said
they were house-carles of Thorvald, from Drangar; Onund asked if all
land through the Strands had been settled; they said there was little
unsettled in the inner Strands, and none north thereof. Then Onund
asked his shipmates, whether they would make for the west country, or
take such as they had been told of; they chose to view the land first.
So they sailed in up the bay, and brought to in a creek off Arness,
then put forth a boat and rowed to land. There dwelt a rich man,
Eric Snare, who had taken land betwixt Ingolfs-firth, and Ufoera in
Fishless; but when Eric knew that Onund was come there, he bade him
take of his hands whatso he would, but said that there was little that
had not been settled before. Onund said he would first see what there
was, so they went landward south past some firths, till they came to
Ufoera; then said Eric, "Here is what there is to look to; all from
here is unsettled, and right in to the settlements of Biorn." Now a
great mountain went down the eastern side of the firth, and snow had
fallen thereon, Onund looked on that mountain, and sang--

  "Brand-whetter's life awry doth go.
  Fair lands and wide full well I know;
  Past house, and field, and fold of man,
  The swift steed of the rollers ran:
  My lands, and kin, I left behind,
  That I this latter day might find,
  Coldback for sunny meads to have;
  Hard fate a bitter bargain drave."

Eric answered, "Many have lost so much in Norway, that it may not be
bettered: and I think withal that most lands in the main-settlements
are already settled, and therefore I urge thee not to go from hence;
but I shall hold to what I spake, that thou mayst have whatso of my
lands seems meet to thee." Onund said, that he would take that offer,
and so he settled land out from Ufoera over the three creeks, Byrgis
Creek, Kolbein's Creek, and Coldback Creek, up to Coldback Cleft.
Thereafter Eric gave him all Fishless, and Reekfirth, and all
Reekness, out on that side of the firth; but as to drifts there was
nought set forth, for they were then so plentiful that every man had
of them what he would. Now Onund set up a household at Coldback, and
had many men about him; but when his goods began to grow great he had
another stead in Reekfirth. Kolbein dwelt at Kolbein's Creek. So Onund
abode in peace for certain winters.




CHAP. X.


Now Onund was so brisk a man, that few, even of whole men, could cope
with him; and his name withal was well known throughout the land,
because of his forefathers. After these things, befell that strife
betwixt Ufeigh Grettir and Thorbiorn Earl's-champion, which had such
ending, that Ufeigh fell before Thorbiorn in Grettir's-Gill, near
Heel. There were many drawn together to the sons of Ufeigh concerning
the blood-suit, and Onund Treefoot was sent for, and rode south in
the spring, and guested at Hvamm, with Aud the Deeply-wealthy, and
she gave him exceeding good welcome, because he had been with her west
over the Sea. In those days, Olaf Feilan, her son's son, was a man
full grown, and Aud was by then worn with great eld; she bade Onund
know that she would have Olaf, her kinsman, married, and was fain that
he should woo Aldis of Barra, who was cousin to Asa, whom Onund had to
wife. Onund deemed the matter hopeful, and Olaf rode south with him.
So when Onund met his friends and kin-in-law they bade him abide with
them: then was the suit talked over, and was laid to Kialarnes Thing,
for as then the Althing was not yet set up. So the case was settled
by umpiredom, and heavy weregild came for the slayings, and Thorbiorn
Earl's-champion was outlawed. His son was Solmund, the father of Kari
the Singed; father and son dwelt abroad a long time afterwards.

Thrand bade Onund and Olaf to his house, and so did Thormod Shaft, and
they backed Olaf's wooing, which was settled with ease, because men
knew how mighty a woman Aud was. So the bargain was made, and, so much
being done, Onund rode home, and Aud thanked him well for his help to
Olaf. That autumn Olaf Feilan wedded Aldis of Barra; and then died Aud
the Deeply-wealthy, as is told in the story of the Laxdale men.




CHAP. XI.


Onund and Asa had two sons; the elder was called Thorgeir, the younger
Ufeigh Grettir; but Asa soon died. Thereafter Onund got to wife a
woman called Thordis, the daughter of Thorgrim, from Gnup in Midfirth,
and akin to Midfirth Skeggi. Of her Onund had a son called Thorgrim;
he was early a big man, and a strong, wise, and good withal in matters
of husbandry. Onund dwelt on at Coldback till he was old, then he died
in his bed, and is buried in Treefoot's barrow; he was the briskest
and lithest of one-footed men who have ever lived in Iceland.

Now Thorgrim took the lead among the sons of Onund, though others of
them were older than he; but when he was twenty-five years old he
grew grey-haired, and therefore was he bynamed Greypate; Thordis, his
mother, was afterwards wedded north in Willowdale, to Audun Skokul,
and their son was Asgeir, of Asgeir's-River. Thorgrim Greypate and
his brothers had great possessions in common, nor did they divide the
goods between them. Now Eric, who farmed at Arness, as is aforesaid,
had to wife Alof, daughter of Ingolf, of Ingolfs-firth; and Flosi was
the name of their son, a hopeful man, and of many friends. In those
days three brothers came out hither, Ingolf, Ufeigh, and Eyvind, and
settled those three firths that are known by their names, and there
dwelt afterwards. Olaf was the name of Eyvind's son, he first dwelt
at Eyvind's-firth, and after at Drangar, and was a man to hold his own
well.

Now there was no strife betwixt these men while their elders were
alive; but when Eric died, it seemed to Flosi, that those of Coldback
had no lawful title to the lands which Eric had given to Onund; and
from this befell much ill-blood betwixt them; but Thorgrim and his
kin still held their lands as before, but they might not risk having
sports together. Now Thorgeir was head-man of the household of those
brothers in Reekfirth, and would ever be rowing out a-fishing, because
in those days were the firths full of fish; so those in the Creek
made up their plot; a man there was, a house-carle of Flosi in Arness,
called Thorfin, him Flosi sent for Thorgeir's head, and he went and
hid himself in the boat-stand; that morning, Thorgeir got ready to row
out to sea, and two men with him, one called Hamund, the other Brand.
Thorgeir went first, and had on his back a leather bottle and drink
therein. It was very dark, and as he walked down from the boat-stand
Thorfin ran at him, and smote him with an axe betwixt the shoulders,
and the axe sank in, and the bottle squeaked, but he let go the axe,
for he deemed that there would be little need of binding up, and would
save himself as swiftly as might be; and it is to be told of him that
he ran off to Arness, and came there before broad day, and told of
Thorgeir's slaying, and said that he should have need of Flosi's
shelter, and that the only thing to be done was to offer atonement,
"for that of all things," said he, "is like to better our strait,
great as it has now grown."

Flosi said that he would first hear tidings; "and I am minded to think
that thou art afraid after thy big deed."

Now it is to be said of Thorgeir, that he turned from the blow as the
axe smote the bottle, nor had he any wound; they made no search
for the man because of the dark, so they rowed over the firths to
Coldback, and told tidings of what had happed; thereat folk made much
mocking, and called Thorgeir, Bottleback, and that was his by-name
ever after.

And this was sung withal--

  "The brave men of days of old,
  Whereof many a tale is told,
  Bathed the whiting of the shield,
  In wounds' house on battle-field;
  But the honour-missing fool,
  Both sides of his slaying tool,
  Since faint heart his hand made vain.
  With but curdled milk must stain."




CHAP. XII.


In those days befell such hard times in Iceland, that nought like them
has been known there; well-nigh all gettings from the sea, and all
drifts, came to an end; and this went on for many seasons. One autumn
certain chapmen in a big ship were drifted thither, and were wrecked
there in the Creek, and Flosi took to him four or five of them; Stein
was the name of their captain; they were housed here and there about
the Creek, and were minded to build them a new ship from the wreck;
but they were unhandy herein, and the ship was over small stem and
stern, but over big amidships.

That spring befell a great storm from the north, which lasted near a
week, and after the storm men looked after their drifts. Now there was
a man called Thorstein, who dwelt at Reekness; he found a whale driven
up on the firthward side of the ness, at a place called Rib-Skerries,
and the whale was a big whale.

Thorstein sent forthwith a messenger to Wick to Flosi, and so to the
nighest farm-steads. Now Einar was the name of the farmer at Combe,
and he was a tenant of those of Coldback, and had the ward of their
drifts on that side of the firths; and now withal he was ware of the
stranding of the whale: and he took boat and rowed past the firths to
Byrgis Creek, whence he sent a man to Coldback; and when Thorgrim and
his brothers heard that, they got ready at their swiftest, and were
twelve in a ten-oared boat, and Kolbein's sons fared with them, Ivar
and Leif, and were six altogether; and all farmers who could bring it
about went to the whale.

Now it is to be told of Flosi that he sent to his kin in Ingolfs-firth
and Ufeigh's-firth, and for Olaf Eyvindson, who then dwelt at Drangar;
and Flosi came first to the whale, with the men of Wick, then they
fell to cutting up the whale, and what was cut was forthwith sent
ashore; near twenty men were thereat at first, but soon folk came
thronging thither.

Therewith came those of Coldback in four boats, and Thorgrim laid
claim to the whale and forbade the men of Wick to shear, allot, or
carry off aught thereof: Flosi bade him show if Eric had given Onund
Treefoot the drift in clear terms, or else he said he should defend
himself with arms. Thorgrim thought he and his too few, and would not
risk an onset; but therewithal came a boat rowing up the firth, and
the rowers therein pulled smartly. Soon they came up, and there was
Swan, from Knoll in Biornfirth, and his house-carles; and straightway,
when he came, he bade Thorgrim not to let himself be robbed; and great
friends they had been heretofore, and now Swan offered his aid. The
brothers said they would take it, and therewith set on fiercely;
Thorgeir Bottleback first mounted the whale against Flosi's
house-carles; there the aforenamed Thorfin was cutting the whale, he
was in front nigh the head, and stood in a foot-hold he had cut for
himself; then Thorgeir said, "Herewith I bring thee back thy axe," and
smote him on the neck, and struck off his head.

Flosi was up on the foreshore when he saw that, and he egged on his
men to meet them hardily; now they fought long together, but those of
Coldback had the best of it: few men there had weapons except the axes
wherewith they were cutting up the whale, and some choppers. So the
men of Wick gave back to the foreshores; the Eastmen had weapons,
and many a wound they gave; Stein, the captain, smote a foot off
Ivar Kolbeinson, but Leif, Ivar's brother, beat to death a fellow of
Stein's with a whale-rib; blows were dealt there with whatever could
be caught at, and men fell on either side. But now came up Olaf and
his men from Drangar in many boats, and gave help to Flosi, and then
those of Coldback were borne back overpowered; but they had loaded
their boats already, and Swan bade get aboard and thitherward they
gave back, and the men of Wick came on after them; and when Swan was
come down to the sea, he smote at Stein, the sea-captain, and gave him
a great wound, and then leapt aboard his boat; Thorgrim wounded Flosi
with a great wound and therewith got away; Olaf cut at Ufeigh Grettir,
and wounded him to death; but Thorgeir caught Ufeigh up and leapt
aboard with him. Now those of Coldback row east by the firths, and
thus they parted; and this was sung of their meeting--

  At Rib-skerries, I hear folk tell,
  A hard and dreadful fray befell,
  For men unarmed upon that day
  With strips of whale-fat made good play.
  Fierce steel-gods these in turn did meet
  With blubber-slices nowise sweet;
  Certes a wretched thing it is
  To tell of squabbles such as this.

After these things was peace settled between them, and these suits
were laid to the Althing; there Thorod the Godi and Midfirth-Skeggi,
with many of the south-country folk, aided those of Coldback; Flosi
was outlawed, and many of those who had been with him; and his moneys
were greatly drained because he chose to pay up all weregild himself.
Thorgrim and his folk could not show that they had paid money for the
lands and drifts which Flosi claimed. Thorkel Moon was lawman then,
and he was bidden to give his decision; he said that to him it seemed
law, that something had been paid for those lands, though mayhap
not their full worth; "For so did Steinvor the Old to Ingolf, my
grandfather, that she had from him all Rosmwhale-ness and gave
therefor a spotted cloak, nor has that gift been voided, though certes
greater flaws be therein: but here I lay down my rede," said he, "that
the land be shared, and that both sides have equal part therein; and
henceforth be it made law, that each man have the drifts before
his own lands." Now this was done, and the land was so divided that
Thorgrim and his folk had to give up Reekfirth and all the lands by
the firth-side, but Combe they were to keep still. Ufeigh was atoned
with a great sum; Thorfin was unatoned, and boot was given to Thorgeir
for the attack on his life; and thereafter were they set at one
together. Flosi took ship for Norway with Stein, the ship-master, and
sold his lands in the Wick to Geirmund Hiuka-timber, who dwelt there
afterwards. Now that ship which the chapmen had made was very broad of
beam, so that men called it the Treetub, and by that name is the
creek known: but in that keel did Flosi go out, but was driven back to
Axefirth, whereof came the tale of Bodmod, and Grimulf, and Gerpir.




CHAP. XIII.


Now after this the brothers Thorgrim and Thorgeir shared their
possessions. Thorgrim took the chattels and Thorgeir the land;
Thorgrim betook himself to Midfirth and bought land at Biarg by the
counsel of Skeggi; he had to wife Thordis, daughter of Asmund of
Asmund's-peak, who had settled the Thingere lands: Thorgrim and
Thordis had a son who was called Asmund; he was a big man and a
strong, wise withal, and the fairest-haired of men, but his head grew
grey early, wherefore he was called Asmund the Greyhaired. Thorgrim
grew to be a man very busy about his household, and kept all his men
well to their work. Asmund would do but little work, so the father and
son had small fellowship together; and so things fared till Asmund had
grown of age; then he asked his father for travelling money;
Thorgrim said he should have little enough, but gave him somewhat of
huckstering wares.

Then Asmund went abroad, and his goods soon grew great; he sailed to
sundry lands, and became the greatest of merchants, and very rich; he
was a man well beloved and trusty, and many kinsmen he had in Norway
of great birth.

One autumn he guested east in the Wick with a great man who was called
Thorstein; he was an Uplander of kin, and had a sister called Ranveig,
one to be chosen before all women; her Asmund wooed, and gained her by
the help of Thorstein her brother; and there Asmund dwelt a while
and was held in good esteem: he had of Ranveig a son hight Thorstein,
strong, and the fairest of men, and great of voice; a man tall of
growth he was, but somewhat slow in his mien, and therefore was he
called Dromund. Now when Thorstein was nigh grown up, his mother fell
sick and died, and thereafter Asmund had no joy in Norway; the kin
of Thorstein's mother took his goods, and him withal to foster; but
Asmund betook himself once more to seafaring, and became a man of
great renown. Now he brought his ship into Hunawater, and in those
days was Thorkel Krafla chief over the Waterdale folk; and he heard
of Asmund's coming out, and rode to the ship and bade Asmund to his
house; and he dwelt at Marstead in Waterdale; so Asmund went to
be guest there. This Thorkel was the son of Thorgrim the Godi of
Cornriver, and was a very wise man.

Now this was after the coming out of Bishop Frederick, and Thorvald
Kodran's son, and they dwelt at the Brooks-meet, when these things
came to pass: they were the first to preach the law of Christ in the
north country; Thorkel let himself be signed with the cross and
many men with him, and things enow betid betwixt the bishop and the
north-country folk which come not into this tale.

Now at Thorkel's was a woman brought up, Asdis by name, who was the
daughter of Bard, the son of Jokul, the son of Ingimund the Old, the
son of Thorstein, the son of Ketil the Huge: the mother of Asdis was
Aldis the daughter of Ufeigh Grettir, as is aforesaid; Asdis was as
yet unwedded, and was deemed the best match among women, both for her
kin and her possessions; Asmund was grown weary of seafaring, and
was fain to take up his abode in Iceland; so he took up the word, and
wooed this woman. Thorkel knew well all his ways, that he was a rich
man and of good counsel to hold his wealth; so that came about, that
Asmund got Asdis to wife; he became a bosom friend of Thorkel, and
a great dealer in matters of farming, cunning in the law, and
far-reaching. And now a little after this Thorgrim Greypate died at
Biarg, and Asmund took the heritage after him and dwelt there.




HERE BEGINS THE STORY OF THE LIFE
OF GRETTIR THE STRONG




CHAP. XIV.

<i>Of Grettir as a child, and his froward ways with his father</i>.


Asmund the Greyhaired kept house at Biarg; great and proud was his
household, and many men he had about him, and was a man much beloved.
These were the children of him and Asdis. Atli was the eldest son;
a man yielding and soft-natured, easy, and meek withal, and all men
liked him well: another son they had called Grettir; he was very
froward in his childhood; of few words, and rough; worrying both in
word and deed. Little fondness he got from his father Asmund, but his
mother loved him right well.

Grettir Asmundson was fair to look on, broad-faced, short-faced,
red-haired, and much freckled; not of quick growth in his childhood.

Thordis was a daughter of Asmund, whom Glum, the son of Uspak, the
son of Kiarlak of Skridinsenni, afterwards had to wife. Ranveig was
another daughter of Asmund; she was the wife of Gamli, the son of
Thorhal, the son of the Vendlander; they kept house at Meals in
Ramfirth; their son was Grim. The son of Glum and Thordis, the
daughter of Asmund, was Uspak, who quarrelled with Odd, the son of
Ufeigh, as is told in the Bandamanna Saga.

Grettir grew up at Biarg till he was ten years old; then he began to
get on a little; but Asmund bade him do some work; Grettir answered
that work was not right meet for him, but asked what he should do.

Says Asmund, "Thou shalt watch my home-geese."

Grettir answered and said, "A mean work, a milksop's work."

Asmund said, "Turn it well out of hand, and then matters shall get
better between us."

Then Grettir betook himself to watching the home-geese; fifty of them
there were, with many goslings; but no long time went by before he
found them a troublesome drove, and the goslings slow-paced withal.
Thereat he got sore worried, for little did he keep his temper in
hand. So some time after this, wayfaring men found the goslings strewn
about dead, and the home-geese broken-winged; and this was in autumn.
Asmund was mightily vexed hereat, and asked if Grettir had killed the
fowl: he sneered mockingly, and answered--

  "Surely as winter comes, shall I
  Twist the goslings' necks awry.
  If in like case are the geese,
  I have finished each of these."

"Thou shalt kill them no more," said Asmund.

"Well, <i>a friend should warn a friend of ill</i>," said Grettir.

"Another work shall be found for thee then," said Asmund.

"<i>More one knows the more one tries</i>," said Grettir; "and what
shall I do now?"

Asmund answered, "Thou shalt rub my back at the fire, as I have been
wont to have it done."

"Hot for the hand, truly," said Grettir; "but still a milksop's work."

Now Grettir went on with this work for a while; but autumn came on,
and Asmund became very fain of heat, and he spurs Grettir on to rub
his back briskly. Now, in those times there were wont to be large
fire-halls at the homesteads, wherein men sat at long fires in the
evenings; boards were set before the men there, and afterwards folk
slept out sideways from the fires; there also women worked at the wool
in the daytime. Now, one evening, when Grettir had to rub Asmund's
back, the old carle said,--

"Now thou wilt have to put away thy sloth, thou milk-sop."

Says Grettir, "<i>Ill is it to goad the foolhardy</i>."

Asmund answers, "Thou wilt ever be a good-for-nought."

Now Grettir sees where, in one of the seats stood wool-combs: one of
these he caught up, and let it go all down Asmund's back. He sprang
up, and was mad wroth thereat; and was going to smite Grettir with
his staff, but he ran off. Then came the housewife, and asked what was
this to-do betwixt them. Then Grettir answered by this ditty--

  "This jewel-strewer, O ground of gold,
  (His counsels I deem over bold),
  On both these hands that trouble sow,
  (Ah bitter pain) will burn me now;

  Therefore with wool-comb's nails unshorn
  Somewhat ring-strewer's back is torn:
  The hook-clawed bird that wrought his wound,--
  Lo, now I see it on the ground."

Hereupon was his mother sore vexed, that he should have taken to a
trick like this; she said he would never fail to be the most reckless
of men. All this nowise bettered matters between Asmund and Grettir.

Now, some time after this, Asmund had a talk with Grettir, that he
should watch his horses. Grettir said this was more to his mind than
the back-rubbing.

"Then shalt thou do as I bid thee," said Asmund. "I have a dun mare,
which I call Keingala; she is so wise as to shifts of weather, thaws,
and the like, that rough weather will never fail to follow, when she
will not go out on grazing. At such times thou shalt lock the horses
up under cover; but keep them to grazing on the mountain neck yonder,
when winter comes on. Now I shall deem it needful that thou turn this
work out of hand better than the two I have set thee to already."

Grettir answered, "This is a cold work and a manly, but I deem it ill
to trust in the mare, for I know none who has done it yet."

Now Grettir took to the horse-watching, and so the time went on till
past Yule-time; then came on much cold weather with snow, that made
grazing hard to come at. Now Grettir was ill clad, and as yet little
hardened, and he began to be starved by the cold; but Keingala grazed
away in the windiest place she could find, let the weather be as rough
as it would. Early as she might go to the pasture, never would she go
back to stable before nightfall. Now Grettir deemed that he must think
of some scurvy trick or other, that Keingala might be paid in full
for her way of grazing: so, one morning early, he comes to the
horse-stable, opens it, and finds Keingala standing all along before
the crib; for, whatever food was given to the horses with her, it was
her way to get it all to herself. Grettir got on her back, and had a
sharp knife in his hand, and drew it right across Keingala's shoulder,
and then all along both sides of the back. Thereat the mare, being
both fat and shy, gave a mad bound, and kicked so fiercely, that her
hooves clattered against the wall. Grettir fell off; but, getting
on his legs, strove to mount her again. Now their struggle is of the
sharpest, but the end of it is, that he flays off the whole of the
strip along the back to the loins. Thereafter he drove the horses out
on grazing; Keingala would bite but at her back, and when noon was
barely past, she started off, and ran back to the house. Grettir now
locks the stable and goes home. Asmund asked Grettir where the horses
were. He said that he had stabled them as he was wont. Asmund said
that rough weather was like to be at hand, as the horses would not
keep at their grazing in such good weather as now it was.

Grettir said, "<i>Oft fail in wisdom folk of better trust</i>."

Now the night goes by, but no rough weather came on. Grettir drove off
the horses, but Keingala cannot bear the grazing. This seemed strange
to Asmund, as the weather changed in nowise from what it had been
theretofore. The third morning Asmund went to the horses, and, coming
to Keingala, said,--

"I must needs deem these horses to be in sorry case, good as the
winter has been, but thy sides will scarce lack flesh, my dun."

"<i>Things boded will happen</i>," said Grettir, "<i>but so will
things unboded</i>."

Asmund stroked the back of the mare, and, lo, the hide came off
beneath his hand; he wondered how this could have happened, and said
it was likely to be Grettir's doing. Grettir sneered mockingly, but
said nought. Now goodman Asmund went home talking as one mad; he went
straight to the fire-hall, and as he came heard the good wife say,
"It were good indeed if the horse-keeping of my kinsman had gone off
well."

Then Asmund sang this stave--

  "Grettir has in such wise played,
  That Keingala has he flayed,
  Whose trustiness would be my boast
  (Proudest women talk the most);
  So the cunning lad has wrought,
  Thinking thereby to do nought
  Of my biddings any more.
  In thy mind turn these words o'er."

The housewife answered, "I know not which is least to my mind, that
thou shouldst ever be bidding him work, or that he should turn out all
his work in one wise."

"That too we will make an end of," said Asmund, "but he shall fare the
worse therefor."

Then Grettir said, "Well, let neither make words about it to the
other."

So things went on awhile, and Asmund had Keingala killed; and many
other scurvy tricks did Grettir in his childhood whereof the story
says nought. But he grew great of body, though his strength was not
well known, for he was unskilled in wrestling; he would make ditties
and rhymes, but was somewhat scurrilous therein. He had no will to lie
anight in the fire-hall and was mostly of few words.




CHAP. XV.

<i>Of the ball-play on Midfirth Water</i>.


At this time there were many growing up to be men in Midfirth;
Skald-Torfa dwelt at Torfa's-stead in those days; her son was called
Bessi, he was the shapeliest of men and a good skald.

At Meal lived two brothers, Kormak and Thorgils, with them a man
called Odd was fostered, and was called the Foundling-skald.

One called Audun was growing up at Audunstead in Willowdale, he was
a kind and good man to deal with, and the strongest in those north
parts, of all who were of an age with him. Kalf Asgeirson dwelt
at Asgeir's-river, and his brother Thorvald with him. Atli also,
Grettir's brother, was growing into a ripe man at that time; the
gentlest of men he was, and well beloved of all. Now these men
settled to have ball-play together on Midfirth Water; thither came the
Midfirthers, and Willowdale men, and men from Westhope, and Waterness,
and Ramfirth, but those who came from far abode at the play-stead.

Now those who were most even in strength were paired together, and
thereat was always the greatest sport in autumn-tide. But when he was
fourteen years old Grettir went to the plays, because he was prayed
thereto by his brother Atli.

Now were all paired off for the plays, and Grettir was allotted to
play against Audun, the aforenamed, who was some winters the eldest of
the two; Audun struck the ball over Grettir's head, so that he could
not catch it, and it bounded far away along the ice; Grettir got angry
thereat, deeming that Audun would outplay him; but he fetches the ball
and brings it back, and, when he was within reach of Audun, hurls
it right against his forehead, and smites him so that the skin was
broken; then Audun struck at Grettir with the bat he held in his hand,
but smote him no hard blow, for Grettir ran in under the stroke; and
thereat they seized one another with arms clasped, and wrestled. Then
all saw that Grettir was stronger than he had been taken to be, for
Audun was a man full of strength.

A long tug they had of it, but the end was that Grettir fell, and
Audun thrust his knees against his belly and breast, and dealt hardly
with him.

Then Atli and Bessi and many others ran up and parted them; but
Grettir said there was no need to hold him like a mad dog, "For," said
he, "<i>thralls wreak themselves at once, dastards never</i>."

This men suffered not to grow into open strife, for the brothers, Kalf
and Thorvald, were fain that all should be at one again, and Audun and
Grettir were somewhat akin withal; so the play went on as before, nor
did anything else befall to bring about strife.




CHAP. XVI.

<i>Of the slaying of Skeggi</i>.


Now Thorkel Krafla got very old; he had the rule of Waterdale and
was a great man. He was bosom friend of Asmund the Greyhaired, as was
beseeming for the sake of their kinship; he was wont to ride to Biarg
every year and see his kin there, nor did he fail herein the spring
following these matters just told. Asmund and Asdis welcomed him most
heartily, he was there three nights, and many things did the kinsmen
speak of between them. Now Thorkel asked Asmund what his mind
foreboded him about his sons, as to what kind of craft they would be
likely to take to. Asmund said that he thought Atli would be a great
man at farming, foreseeing, and money-making. Thorkel answered, "A
useful man and like unto thyself: but what dost thou say of Grettir?"

Asmund said, "Of him I say, that he will be a strong man and an
unruly, and, certes, of wrathful mood, and heavy enough he has been to
me."

Thorkel answered, "That bodes no good, friend; but how shall we settle
about our riding to the Thing next summer?"

Asmund answered, "I am growing heavy for wayfaring, and would fain sit
at home."

"Wouldst thou that Atli go in thy stead?" said Thorkel.

"I do not see how I could spare him," says Asmund, "because of the
farm-work and ingathering of household stores; but now Grettir will
not work, yet he bears about that wit with him that I deem he will
know how to keep up the showing forth of the law for me through thy
aid."

"Well, thou shall have thy will," said Thorkel, and withal he rode
home when he was ready, and Asmund let him go with good gifts.

Some time after this Thorkel made him ready to ride to the Thing, he
rode with sixty men, for all went with him who were in his rule: thus
he came to Biarg, and therefrom rode Grettir with him.

Now they rode south over the heath that is called Two-days'-ride; but
on this mountain the baiting grounds were poor, therefore they rode
fast across it down to the settled lands, and when they came down
to Fleet-tongue they thought it was time to sleep, so they took the
bridles off their horses and let them graze with the saddles on. They
lay sleeping till far on in the day, and when they woke, the men went
about looking for their horses; but they had gone each his own way,
and some of them had been rolling; but Grettir was the last to find
his horse.

Now it was the wont in those days that men should carry their own
victuals when they rode to the Althing, and most bore meal-bags
athwart their saddles; and the saddle was turned under the belly of
Grettir's horse, and the meal-bag was gone, so he goes and searches,
and finds nought.

Just then he sees a man running fast, Grettir asks who it is who is
running there; the man answered that his name was Skeggi, and that
he was a house-carle from the Ridge in Waterdale. "I am one of the
following of goodman Thorkel," he says, "but, faring heedlessly, I
have lost my meal-bag."

Grettir said, "<i>Odd haps are worst haps</i>, for I, also, have lost
the meal-sack which I owned, and now let us search both together."

This Skeggi liked well, and a while they go thus together; but all
of a sudden Skeggi bounded off up along the moors and caught up a
meal-sack. Grettir saw him stoop, and asked what he took up there.

"My meal-sack," says Skeggi.

"Who speaks to that besides thyself?" says Grettir; "let me see it,
for many a thing has its like."

Skeggi said that no man should take from him what was his own; but
Grettir caught at the meal-bag, and now they tug one another along
with the meal-sack between them, both trying hard to get the best of
it.

"It is to be wondered at," says the house-carle, "that ye Waterdale
men should deem, that because other men are not as wealthy as ye,
that they should not therefore dare to hold aught of their own in your
despite."

Grettir said, that it had nought to do with the worth of men that each
should have his own.

Skeggi answers, "Too far off is Audun now to throttle thee as at that
ball-play."

"Good," said Grettir; "but, howsoever that went, thou at least shall
never throttle me."

Then Skeggi got at his axe and hewed at Grettir; when Grettir saw
that, he caught the axe-handle with the left hand bladeward of
Skeggi's hand, so hard that straightway was the axe loosed from his
hold. Then Grettir drave that same axe into his head so that it stood
in the brain, and the house-carle fell dead to earth. Then Grettir
seized the meal-bag and threw it across his saddle, and thereon rode
after his fellows.

Now Thorkel rode ahead of all, for he had no misgiving of such things
befalling: but men missed Skeggi from the company, and when Grettir
came up they asked him what he knew of Skeggi; then he sang--

  "A rock-troll her weight did throw
  At Skeggi's throat a while ago:
  Over the battle ogress ran
  The red blood of the serving-man;
  Her deadly iron mouth did gape
  Above him, till clean out of shape
  She tore his head and let out life:
  And certainly I saw their strife."

Then Thorkel's men sprung up and said that surely trolls had not taken
the man in broad daylight. Thorkel grew silent, but said presently,
"The matter is likely to be quite other than this; methinks Grettir
has in all likelihood killed him, or what could befall?"

Then Grettir told all their strife. Thorkel says, "This has come to
pass most unluckily, for Skeggi was given to my following, and was,
nathless, a man of good kin; but I shall deal thus with the matter: I
shall give boot for the man as the doom goes, but the outlawry I may
not settle. Now, two things thou hast to choose between, Grettir;
whether thou wilt rather go to the Thing and risk the turn of matters,
or go back home."

Grettir chose to go to the Thing, and thither he went. But a lawsuit
was set on foot by the heirs of the slain man: Thorkel gave handsel,
and paid up all fines, but Grettir must needs be outlawed, and keep
abroad three winters.

Now when the chiefs rode from the Thing, they baited under Sledgehill
before they parted: then Grettir lifted a stone which now lies there
in the grass and is called Grettir's-heave; but many men came up to
see the stone, and found it a great wonder that so young a man should
heave aloft such a huge rock.

Now Grettir rode home to Biarg and tells the tale of his journey;
Asmund let out little thereon, but said that he would turn out an
unruly man.




CHAP. XVII.

<i>Of Grettir's voyage out</i>.


There was a man called Haflidi, who dwelt at Reydarfell in
Whiteriverside, he was a seafaring man and had a sailing ship, which
lay up Whiteriver: there was a man on board his ship, hight Bard,
who had a wife with him young and fair. Asmund sent a man to Haflidi,
praying him to take Grettir and look after him; Haflidi said that he
had heard that the man was ill ruled of mood; yet for the sake of the
friendship between him and Asmund he took Grettir to himself, and made
ready for sailing abroad.

Asmund would give to his son no faring-goods but victuals for the
voyage and a little wadmall. Grettir prayed him for some weapon, but
Asmund answered, "Thou hast not been obedient to me, nor do I know
how far thou art likely to work with weapons things that may be of any
gain; and no weapon shalt thou have of me."

"<i>No deed no reward</i>," says Grettir. Then father and son parted
with little love. Many there were who bade Grettir farewell, but few
bade him come back.

But his mother brought him on his road, and before they parted she
spoke thus, "Thou art not fitted out from home, son, as I fain would
thou wert, a man so well born as thou; but, meseems, the greatest
shortcoming herein is that thou hast no weapons of any avail, and my
mind misgives me that thou wilt perchance need them sorely."

With that she took out from under her cloak a sword well wrought,
and a fair thing it was, and then she said, "This sword was owned
by Jokul, my father's father, and the earlier Waterdale men, and it
gained them many a day; now I give thee the sword, and may it stand
thee in good stead."

Grettir thanked her well for this gift, and said he deemed it better
than things of more worth; then he went on his way, and Asdis wished
him all good hap.

Now Grettir rode south over the heath, and made no stay till he came
to the ship. Haflidi gave him a good welcome and asked him for his
faring-goods, then Grettir sang--

  "Rider of wind-driven steed,
  Little gat I to my need,
  When I left my fair birth-stead,
  From the snatchers of worm's bed;
  But this man's-bane hanging here,
  Gift of woman good of cheer,
  Proves the old saw said not ill,
  <i>Best to bairn is mother still</i>."

Haflidi said it was easily seen that she thought the most of him. But
now they put to sea when they were ready, and had wind at will; but
when they had got out over all shallows they hoisted sail.

Now Grettir made a den for himself under the boat, from whence he
would move for nought, neither for baling, nor to do aught at the
sail, nor to work at what he was bound to work at in the ship in even
shares with the other men, neither would he buy himself off from the
work.

Now they sailed south by Reekness and then south from the land; and
when they lost land they got much heavy sea; the ship was somewhat
leaky, and scarce seaworthy in heavy weather, therefore they had it
wet enough. Now Grettir let fly his biting rhymes, whereat the men
got sore wroth. One day, when it so happened that the weather was both
squally and cold, the men called out to Grettir, and bade him now do
manfully, "For," said they, "now our claws grow right cold." Grettir
looked up and said--

  "Good luck, scurvy starvelings, if I should behold
  Each finger ye have doubled up with the cold."

And no work they got out of him, and now it misliked them of their
lot as much again as before, and they said that he should pay with his
skin for his rhymes and the lawlessness which he did. "Thou art more
fain," said they, "of playing with Bard the mate's wife than doing thy
duty on board ship, and this is a thing not to be borne at all."

The gale grew greater steadily, and now they stood baling for days and
nights together, and all swore to kill Grettir. But when Haflidi heard
this, he went up to where Grettir lay, and said, "Methinks the bargain
between thee and the chapmen is scarcely fair; first thou dost by them
unlawfully, and thereafter thou castest thy rhymes at them; and now
they swear that they will throw thee overboard, and this is unseemly
work to go on."

"Why should they not be free to do as they will?" says Grettir; "but I
well would that one or two of them tarry here behind with me, or ever
I go overboard."

Haflidi says, "Such deeds are not to be done, and we shall never
thrive if ye rush into such madness; but I shall give thee good rede."

"What is that?" says Grettir.

"They blame thee for singing ill things of them; now, therefore, I
would that thou sing some scurvy rhyme to me, for then it might be
that they would bear with thee the easier."

"To thee I never sing but good," says Grettir: "I am not going to make
thee like these starvelings."

"One may sing so," says Haflidi, "that the lampoon be not so foul when
it is searched into, though at first sight it be not over fair."

"I have ever plenty of that skill in me," says Grettir.

Then Haflidi went to the men where they were baling, and said, "Great
is your toil, and no wonder that ye have taken ill liking to Grettir."

"But his lampoons we deem worse than all the rest together," they
said.

Haflidi said in a loud voice, "He will surely fare ill for it in the
end."

But when Grettir heard Haflidi speak blamefully of him, he sang--

  "Otherwise would matters be,
  When this shouting Haflidi
  Ate in house at Reydarfell
  Curdled milk, and deemed it well;
  He who decks the reindeer's side
  That 'twixt ness and ness doth glide,
  Twice in one day had his fill
  Of the feast of dart shower shrill."[8]

[Footnote 8: This is about as obscure as the original, which seems to
allude to some event not mentioned in the Saga.]

The shipmen thought this foul enough, and said he should not put shame
on Skipper Haflidi for nought.

Then said Haflidi, "Grettir is plentifully worthy that ye should
do him some shame, but I will not have my honour staked against his
ill-will and recklessness; nor is it good for us to wreak vengeance
for this forthwith while we have this danger hanging over us; but be
ye mindful of it when ye land, if so it seem good to you."

"Well," they said, "why should we not fare even as thou farest? for
why should his vile word bite us more than thee?"

And in that mind Haflidi bade them abide; and thence-forward the
chapmen made far less noise about Grettir's rhymes than before.

Now a long and a hard voyage they had, and the leak gained on the
ship, and men began to be exceeding worn with toil. The young wife of
the mate was wont to sew from Grettir's hands, and much would the crew
mock him therefor; but Haflidi went up to where Grettir lay and sang--

  "Grettir, stand up from thy grave,
  In the trough of the grey wave
  The keel labours, tell my say
  Now unto thy merry may;
  From thy hands the linen-clad
  Fill of sewing now has had,
  Till we make the land will she
  Deem that labour fitteth thee."

Then Grettir stood up and sang--

  "Stand we up, for neath us now
  Rides the black ship high enow;
  This fair wife will like it ill
  If my limbs are laid here still;
  Certes, the white trothful one
  Will not deem the deed well done,
  If the work that I should share
  Other folk must ever bear."

Then he ran aft to where they were baling, and asked what they would
he should do; they said he would do mighty little good.

"Well," said he, "<i>ye may yet be apaid of a man's aid</i>."

Haflidi bade them not set aside his help, "For it may be he shall deem
his hands freed if he offers his aid."

At that time pumping was not used in ships that fared over the main;
the manner of baling they used men called tub or cask baling, and a
wet work it was and a wearisome; two balers were used, and one went
down while the other came up. Now the chapmen bade Grettir have the
job of sinking the balers, and said that now it should be tried what
he could do; he said that the less it was tried the better it would
be. But he goes down and sinks the balers, and now two were got to
bale against him; they held out but a little while before they were
overcome with weariness, and then four came forward and soon fared in
likewise, and, so say some, that eight baled against him before the
baling was done and the ship was made dry. Thenceforth the manner of
the chapmen's words to Grettir was much changed, for they saw what
strength he had to fall back upon; and from that time he was the
stoutest and readiest to help, wheresoever need was.

Now they bore off east into the main, and much thick weather they had,
and one night unawares they ran suddenly on a rock, so that the nether
part of the ship went from under her; then the boat was run down, and
women and all the loose goods were brought off: nearby was a little
holm whither they brought their matters as they best could in the
night; but when it began to dawn they had a talk as to where they were
come; then they who had fared between lands before knew the land for
Southmere in Norway; there was an island hardby called Haramsey; many
folk dwelt there, and therein too was the manor of a lord.




CHAP. XVIII.

<i>Of Grettir at Haramsey and his dealings with Karr the Old</i>.


Now the lord who dwelt in the island was called Thorfinn; he was the
son of Karr the Old, who had dwelt there long; and Thorfinn was a
great chief.

But when day was fully come men saw from the island that the chapmen
were brought to great straits. This was made known to Thorfinn, and he
quickly bestirred himself, and had a large bark of his launched, rowed
by sixteen men, on this bark were nigh thirty men in all; they came up
speedily and saved the chapmen's wares; but the ship settled down,
and much goods were lost there. Thorfinn brought all men from the ship
home to himself, and they abode there a week and dried their wares.
Then the chapmen went south into the land, and are now out of the
tale.

Grettir was left behind with Thorfinn, and little he stirred, and was
at most times mighty short of speech. Thorfinn bade give him meals,
but otherwise paid small heed to him; Grettir was loth to follow him,
and would not go out with him in the day; this Thorfinn took ill, but
had not the heart to have food withheld from him.

Now Thorfinn was fond of stately house-keeping, and was a man of great
joyance, and would fain have other men merry too: but Grettir would
walk about from house to house, and often went into other farms about
the island.

There was a man called Audun who dwelt at Windham; thither Grettir
went every day, and he made friends with Audun, and there he was wont
to sit till far on in the day. Now one night very late, as Grettir
made ready to go home, he saw a great fire burst out on a ness to the
north of Audun's farm. Grettir asked what new thing this might be.
Audun said that he need be in no haste to know that.

"It would be said," quoth Grettir, "if that were seen in our land,
that the flame burned above hid treasure."

The farmer said, "That fire I deem to be ruled over by one into whose
matters it avails little to pry."

"Yet fain would I know thereof," said Grettir.

"On that ness," said Audun, "stands a barrow, great and strong,
wherein was laid Karr the Old, Thorfinn's father; at first father
and son had but one farm in the island; but since Karr died he has so
haunted this place that he has swept away all farmers who owned lands
here, so that now Thorfinn holds the whole island; but whatsoever man
Thorfinn holds his hand over, gets no scathe."

Grettir said that he had told his tale well: "And," says he, "I shall
come here to-morrow, and then thou shalt have digging-tools ready."

"Now, I pray thee," says Audun, "to do nought herein, for I know that
Thorfinn will cast his hatred on thee therefor."

Grettir said he would risk that.

So the night went by, and Grettir came early on the morrow and the
digging-tools were ready; the farmer goes with him to the barrow, and
Grettir brake it open, and was rough-handed enough thereat, and did
not leave off till he came to the rafters, and by then the day was
spent; then he tore away the rafters, and now Audun prayed him hard
not to go into the barrow; Grettir bade him guard the rope, "but I
shall espy what dwells within here."

Then Grettir entered into the barrow, and right dark it was, and a
smell there was therein none of the sweetest. Now he groped about to
see how things were below; first he found horse-bones, and then he
stumbled against the arm of a high-chair, and in that chair found a
man sitting; great treasures of gold and silver were heaped together
there, and a small chest was set under the feet of him full of silver;
all these riches Grettir carried together to the rope; but as he went
out through the barrow he was griped at right strongly; thereon he let
go the treasure and rushed against the barrow-dweller, and now they
set on one another unsparingly enough.

Everything in their way was kicked out of place, the barrow-wight
setting on with hideous eagerness; Grettir gave back before him for a
long time, till at last it came to this, that he saw it would not do
to hoard his strength any more; now neither spared the other, and
they were brought to where the horse-bones were, and thereabout they
wrestled long. And now one, now the other, fell on his knee; but the
end of the strife was, that the barrow-dweller fell over on his back
with huge din. Then ran Audun from the holding of the rope, and deemed
Grettir dead. But Grettir drew the sword, 'Jokul's gift,' and drave
it at the neck of the barrow-bider so that it took off his head, and
Grettir laid it at the thigh of him.[9] Then he went to the rope with
the treasure, and lo, Audun was clean gone, so he had to get up the
rope by his hands; he had tied a line to the treasure, and therewith
he now haled it up.

[Footnote 9: The old belief was that by this means only could a ghost
be laid.]

Grettir had got very stiff with his dealings with Karr, and now he
went back to Thorfinn's house with the treasures, whenas all folk had
set them down to table. Thorfinn gave Grettir a sharp look when he
came into the drinking-hall, and asked him what work he had on hand
so needful to do that he might not keep times of meals with other
men. Grettir answers, "Many little matters will hap on late eves," and
therewith he cast down on the table all the treasure he had taken in
the barrow; but one matter there was thereof, on which he must needs
keep his eyes; this was a short-sword, so good a weapon, that a
better, he said, he had never seen; and this he gave up the last of
all. Thorfinn was blithe to see that sword, for it was an heirloom of
his house, and had never yet gone out of his kin.

"Whence came these treasures to thine hand?" said Thorfinn.

Grettir sang--

  "Lessener of the flame of sea,
  My strong hope was true to me,
  When I deemed that treasure lay
  In the barrow; from to-day
  Folk shall know that I was right;
  The begetters of the fight
  Small joy now shall have therein,
  Seeking dragon's-lair to win."

Thorfinn answered, "Blood will seldom seem blood to thine eyes; no man
before thee has had will to break open the barrow; but, because I
know that what wealth soever is hid in earth or borne into barrow is
wrongly placed, I shall not hold thee blameworthy for thy deed as
thou hast brought it all to me; yea, or whence didst thou get the good
sword?"

Grettir answered and sang--

  "Lessener of waves flashing flame,
  To my lucky hand this came
  In the barrow where that thing
  Through the dark fell clattering;
  If that helm-fire I should gain,
  Made so fair to be the bane
  Of the breakers of the bow,
  Ne'er from my hand should it go."

Thorfinn said, "Well hast thou prayed for it, but thou must show some
deed of fame before I give thee that sword, for never could I get it
of my father while he lived."

Said Grettir, "Who knows to whom most gain will come of it in the
end?"

So Thorfinn took the treasures and kept the sword at his bed-head,
and the winter wore on toward Yule, so that little else fell out to be
told of.




CHAP. XIX.

<i>Of Yule at Haramsey, and how Grettir dealt with the Bearserks</i>.


Now the summer before these things Earl Eric Hakonson made ready to
go from his land west to England, to see King Knut the Mighty, his
brother-in-law, but left behind him in the rule of Norway Hakon, his
son, and gave him into the hands of Earl Svein, his brother, for the
watching and warding of his realm, for Hakon was a child in years.

But before Earl Eric went away from the land, he called together lords
and rich bonders, and many things they spoke on laws and the rule of
the land, for Earl Eric was a man good at rule. Now men thought it an
exceeding ill fashion in the land that runagates or bearserks called
to holm high-born men for their fee or womankind, in such wise, that
whosoever should fall before the other should lie unatoned; hereof
many got both shame and loss of goods, and some lost their lives
withal; and therefore Earl Eric did away with all holm-gangs and
outlawed all bearserks who fared with raids and riots.

In the making of this law, the chief of all, with Earl Eric, was
Thorfinn Karrson, from Haramsey, for he was a wise man, and a dear
friend of the Earls.

Two brothers are named as being of the worst in these matters,
one hight Thorir Paunch, the other Ogmund the Evil; they were of
Halogaland kin, bigger and stronger than other men. They wrought the
bearserks'-gang and spared nothing in their fury; they would take away
the wives of men and hold them for a week or a half-month, and then
bring them back to their husbands; they robbed wheresoever they came,
or did some other ill deeds. Now Earl Eric made them outlaws through
the length and breadth of Norway, and Thorfinn was the eagerest of men
in bringing about their outlawry, therefore they deemed that they owed
him ill-will enow.

So the Earl went away from the land, as is said in his Saga; but Earl
Svein bore sway over Norway. Thorfinn went home to his house, and sat
at home till just up to Yule, as is aforesaid; but at Yule he made
ready to go to his farm called Slysfirth, which is on the mainland,
and thither he had bidden many of his friends. Thorfinn's wife could
not go with her husband, for her daughter of ripe years lay ill
a-bed, so they both abode at home. Grettir was at home too, and
eight house-carles. Now Thorfinn went with thirty freedmen to the
Yule-feast, whereat there was the greatest mirth and joyance among
men.

Now Yule-eve comes on, and the weather was bright and calm; Grettir
was mostly abroad this day, and saw how ships fared north and south
along the land, for each one sought the other's home where the Yule
drinking was settled to come off. By this time the goodman's daughter
was so much better that she could walk about with her mother, and thus
the day wore on.

Now Grettir sees how a ship rows up toward the island; it was not
right big, but shield-hung it was from stem to stern, and stained all
above the sea: these folk rowed smartly, and made for the boat-stands
of goodman Thorfinn, and when the keel took land, those who were
therein sprang overboard. Grettir cast up the number of the men, and
they were twelve altogether; he deemed their guise to be far from
peaceful. They took up their ship and bore it up from the sea;
thereafter they ran up to the boat-stand, and therein was that big
boat of Thorfinn, which was never launched to sea by less than thirty
men, but these twelve shot it in one haul down to the shingle of the
foreshore; and thereon they took up their own bark and bore it into
the boat-stand.

Now Grettir thought that he could see clear enough that they would
make themselves at home. But he goes down to meet them, and welcomes
them merrily, and asks who they were and what their leader was hight;
he to whom these words were spoken answered quickly, and said that his
name was Thorir, and that he was called Paunch, and that his brother
was Ogmund, and that the others were fellows of theirs.

"I deem," said Thorir, "that thy master Thorfinn has heard tell of us;
is he perchance at home?"

Grettir answered, "Lucky men are ye, and hither have come in a good
hour, if ye are the men I take you to be; the goodman is gone away
with all his home-folk who are freemen, and will not be home again
till after Yule; but the mistress is at home, and so is the goodman's
daughter; and if I thought that I had some ill-will to pay back, I
should have chosen above all things to have come just thus; for here
are all matters in plenty whereof ye stand in need both beer, and all
other good things."

Thorir held his peace, while Grettir let this tale run on, then he
said to Ogmund--

"How far have things come to pass other than as I guessed? and now am
I well enough minded to take revenge on Thorfinn for having made us
outlaws; and this man is ready enough of tidings, and no need have we
to drag the words out of him."

"Words all may use freely," said Grettir, "and I shall give you such
cheer as I may; and now come home with me."

They bade him have thanks therefor, and said they would take his
offer.

But when they came home to the farm, Grettir took Thorir by the hand
and led him into the hall; and now was Grettir mightily full of words.
The mistress was in the hall, and had had it decked with hangings, and
made all fair and seemly; but when she heard Grettir's talk, she stood
still on the floor, and asked whom he welcomed in that earnest wise.

He answered, "Now, mistress, is it right meet to welcome these guests
merrily, for here is come goodman Thorir Paunch and the whole twelve
of them, and are minded to sit here Yule over, and a right good hap it
is, for we were few enough before."

She answered, "Am I to number these among bonders and goodmen, who are
the worst of robbers and ill-doers? a large share of my goods had I
given that they had not come here as at this time; and ill dost thou
reward Thorfinn, for that he took thee a needy man from shipwreck and
has held thee through the winter as a free man."

Grettir said, "It would be better to take the wet clothes off these
guests than to scold at me; since for that thou mayst have time long
enough."

Then said Thorir, "Be not cross-grained, mistress; nought shall thou
miss thy husband's being away, for a man shall be got in his place
for thee, yea, and for thy daughter a man, and for each of the
home-women."

"That is spoken like a man," said Grettir, "nor will they thus have
any cause to bewail their lot."

Now all the women rushed forth from the hall smitten with huge dread
and weeping; then said Grettir to the bearserks, "Give into my hands
what it pleases you to lay aside of weapons and wet clothes, for the
folk will not be yielding to us while they are scared."

Thorir said he heeded not how women might squeal; "But," said he,
"thee indeed we may set apart from the other home-folk, and methinks
we may well make thee our man of trust."

"See to that yourselves," said Grettir, "but certes I do not take to
all men alike."

Thereupon they laid aside the more part of their weapons, and
thereafter Grettir said--

"Methinks it is a good rede now that ye sit down to table and drink
somewhat, for it is right likely that ye are thirsty after the
rowing."

They said they were ready enough for that, but knew not where to find
out the cellar; Grettir asked if they would that he should see for
things and go about for them. The bearserks said they would be right
fain of that; so Grettir fetched beer and gave them to drink; they
were mightily weary, and drank in huge draughts, and still he let them
have the strongest beer that there was, and this went on for a long
time, and meanwhile he told them many merry tales. From all this there
was din enough to be heard among them, and the home-folk were nowise
fain to come to them.

Now Thorir said, "Never yet did I meet a man unknown to me, who would
do us such good deeds as this man; now, what reward wilt thou take of
us for thy work?"

Grettir answered, "As yet I look to no reward for this; but if we be
even such friends when ye go away, as it looks like we shall be, I am
minded to join fellowship with you; and though I be of less might than
some of you, yet shall I not let any man of big redes."

Hereat they were well pleased, and would settle the fellowship with
vows.

Grettir said that this they should not do, "For true is the old saw,
<i>Ale is another man</i>, nor shall ye settle this in haste any
further than as I have said, for on both sides are we men little meet
to rule our tempers."

They said that they would not undo what they had said.

Withal the evening wore on till it grew quite dark; then sees Grettir
that they were getting very heavy with drink, so he said--

"Do ye not find it time to go to sleep?"

Thorir said, "Time enough forsooth, and sure shall I be to keep to
what I have promised the mistress."

Then Grettir went forth from the hall, and cried out loudly--

"Go ye to your beds, women all, for so is goodman Thorir pleased to
bid."

They cursed him for this, and to hear them was like hearkening to the
noise of many wolves. Now the bearserks came forth from the hall, and
Grettir said--

"Let us go out, and I will show you Thorfinn's cloth bower."

They were willing to be led there; so they came to an out-bower
exceeding great; a door there was to it, and a strong lock thereon,
and the storehouse was very strong withal; there too was a closet good
and great, and a shield panelling between the chambers; both chambers
stood high, and men went up by steps to them. Now the bearserks got
riotous and pushed Grettir about, and he kept tumbling away from them,
and when they least thought thereof, he slipped quickly out of the
bower, seized the latch, slammed the door to, and put the bolt on.
Thorir and his fellows thought at first that the door must have got
locked of itself, and paid no heed thereto; they had light with them,
for Grettir had showed them many choice things which Thorfinn owned,
and these they now noted awhile. Meantime Grettir made all speed home
to the farm, and when he came in at the door he called out loudly, and
asked where the goodwife was; she held her peace, for she did not dare
to answer.

He said, "Here is somewhat of a chance of a good catch; but are there
any weapons of avail here?"

She answers, "Weapons there are, but how they may avail thee I know
not."

"Let us talk thereof anon," says he, "but now let every man do his
best, for later on no better chance shall there be."

The good wife said, "Now God were in garth if our lot might better:
over Thorfinn's bed hangs the barbed spear, the big one that was
owned by Karr the Old; there, too, is a helmet and a byrni, and the
short-sword, the good one; and the arms will not fail if thine heart
does well."

Grettir seizes the helmet and spear, girds himself with the
short-sword, and rushed out swiftly; and the mistress called upon the
house-carles, bidding them follow such a dauntless man, four of them
rushed forth and seized their weapons, but the other four durst come
nowhere nigh. Now it is to be said of the bearserks that they thought
Grettir delayed his coming back strangely; and now they began to doubt
if there were not some guile in the matter. They rushed against the
door and found it was locked, and now they try the timber walls so
that every beam creaked again; at last they brought things so far that
they broke down the shield-panelling, got into the passage, and thence
out to the steps. Now bearserks'-gang seized them, and they howled
like dogs. In that very nick of time Grettir came up and with both
hands thrust his spear at the midst of Thorir, as he was about to
get down the steps, so that it went through him at once. Now the
spear-head was both long and broad, and Ogmund the Evil ran on to
Thorir and pushed him on to Grettir's thrust, so that all went up to
the barb-ends; then the spear stood out through Thorir's back and into
Ogmund's breast, and they both tumbled dead off the spear; then of
the others each rushed down the steps as he came forth; Grettir set on
each one of them, and in turn hewed with the sword, or thrust with the
spear; but they defended themselves with logs that lay on the green,
and whatso thing they could lay hands on, therefore the greatest
danger it was to deal with them, because of their strength, even
though they were weaponless.

Two of the Halogalanders Grettir slew on the green, and then came up
the house-carles; they could not come to one mind as to what weapons
each should have; now they set on whenever the bearserks gave back,
but when they turned about on them, then the house-carles slunk away
up to the houses. Six vikings fell there, and of all of them was
Grettir the bane. Then the six others got off and came down to the
boat-stand, and so into it, and thence they defended themselves with
oars. Grettir now got great blows from them, so that at all times he
ran the risk of much hurt; but the house-carles went home, and had
much to say of their stout onset; the mistress bade them espy what
became of Grettir, but that was not to be got out of them. Two more of
the bearserks Grettir slew in the boat-stand, but four slipped out
by him; and by this, dark night had come on; two of them ran into
a corn-barn, at the farm of Windham, which is aforenamed: here they
fought for a long time, but at last Grettir killed them both; then
was he beyond measure weary and stiff, the night was far gone, and the
weather got very cold with the drift of the snow. He was fain to leave
the search of the two vikings who were left now, so he walked home to
the farm. The mistress had lights lighted in the highest lofts at the
windows that they might guide him on his way; and so it was that he
found his road home whereas he saw the light.

But when he was come into the door, the mistress went up to him, and
bade him welcome.

"Now," she said, "thou hast reaped great glory, and freed me and my
house from a shame of which we should never have been healed, but if
thou hadst saved us."

Grettir answered, "Methinks I am much the same as I was this evening,
when thou didst cast ill words on me."

The mistress answered, "We wotted not that thou wert a man of such
prowess as we have now proved thee; now shall all things in the house
be at thy will which I may bestow on thee, and which it may be seeming
for thee to take; but methinks that Thorfinn will reward thee better
still when he comes home."

Grettir answered, "Little of reward will be needed now, but I keep
thine offer till the coming of the master; and I have some hope now
that ye will sleep in peace as for the bearserks."

Grettir drank little that evening, and lay with his weapons about him
through the night. In the morning, when it began to dawn, people were
summoned together throughout the island, and a search was set on foot
for the bearserks who had escaped the night before; they were found
far on in the day under a rock, and were by then dead from cold and
wounds; then they were brought unto a tidewashed heap of stones and
buried thereunder.

After that folk went home, and the men of that island deemed
themselves brought unto fair peace.

Now when Grettir came back to the mistress, he sang this stave--

  "By the sea's wash have we made
  Graves, where twelve spear-groves are laid;
  I alone such speedy end,
  Unto all these folk did send.
  O fair giver forth of gold,
  Whereof can great words be told,
  'Midst the deeds one man has wrought,
  If this deed should come to nought?"

The good wife said, "Surely thou art like unto very few men who are
now living on the earth."

So she set him in the high seat, and all things she did well to him,
and now time wore on till Thorfinn's coming home was looked for.




CHAP. XX.

<i>How Thorfinn met Grettir at Haramsey again</i>.


After Yule Thorfinn made ready for coming home, and he let those folk
go with good gifts whom he had bidden to his feast. Now he fares with
his following till he comes hard by his boat-stands; they saw a ship
lying on the strand, and soon knew it for Thorfinn's bark, the big
one. Now Thorfinn had as yet had no news of the vikings, he bade his
men hasten landward, "For I fear," said he, "that friends have not
been at work here."

Thorfinn was the first to step ashore before his men, and forthwith he
went up to the boat-stand; he saw a keel standing there, and knew it
for the bearserks' ship. Then he said to his men, "My mind misgives
me much that here things have come to pass, even such as I would have
given the whole island, yea, every whit of what I have herein, that
they might never have happed."

They asked why he spake thus. Then he said, "Here have come the
vikings, whom I know to be the worst of all Norway, Thorir Paunch
and Ogmund the Evil; in good sooth they will hardly have kept house
happily for us, and in an Icelander I have but little trust."

Withal he spoke many things hereabout to his fellows.

Now Grettir was at home, and so brought it about, that folk were slow
to go down to the shore; and said he did not care much if the goodman
Thorfinn had somewhat of a shake at what he saw before him; but when
the mistress asked him leave to go, he said she should have her will
as to where she went, but that he himself should stir nowhither. She
ran swiftly to meet Thorfinn, and welcomed him cheerily. He was glad
thereof, and said, "Praise be to God that I see thee whole and merry,
and my daughter in likewise. But how have ye fared since I went from
home?"

She answered, "Things have turned out well, but we were near being
overtaken by such a shame as we should never have had healing of, if
thy winter-guest had not holpen us."

Then Thorfinn spake, "Now shall we sit down, but do thou tell us these
tidings."

Then she told all things plainly even as they had come to pass,
and praised greatly Grettir's stoutness and great daring; meanwhile
Thorfinn held his peace, but when she had made an end of her tale,
he said, "How true is the saw, <i>Long it takes to try a man</i>. But
where is Grettir now?"

The goodwife said, "He is at home in the hall."

Thereupon they went home to the farm.

Thorfinn went up to Grettir and kissed him, and thanked him with many
fair words for the great heart which he had shown to him; "And I will
say to thee what few say to their friends, that I would thou shouldst
be in need of men, that then thou mightest know if I were to thee in
a man's stead or not; but for thy good deed I can never reward thee
unless thou comest to be in some troublous need; but as to thy abiding
with me, that shall ever stand open to thee when thou willest it; and
thou shalt be held the first of all my men."

Grettir bade him have much thank therefor. "And," quoth he, "this
should I have taken even if thou hadst made me proffer thereof
before."

Now Grettir sat there the winter over, and was in the closest
friendship with Thorfinn; and for this deed he was now well renowned
all over Norway, and there the most, where the bearserks had erst
wrought the greatest ill deeds.

This spring Thorfinn asked Grettir what he was about to busy himself
with: he said he would go north to Vogar while the fair was. Thorfinn
said there was ready for him money as much as he would. Grettir said
that he needed no more money at that time than faring-silver: this,
Thorfinn said, was full-well due to him, and thereupon went with him
to ship.

Now he gave him the short-sword, the good one, which Grettir bore as
long as he lived, and the choicest of choice things it was. Withal
Thorfinn bade Grettir come to him whenever he might need aid.

But Grettir went north to Vogar, and a many folk were there; many men
welcomed him there right heartily who had not seen him before, for the
sake of that great deed of prowess which he had done when he saw the
vikings; many high-born men prayed him to come and abide with them,
but he would fain go back to his friend Thorfinn. Now he took ship in
a bark that was owned of a man hight Thorkel, who dwelt in Salft in
Halogaland, and was a high-born man. But when Grettir came to Thorkel
he welcomed him right heartily, and bade Grettir abide with him that
winter, and laid many words thereto.

This offer Grettir took, and was with Thorkel that winter in great
joyance and fame.




CHAP. XXI.

<i>Of Grettir and Biorn and the Bear</i>.


There was a man, hight Biorn, who was dwelling with Thorkel; he was
a man of rash temper, of good birth, and somewhat akin to Thorkel; he
was not well loved of men, for he would slander much those who were
with Thorkel, and in this wise he sent many away. Grettir and he
had little to do together; Biorn thought him of little worth weighed
against himself, but Grettir was unyielding, so that things fell
athwart between them. Biorn was a mightily boisterous man, and made
himself very big; many young men gat into fellowship with him in these
things, and would stray abroad by night. Now it befell, that early in
winter a savage bear ran abroad from his winter lair, and got so grim
that he spared neither man nor beast. Men thought he had been roused
by the noise that Biorn and his fellows had made. The brute got so
hard to deal with that he tore down the herds of men, and Thorkel
had the greatest hurt thereof, for he was the richest man in the
neighbourhood.

Now one day Thorkel bade his men to follow him, and search for the
lair of the bear. They found it in sheer sea-rocks; there was a high
rock and a cave before it down below, but only one track to go up to
it: under the cave were scarped rocks, and a heap of stones down by
the sea, and sure death it was to all who might fall down there. The
bear lay in his lair by day, but went abroad as soon as night fell; no
fold could keep sheep safe from him, nor could any dogs be set on
him: and all this men thought the heaviest trouble. Biorn, Thorkel's
kinsman, said that the greatest part had been done, as the lair had
been found. "And now I shall try," said he, "what sort of play we[10]
namesakes shall have together." Grettir made as if he knew not what
Biorn said on this matter.

[Footnote 10: Biorn is Icelandic for bear.]

Now it happened always when men went to sleep anights that Biorn
disappeared: and one night when Biorn went to the lair, he was aware
that the beast was there before him, and roaring savagely. Biorn lay
down in the track, and had over him his shield, and was going to wait
till the beast should stir abroad as his manner was. Now the bear had
an inkling of the man, and got somewhat slow to move off. Biorn waxed
very sleepy where he lay, and cannot wake up, and just at this time
the beast betakes himself from his lair; now he sees where the man
lies, and, hooking at him with his claw, he tears from him the shield
and throws it down over the rocks. Biorn started up suddenly awake,
takes to his legs and runs home, and it was a near thing that the
beast gat him not. This his fellows knew, for they had spies about
Biorn's ways; in the morning they found the shield, and made the
greatest jeering at all this.

At Yule Thorkel went himself, and eight of them altogether, and there
was Grettir and Biorn and other followers of Thorkel. Grettir had on
a fur-cloak, which he laid aside while they set on the beast. It was
awkward for an onslaught there, for thereat could folk come but by
spear-thrusts, and all the spear-points the bear turned off him with
his teeth. Now Biorn urged them on much to the onset, yet he himself
went not so nigh as to run the risk of any hurt. Amid this, when men
looked least for it, Biorn suddenly seized Grettir's coat, and cast it
into the beast's lair. Now nought they could wreak on him, and had
to go back when the day was far spent. But when Grettir was going, he
misses his coat, and he could see that the bear has it cast under him.
Then he said, "What man of you has wrought the jest of throwing my
cloak into the lair?"

Biorn says, "He who is like to dare to own to it."

Grettir answers, "I set no great store on such matters."

Now they went on their way home, and when they had walked awhile, the
thong of Grettir's leggings brake. Thorkel bid them wait for him; but
Grettir said there was no need of that. Then said Biorn, "Ye need
not think that Grettir will run away from his coat; he will have the
honour all to himself, and will slay that beast all alone, wherefrom
we have gone back all eight of us; thus would he be such as he is said
to be: but sluggishly enow has he fared forth to-day."

"I know not," said Thorkel, "how thou wilt fare in the end, but men of
equal prowess I deem you not: lay as few burdens on him as thou mayst,
Biorn."

Biorn said, that neither of them should pick and choose words from out
his mouth.

Now, when a hill's brow was between them, Grettir went back to the
pass, for now there was no striving with others for the onset. He
drew the sword, Jokul's gift, but had a loop over the handle of the
short-sword, and slipped it up over his hand, and this he did in that
he thought he could easier have it at his will if his hand were loose.
He went up into the pass forthwith, and when the beast saw a man, it
rushed against Grettir exceeding fiercely, and smote at him with that
paw which was furthest off from the rock; Grettir hewed against the
blow with the sword, and therewith smote the paw above the claws, and
took it off; then the beast was fain to smite at Grettir with the paw
that was whole, and dropped down therewith on to the docked one, but
it was shorter than he wotted of, and withal he tumbled into Grettir's
arms. Now he griped at the beast between the ears and held him off,
so that he got not at him to bite. And, so Grettir himself says, that
herein he deemed he had had the hardest trial of his strength, thus
to hold the brute. But now as it struggled fiercely, and the space
was narrow, they both tumbled down over the rock; the beast was the
heaviest of the two, and came down first upon the stone heap below,
Grettir being the uppermost, and the beast was much mangled on its
nether side. Now Grettir seized the short-sword and thrust it into
the heart of the bear, and that was his bane. Thereafter he went home,
taking with him his cloak all tattered, and withal what he had cut
from the paw of the bear. Thorkel sat a-drinking when he came into the
hall, and much men laughed at the rags of the cloak Grettir had cast
over him. Now he threw on to the table what he had chopped off the
paw.

Then said Thorkel, "Where is now Biorn my kinsman? never did I see thy
irons bite the like of this, Biorn, and my will it is, that thou make
Grettir a seemly offer for this shame thou hast wrought on him."

Biorn said that was like to be long about, "and never shall I care
whether he likes it well or ill."

Then Grettir sang--

  "Oft that war-god came to hall
  Frighted, when no blood did fall,
  In the dusk; who ever cried
  On the bear last autumn-tide;
  No man saw me sitting there
  Late at eve before the lair;
  Yet the shaggy one to-day
  From his den I drew away."

"Sure enough," said Biorn, "thou hast fared forth well to-day, and
two tales thou tellest of us twain therefor; and well I know that thou
hast had a good hit at me."

Thorkel said, "I would, Grettir, that thou wouldst not avenge thee on
Biorn, but for him I will give a full man-gild if thereby ye may be
friends."

Biorn said he might well turn his money to better account, than to
boot for this; "And, methinks it is wisest that in my dealings with
Grettir <i>one oak should have what from the other it shaves</i>."

Grettir said that he should like that very well. But Thorkel said,
"Yet I hope, Grettir, that thou wilt do this for my sake, not to do
aught against Biorn while ye are with me."

"That shall be," said Grettir.

Biorn said he would walk fearless of Grettir wheresoever they might
meet.

Grettir smiled mockingly, but would not take boot for Biorn. So they
were here that winter through.




CHAP. XXII.

<i>Of the Slaying of Biorn</i>.


In the spring Grettir went north to Vogar with chapmen. He and Thorkel
parted in friendship; but Biorn went west to England, and was the
master of Thorkel's ship that went thither. Biorn dwelt thereabout
that summer and bought such things for Thorkel as he had given him
word to get; but as the autumn wore on he sailed from the west.
Grettir was at Vogar till the fleet broke up; then he sailed from
the north with some chapmen until they came to a harbour at an island
before the mouth of Drontheimfirth, called Gartar, where they pitched
their tents. Now when they were housed, a ship came sailing havenward
from the south along the land; they soon saw that it was an England
farer; she took the strand further out, and her crew went ashore;
Grettir and his fellows went to meet them. But when they met, Grettir
saw that Biorn was among those men, and spake--

"It is well that we have met here; now we may well take up our ancient
quarrel, and now I will try which of us twain may do the most."

Biorn said that was an old tale to him, "but if there has been aught
of such things between us, I will boot for it, so that thou mayst
think thyself well holden thereof."

Then Grettir sang--

  "In hard strife I slew the bear,
  Thereof many a man doth hear;
  Then the cloak I oft had worn,
  By the beast to rags was torn;
  Thou, O braggart ring-bearer,
  Wrought that jest upon me there,
  Now thou payest for thy jest,
  Not in words am I the best?"

Biorn said, that oft had greater matters than these been atoned for.

Grettir said, "That few had chosen hitherto to strive to trip him up
with spite and envy, nor ever had he taken fee for such, and still
must matters fare in likewise. Know thou that we shall not both of us
go hence whole men if I may have my will, and a coward's name will I
lay on thy back, if thou darest not to fight."

Now Biorn saw that it would avail nought to try to talk himself free;
so he took his weapons and went aland.

Then they ran one at the other and fought, but not long before Biorn
got sore wounded, and presently fell dead to earth. But when Biorn's
fellows saw that, they went to their ship, and made off north along
the land to meet Thorkel and told him of this hap: he said it had not
come to pass ere it might have been looked for.

Soon after this Thorkel went south to Drontheim, and met there Earl
Svein. Grettir went south to Mere after the slaying of Biorn, and
found his friend Thorfinn, and told him what had befallen. Thorfinn
gave him good welcome, and said--

"It is well now that thou art in need of a friend; with me shalt thou
abide until these matters have come to an end."

Grettir thanked him for his offer, and said he would take it now.

Earl Svein was dwelling in Drontheim, at Steinker, when he heard of
Biorn's slaying; at that time there was with him Hiarandi, the brother
of Biorn, and he was the Earl's man; he was exceeding wroth when
he heard of the slaying of Biorn, and begged the Earl's aid in the
matter, and the Earl gave his word thereto.

Then he sent men to Thorfinn and summoned to him both him and Grettir.
Thorfinn and Grettir made ready at once at the Earl's bidding to go
north to Drontheim to meet him. Now the Earl held a council on the
matter, and bade Hiarandi to be thereat; Hiarandi said he would not
bring his brother to purse; "and I shall either fare in a like wise
with him, or else wreak vengeance for him." Now when the matter was
looked into, the Earl found that Biorn had been guilty towards Grettir
in many ways; and Thorfinn offered weregild, such as the Earl deemed
might be befitting for Biorn's kin to take; and thereon he had much
to say on the freedom which Grettir had wrought for men north there in
the land, when he slew the bearserks, as has been aforesaid.

The Earl answered, "With much truth thou sayest this, Thorfinn,
that was the greatest land-ridding, and good it seems to us to take
weregild because of thy words; and withal Grettir is a man well
renowned because of his strength and prowess."

Hiarandi would not take the settlement, and they broke up the meeting.
Thorfinn got his kinsman Arnbiorn to go about with Grettir day by day,
for he knew that Hiarandi lay in wait for his life.




CHAP. XXIII.

<i>The Slaying of Hiarandi</i>.


It happened one day that Grettir and Arnbiorn were walking through
some streets for their sport, that as they came past a certain court
gate, a man bounded forth therefrom with axe borne aloft, and drave it
at Grettir with both hands; he was all unawares of this, and walked on
slowly; Arnbiorn caught timely sight of the man, and seized Grettir,
and thrust him on so hard that he fell on his knee; the axe smote the
shoulder-blade, and cut sideways out under the arm-pit, and a great
wound it was. Grettir turned about nimbly, and drew the short-sword,
and saw that there was Hiarandi. Now the axe stuck fast in the road,
and it was slow work for Hiarandi to draw it to him again, and in this
very nick of time Grettir hewed at him, and the blow fell on the upper
arm, near the shoulder, and cut it off; then the fellows of Hiarandi
rushed forth, five of them, and a fight forthwith befell, and speedy
change happed there, for Grettir and Arnbiorn slew those who were with
Hiarandi, all but one, who got off, and forthwith went to the Earl to
tell him these tidings.

The Earl was exceeding wroth when he heard of this, and the second day
thereafter he had a Thing summoned. Then they, Thorfinn and Grettir,
came both to the Thing. The Earl put forth against Grettir the guilt
for these manslaughters; he owned them all, and said he had had to
defend his hands.

"Whereof methinks I bear some marks on me," says Grettir, "and surely
I had found death if Arnbiorn had not saved me."

The Earl answered that it was ill hap that Grettir was not slain.

"For many a man's bane wilt thou be if thou livest, Grettir."

Then came to the Earl, Bessi, son of Skald-Torfa, a fellow and a
friend to Grettir; he and Thorfinn went before the Earl had prayed him
respite for Grettir, and offered, that the Earl alone should doom in
this matter, but that Grettir might have peace and leave to dwell in
the land.

The Earl was slow to come to any settlement, but suffered himself to
be led thereto because of their prayers. There respite was granted
to Grettir till the next spring; still the Earl would not settle the
peace till Gunnar, the brother of Biorn and Hiarandi, was thereat; now
Gunnar was a court-owner in Tunsberg.

In the spring, the Earl summoned Grettir and Thorfinn east to
Tunsberg, for he would dwell there east while the most sail was
thereat. Now they went east thither, and the Earl was before them in
the town when they came. Here Grettir found his brother, Thorstein
Dromond, who was fain of him and bade him abide with him: Thorstein
was a court-owner in the town. Grettir told him all about his matters,
and Thorstein gave a good hearing thereto, but bade him beware of
Gunnar. And so the spring wore on.




CHAP. XXIV.

<i>Of the Slaying of Gunnar, and Grettir's strife with Earl Svein</i>.


Now Gunnar was in the town, and lay in wait for Grettir always
and everywhere. It happened on a day that Grettir sat in a booth
a-drinking, for he would not throw himself in Gunnar's way. But, when
he wotted of it the least, the door was driven at so that it brake
asunder, four men all-armed burst in, and there was Gunnar and his
fellows.

They set on Grettir; but he caught up his weapons which hung over
him, and then drew aback into the corner, whence he defended himself,
having before him the shield, but dealing blows with the short-sword,
nor did they have speedy luck with him. Now he smote at one of
Gunnar's fellows, and more he needed not; then he advanced forth on
the floor, and therewith they were driven doorward through the booth,
and there fell another man of Gunnar's; then were Gunnar and his
fellows fain of flight; one of them got to the door, struck his foot
against the threshold and lay there grovelling and was slow in getting
to his feet. Gunnar had his shield before him, and gave back before
Grettir, but he set on him fiercely and leaped up on the cross-beam by
the door. Now the hands of Gunnar and the shield were within the door,
but Grettir dealt a blow down amidst Gunnar and the shield and cut off
both his hands by the wrist, and he fell aback out of the door; then
Grettir dealt him his death-blow.

But in this nick of time got to his feet Gunnar's man, who had lain
fallen awhile, and he ran straightway to see the Earl, and to tell him
these tidings.

Earl Svein was wondrous wroth at this tale, and forthwith summoned a
Thing in the town. But when Thorfinn and Thorstein Dromond knew this,
they brought together their kin and friends and came thronging to the
Thing. Very cross-grained was the Earl, and it was no easy matter to
come to speech with him. Thorfinn went up first before the Earl and
said, "For this cause am I come hither, to offer thee peace and honour
for these man-slayings that Grettir has wrought; thou alone shall
shape and settle all, if the man hath respite of his life."

The Earl answered sore wroth: "Late wilt thou be loth to ask respite
for Grettir; but in my mind it is that thou hast no good cause in
court; he has now slain three brothers, one at the heels of the other,
who were men so brave that they would none bear the other to purse.
Now it will not avail thee, Thorfinn, to pray for Grettir, for I
will not thus bring wrongs into the land so as to take boot for such
unmeasured misdeeds."

Then came forward Bessi, Skald-Torfa's son, and prayed the Earl to
take the offered settlement. "Thereto," he said, "I will give up my
goods, for Grettir is a man of great kin and a good friend of mine;
thou mayst well see, Lord, that it is better to respite one man's life
and to have therefor the thanks of many, thyself alone dooming the
fines, than to break down thine own honour, and risk whether thou
canst seize the man or not."

The Earl answered, "Thou farest well herein, Bessi, and showest at all
times that thou art a high-minded man; still I am loth thus to break
the laws of the land, giving respite to men of foredoomed lives."

Then stepped forth Thorstein Dromond and greeted the Earl, and made
offers on Grettir's behalf, and laid thereto many fair words. The Earl
asked for what cause he made offers for this man. Thorstein said that
they were brothers. The Earl said that he had not known it before:
"Now it is but the part of a man for thee to help him, but because
we have made up our mind not to take money for these man-slayings,
we shall make all men of equal worth here, and Grettir's life will we
have, whatsoever it shall cost and whensoever chance shall serve."

Thereat the Earl sprang up, and would listen in nowise to the offered
atonements.

Now Thorfinn and his folk went home to Thorstein's court and made
ready. But when the Earl saw this he bade all his men take weapons,
and then he went thither with his folk in array. But before he came up
Thorfinn and his men ordered themselves for defence before the gate of
the court. Foremost stood Thorfinn and Thorstein and Grettir, and then
Bessi, and each of them had a large following of men with him.

The Earl bade them to give up Grettir, nor to bring themselves into an
evil strait; they made the very same offer as before. The Earl would
not hearken thereto. Then Thorfinn and Thorstein said that the Earl
should have more ado yet for the getting of Grettir's life, "For one
fate shall befall us all, and it will be said thou workest hard for
one man's life, if all we have to be laid on earth therefor."

The Earl said he should spare none of them, and now they were at the
very point to fight.

Then went to the Earl many men of goodwill, and prayed him not to
push matters on to such great evils, and said they would have to pay
heavily before all these were slain. The Earl found this rede to be
wholesome, and became somewhat softened thereat.

Thereafter they drew up an agreement to which Thorstein and Thorfinn
were willing enough, now that Grettir should have respite of his life.
The Earl spake: "Know ye," quoth he, "that though I deal by way of
mean words with these man-slayings at this time, yet I call this no
settlement, but I am loth to fight against my own folk; though I see
that ye make little of me in this matter."

Then said Thorfinn, "This is a greater honour for thee, Lord, for that
thou alone wilt doom the weregild."

Then the Earl said that Grettir should go in peace, as for him, out to
Iceland, when ships fared out, if so they would; they said that they
would take this. They paid the Earl fines to his mind, and parted from
him with little friendship. Grettir went with Thorfinn; he and his
brother Thorstein parted fondly.

Thorfinn got great fame for the aid he had given Grettir against such
overwhelming power as he had to deal with: none of the men who had
helped Grettir were ever after well loved of the Earl, save Bessi.

So quoth Grettir--

  "To our helping came
  The great of name;
  Thorfinn was there
  Born rule to bear;
  When all bolts fell
  Into locks, and hell
  Cried out for my life
  In the Tunsberg strife.
  The Dromund fair[11]
  Of red seas was there,
  The stone of the bane
  Of steel-gods vain:
  From Bylest's kin
  My life to win,
  Above all men
  He laboured then.

  Then the king's folk
  Would strike no stroke
  To win my head;
  So great grew dread;
  For the leopard came
  With byrni's flame,
  And on thoughts-burg wall
  Should that bright fire fall."

Grettir went back north with Thorfinn, and was with him till he gat
him to ship with chapmen who were bound out to Iceland: he gave him
many fair gifts of raiment, and a fair-stained saddle and a bridle
withal. They parted in friendship, and Thorfinn bade him come to him
whensoever he should come back to Norway.

[Footnote 11: The stone of steel-god's bane in Thorstein; Bylest's kin
is Hel, death. The leopard is Bessi Skald-Torfason; byrni's flame, his
sword. Thoughts-burg, a warrior's head.]




CHAP. XXV.

<i>The Slaying of Thorgils Makson</i>.


Asmund the Greyhaired lived on at Biarg, while Grettir was abroad, and
by that time he was thought to be the greatest of bonders in Midfirth.
Thorkel Krafla died during those seasons that Grettir was out of
Iceland. Thorvald Asgeirson farmed then at the Ridge in Waterdale,
and waxed a great chief. He was the father of Dalla whom Isleif had to
wife, he who afterwards was bishop at Skalholt.

Asmund had in Thorvald the greatest help in suits and in many other
matters. At Asmund's grew up a man, hight Thorgils, called Thorgils
Makson, near akin to Asmund. Thorgils was a man of great strength and
gained much money by Asmund's foresight.

Asmund bought for Thorgils the land at Brookmeet, and there he farmed.
Thorgils was a great store-gatherer, and went a-searching to the
Strands every year, and there he gat for himself whales and other
gettings; and a stout-hearted man he was.

In those days was at its height the waxing of the foster-brothers,
Thorgeir Havarson and Thormod Coalbrowskald; they had a boat and went
therein far and wide, and were not thought men of much even-dealing.
It chanced one summer that Thorgils Makson found a whale on the common
drift-lands, and forthwith he and his folk set about cutting it up.

But when the foster-brothers heard thereof they went thither, and at
first their talk had a likely look out. Thorgils offered that they
should have the half of the uncut whale; but they would have for
themselves all the uncut, or else divide all into halves, both the cut
and the uncut. Thorgils flatly refused to give up what was cut of the
whale; and thereat things grew hot between them, and forthwithal both
sides caught up their weapons and fought. Thorgeir and Thorgils fought
long together without either losing or gaining, and both were of the
eagerest. Their strife was both fierce and long, but the end of it
was, that Thorgils fell dead to earth before Thorgeir; but Thormod and
the men of Thorgils fought in another place; Thormod had the best of
that strife, and three of Thorgils' men fell before him. After the
slaying of Thorgils, his folk went back east to Midfirth, and brought
his dead body with them. Men thought that they had the greatest loss
in him. But the foster-brothers took all the whale to themselves.

This meeting Thormod tells of in that drapa that he made on Thorgeir
dead. Asmund the Greyhaired heard of the slaying of Thorgils his
kinsman; he was suitor in the case for Thorgils' slaying, he went
and took witnesses to the wounds, and summoned the case before the
Althing, for then this seemed to be law, as the case had happened in
another quarter. And so time wears on.




CHAP. XXVI.

<i>Of Thorstein Kuggson, and the gathering for the Bloodsuit for the
Slaying of Thorgils Makson</i>.


There was a man called Thorstein, he was the son of Thorkel Kugg, the
son of Thord the Yeller, the son of Olaf Feilan, the son of Thorstein
the Red, the son of Aud the Deeply-wealthy. The mother of Thorstein
Kuggson was Thurid the daughter of Asgeir Madpate, Asgeir was father's
brother of Asmund the Greyhaired.

Thorstein Kuggson was suitor in the case about Thorgils Makson's
slaying along with Asmund the Greyhaired, who now sent word to
Thorstein that he should come to meet him. Thorstein was a great
champion, and the wildest-tempered of men; he went at once to meet
his kinsman Asmund, and they talked the blood-suit over together.
Thorstein was mightily wroth and said that no atonement should be for
this, and said they had strength of kin enough to bring about for the
slaying either outlawry or vengeance on men. Asmund said that he
would follow him in whatsoever he would have done. They rode north to
Thorvald their kinsman to pray his aid, and he quickly gave his word
and said yea thereto. So they settled the suit against Thorgeir and
Thormod; then Thorstein rode home to his farmstead, he then farmed at
Liarskogar in Hvamsveit. Skeggi farmed at Hvam, he also joined in the
suit with Thorstein. Skeggi was the son of Thorarinn Fylsenni, the son
of Thord the Yeller; the mother of Skeggi was Fridgerd, daughter of
Thord of Head.

These had a many men with them at the Thing, and pushed their suit
with great eagerness.

Asmund and Thorvald rode from the north with six tens of men, and sat
at Liarskogar many nights.




CHAP. XXVII.

<i>The Suit for the Slaying of Thorgils Makson</i>.


A man hight Thorgils abode at Reek-knolls in those days, he was the
son of Ari, the son of Mar, the son of Atli the Red, the son of Ulf
the Squinter, who settled at Reekness; the mother of Thorgils Arisen
was Thorgerd, the daughter of Alf a-Dales; another daughter of Alf was
Thorelf, mother of Thorgeir Havarson. There had Thorgeir good kinship
to trust in, for Thorgils was the greatest chief in the Westfirthers'
quarter. He was a man of such bountifulness, that he gave food to any
free-born man as long as he would have it, and therefore there was at
all times a throng of people at Reek-knolls; thus had Thorgils much
renown of his house-keeping. He was a man withal of good will and
foreknowledge. Thorgeir was with Thorgils in winter, but went to the
Strands in summer.

After the slaying of Thorgils Makson, Thorgeir went to Reek-knolls and
told Thorgils Arisen these tidings; Thorgils said that he was ready to
give him harbour with him, "But, methinks," he says, "that they will
be heavy in the suit, and I am loth to eke out the troubles. Now I
shall send a man to Thorstein and bid weregild for the slaying of
Thorgils; but if he will not take atonement I shall not defend the
case stiffly."

Thorgeir said he would trust to his foresight. In autumn Thorgils
sent a man to Thorstein Kuggson to try settling the case, but he was
cross-grained to deal with as to the taking money for the blood-suit
of Thorgils Makson; but about the other man-slayings, he said he
would do as wise men should urge him. Now when Thorgils heard this, he
called Thorgeir to him for a talk, and asked him what kind of aid he
now deemed meetest for him; Thorgeir said that it was most to his mind
to go abroad if he should be outlawed. Thorgils said that should be
tried. A ship lay up Northriver in Burgfirth; in that keel Thorgils
secretly paid faring for the foster-brothers, and thus the winter
passed. Thorgils heard that Asmund and Thorstein drew together many
men to the Althing, and sat in Liarskogar. He drew out the time of
riding from home, for he would that Asmund and Thorstein should have
ridden by before him to the south, when he came from the west; and
so it fell out. Thorgils rode south, and with him rode the
foster-brothers. In this ride Thorgeir killed Bundle-Torfi of
Marswell, and Skuf withal, and Biarni in Dog-dale; thus says Thormod
in Thorgeir's-Drapa--

  "Mighty strife the warrior made,
  When to earth was Makson laid,
  Well the sword-shower wrought he there,
  Flesh the ravens got to tear;
  Then when Skuf and Biarni fell,
  He was there the tale to tell;
  Sea-steed's rider took his way
  Through the thickest of the fray."

Thorgils settled the peace for the slaying of Skuf and Biarni then
and there in the Dale, and delayed no longer than his will was before;
Thorgeir went to ship, but Thorgils to the Althing, and came not
thither until men were going to the courts.

Then Asmund the Greyhaired challenged the defence for the blood-suit
on the slaying of Thorgils Makson. Thorgils went to the court and
offered weregild for the slaying, if thereby Thorgeir might become
free of guilt; he put forth for defence in the suit whether they had
not free catch on all common foreshores. The lawman was asked if this
was a lawful defence. Skapti was the lawman, and backed Asmund for the
sake of their kinship. He said this was law if they were equal men,
but said that bonders had a right to take before batchelors. Asmund
said that Thorgils had offered an even sharing to the foster-brothers
in so much of the whale as was uncut when they came thereto; and
therewith that way of defence was closed against them. Now Thorstein
and his kin followed up the suit with much eagerness, and nought was
good to them but that Thorgeir should be made guilty.

Thorgils saw that one of two things was to be done, either to set on
with many men, not knowing what might be gained thereby, or to suffer
them to go on as they would; and, whereas Thorgeir had been got on
board ship, Thorgils let the suit go on unheeded.

Thorgeir was outlawed, but for Thormod was taken weregild, and he to
be quit. By this blood-suit Thorstein and Asmund were deemed to have
waxed much. And now men ride home from the Thing.

Some men would hold talk that Thorgils had lightly backed the case,
but he heeded their talk little, and let any one say thereon what he
would.

But when Thorgeir heard of this outlawry, he said--

"Fain am I that those who have made me an outlaw should have full pay
for this, ere all be over."

There was a man called Gaut Sleitason, who was akin to Thorgils
Makson. Gaut had made ready to go in this same ship wherein Thorgeir
was to sail. He bristled up against Thorgeir, and showed mighty
ill-will against him and went about scowling; when the chapmen found
this out, they thought it far from safe that both should sail in one
ship. Thorgeir said he heeded not how much soever Gaut would bend his
brows on him; still it was agreed that Gaut should take himself off
from the ship, whereupon he went north into the upper settlements,
and that time nought happed between him and Thorgeir, but out of this
sprang up between them ill blood, as matters showed after.




CHAP. XXVIII.

<i>Grettir comes out to Iceland again</i>.


This summer Grettir Asmundson came out to Skagafirth: he was in those
days so famed a man for strength and prowess, that none was deemed
his like among young men. He rode home to Biarg forthwith, and Asmund
welcomed him meetly. At that time Atli managed the farming matters,
and well things befell betwixt the brothers.

But now Grettir waxed so overbearing, that he deemed that nought was
too much for him to do. At that time had many men grown into full
manhood who were young in the days when Grettir was wont to play with
them on Midfirth-water before he went abroad; one of these was Audun,
who then dwelt at Audunstead, in Willowdale; he was the son of Asgeir,
the son of Audun, the son of Asgeir Madpate; of all men he was the
strongest north there; but he was thought to be the gentlest of
neighbours. Now it came into Grettir's mind that he had had the worst
of Audun in that ball-play whereof is told before; and now he would
fain try which of the twain had ripened the most since then. For this
cause Grettir took his way from home, and fared unto Audunstead.
This was in early mowing tide; Grettir was well dight, and rode in a
fair-stained saddle of very excellent workmanship, which Thorfinn had
given him; a good horse he had withal, and all weapons of the best.
Grettir came early in the day to Audunstead, and knocked at the door.
Few folk were within; Grettir asked if Audun was at home. Men said
that he had gone to fetch victuals from the hill-dairy. Then Grettir
took the bridle off his horse; the field was unmowed, and the horse
went whereas the grass was the highest. Grettir went into the hall,
sat down on the seat-beam, and thereon fell asleep. Soon after Audun
came home, and sees a horse grazing in the field with a fair-stained
saddle on; Audun was bringing victuals on two horses, and carried
curds on one of them, in drawn-up hides, tied round about: this
fashion men called curd-bags. Audun took the loads off the horses and
carried the curd-bags in his arms into the house.

Now it was dark before his eyes, and Grettir stretched his foot from
out the beam so that Audun fell flat down head-foremost on to the
curd-bag, whereby the bonds of the bag brake; Audun leaped up and
asked who was that rascal in the way. Grettir named himself.

Then said Audun, "Rashly hast thou done herein; what is thine errand
then?"

Grettir said, "I will fight with thee."

"First I will see about my victuals," said Audun.

"That thou mayst well do," said Grettir, "if thou canst not charge
other folk therewith."

Then Audun stooped down and caught up the curd-bag and dashed it
against Grettir's bosom, and bade him first take what was sent him;
and therewith was Grettir all smothered in the curds; and a greater
shame he deemed that than if Audun had given him a great wound.

Now thereon they rushed at one another and wrestled fiercely; Grettir
set on with great eagerness, but Audun gave back before him. Yet he
feels that Grettir has outgrown him in strength. Now all things in
their way were kicked out of place, and they were borne on wrestling
to and fro throughout all the hall; neither spared his might, but
still Grettir was the toughest of the twain, and at last Audun fell,
having torn all weapons from Grettir.

Now they grapple hard with one another, and huge cracking was all
around them. Withal a great din was heard coming through the earth
underneath the farmstead, and Grettir heard some one ride up to the
houses, get off his horse, and stride in with great strides; he sees
a man come up, of goodly growth, in a red kirtle and with a helmet on
his head. He took his way into the hall, for he had heard clamorous
doings there as they were struggling together; he asked what was in
the hall.

Grettir named himself, "But who asks thereof?" quoth he.

"Bardi am I hight," said the new comer.

"Art thou Bardi, the son of Gudmund, from Asbiornsness?"

"That very man am I," said Bardi; "but what art thou doing?"

Grettir said, "We, Audun and I, are playing here in sport."

"I know not as to the sport thereof," said Bardi, "nor are ye even men
either; thou art full of unfairness and overbearing, and he is easy
and good to deal with; so let him stand up forthwith."

Grettir said, "<i>Many a man stretches round the door to the lock</i>;
and meseems it lies more in thy way to avenge thy brother Hall[12]
than to meddle in the dealings betwixt me and Audun."

[Footnote 12: Who was killed in Norway by the sons of Harek, and whose
revenge is told of in the Saga of the Heath slayings (existing in
fragment).]

"At all times I hear this," said Bardi, "nor know I if that will be
avenged, but none the less I will that thou let Audun be at peace, for
he is a quiet man."

Grettir did so at Bardi's bidding, nathless, little did it please him.
Bardi asked for what cause they strove.

Grettir sang--

  "Prithee, Audun, who can tell,
  But that now thy throat shall swell;
  That from rough hands thou shalt gain
  By our strife a certain pain.
  E'en such wrong as I have done,
  I of yore from Audun won,
  When the young, fell-creeping lad
  At his hands a choking had."

Bardi said that certes it was a matter to be borne with, if he had had
to avenge himself.

"Now I will settle matters between you," quoth Bardi; "I will that ye
part, leaving things as they are, that thereby there may be an end of
all between you."

This they let hold good, but Grettir took ill liking to Bardi and his
brothers.

Now they all rode off, and when they were somewhat on their way,
Grettir spake--

"I have heard that thou hast will to go to Burgfirth this summer, and
I now offer to go south with thee; and methinks that herein I do for
thee more than thou art worthy of."

Hereat was Bardi glad, and speedily said yea thereto, and bade him
have thanks for this; and thereupon they parted. But a little after
Bardi came back and said--

"I will have it known that thou goest not unless my foster-father
Thorarin will have it so, for he shall have all the rule of the
faring."

"Well mightest thou, methinks, have full freedom as to thine own
redes," said Grettir, "and my faring I will not have laid under the
choice of other folk; and I shall mislike it if thou easiest me aside
from thy fellowship."

Now either went their way, and Bardi said he should let Grettir know
for sure if Thorarin would that he should fare with him, but that
otherwise he might sit quiet at home. Grettir rode home to Biarg, but
Bardi to his own house.




CHAP. XXIX.

<i>Of the Horse-fight at Longfit</i>.


That summer was settled to be a great horse-fight at Longfit, below
Reeks. Thither came many men. Atli of Biarg had a good horse, a
black-maned roan of Keingala's kin, and father and son had great love
for that horse. The brothers, Kormak and Thorgils of Meal, had a brown
horse, trusty in fight. These were to fight their horse against Atli
of Biarg. And many other good horses were there.

Odd, the Foundling-skald, of Kormak's kin, was to follow the horse
of his kinsman through the day. Odd was then growing a big man, and
bragged much of himself, and was untameable and reckless. Grettir
asked of Atli his brother, who should follow his horse.

"I am not so clear about that," said he.

"Wilt thou that I stand by it?" said Grettir.

"Be thou then very peaceable, kinsman," said Atli, "for here have we
to deal with overbearing men."

"Well, let them pay for their own insolence," said Grettir, "if they
know not how to hold it back."

Now are the horses led out, but all stood forth on the river-bank tied
together. There was a deep hollow in the river down below the bank.
The horses bit well at each other, and the greatest sport it was.

Odd drave on his horse with all his might, but Grettir held back, and
seized the tail with one hand, and the staff wherewith he goaded the
horse he held in the other. Odd stood far before his horse, nor was it
so sure that he did not goad Atli's horse from his hold. Grettir made
as if he saw it not. Now the horses bore forth towards the river. Then
Odd drave his staff at Grettir, and smote the shoulder-blade, for that
Grettir turned the shoulder towards him: that was so mighty a stroke,
that the flesh shrank from under it, but Grettir was little scratched.

Now in that nick of time the horses reared up high, and Grettir ran
under his horse's hocks, and thrust his staff so hard at the side
of Odd that three ribs brake in him, but he was hurled out into deep
water, together with his horse and all the horses that were tied
together. Then men swam out to him and dragged him out of the river;
then was a great hooting made thereat; Kormak's folk ran to their
weapons, as did the men of Biarg in another place. But when the
Ramfirthers and the men of Waterness saw that, they went betwixt them,
and they were parted and went home, but both sides had ill-will one
with the other, though they sat peacefully at home for a while.

Atli was sparing of speech over this, but Grettir was right unsparing,
and said that they would meet another time if his will came to pass.




CHAP. XXX.

<i>Of Thorbiorn Oxmain and Thorbiorn Tardy, and of Grettir's meeting
with Kormak on Ramfirth-neck</i>.


Thorbiorn was the name of a man who dwelt at Thorodstead in Ramfirth;
he was the son of Arnor Hay-nose,[13] the son of Thorod, who had
settled Ramfirth on that side out as far as Bank was on the other.

[Footnote 13: In the Landnáma he is called 'Hy-nef;' the meaning is
doubtful, but it seems that the author of this history means to call
him Hay-nose.]

Thorbiorn was the strongest of all men; he was called Oxmain. Thorod
was the name of his brother, he was called Drapa-Stump; their mother
was Gerd, daughter of Bodvar, from Bodvars-knolls. Thorbiorn was a
great and hardy warrior, and had many men with him; he was noted as
being worse at getting servants than other men, and barely gave he
wages to any man, nor was he thought a good man to deal with. There
was a kinsman of his hight Thorbiorn, and bynamed Tardy; he was a
sailor, and the namesakes were partners. He was ever at Thorodstead,
and was thought to better Thorbiorn but little. He was a fault-finding
fellow, and went about jeering at most men.

There was a man hight Thorir, the son of Thorkel of Boardere. He
farmed first at Meals in Ramfirth; his daughter was Helga, whom
Sleita-Helgi had to wife, but after the man-slaying in Fairslope
Thorir set up for himself his abode south in Hawkdale, and farmed at
the Pass, and sold the land at Meals to Thorhall, son of Gamli the
Vendlander.[14] His son was Gamli, who had to wife Ranveig, daughter
of Asmund the Greyhaired, and Grettir's sister. They dwelt at that
time at Meals, and had good hap. Thorir of the Pass had two sons, one
hight Gunnar, the other Thorgeir; they were both hopeful men, and
had then taken the farm after their father, yet were for ever with
Thorbiorn Oxmain, and were growing exceeding unruly.

[Footnote 14: Ed. 1853 has the "Wide-landed, Viðlendings," which here
is altered agreeably to the correction in ch. 14, p. 29.]

The summer after that just told, Kormak and Thorgils and Narfi their
kinsman rode south to Northriverdale, on some errand of theirs. Odd
the Foundling-skald fared also with them, and by then was gotten
healed of the stiffness he gained at the horse-fight. But while they
were south of the heath, Grettir fared from Biarg, and with him two
house-carles of Atli's. They rode over to Bowerfell, and thence over
the mountain neck to Ramfirth, and came to Meals in the evening.

They were there three nights; Ranveig and Gamli welcomed Grettir well,
and bade him abide with them, but he had will to ride home.

Then Grettir heard that Kormak and his fellows were come from the
south, and had guested at Tongue through the night. Grettir got ready
early to leave Meals; Gamli offered him men to go with him. Now Grim
was the name of Gamli's brother; he was of all men the swiftest; he
rode with Grettir with another man; they were five in all. Thus they
rode on till they came to Ramfirth-neck, west of Bowerfell. There
stands a huge stone that is called Grettir's heave; for he tried long
that day to lift that stone, and thus they delayed till Kormak and his
fellows were come. Grettir rode to meet them, and both sides jumped
off their horses. Grettir said it was more like free men now to
deal blows of the biggest, than to fight with staves like wandering
churles. Then Kormak bade them take the challenge in manly wise, and
do their best. Thereafter they ran at one another and fought. Grettir
went before his men, and bade them take heed, that none came at his
back. Thus they fought a while, and men were wounded on both sides.

Now Thorbiorn Oxmain had ridden that day over the neck to Bowerfell,
and when he rode back he saw their meeting. There were with him then
Thorbiorn the Tardy, and Gunnar and Thorgeir, Thorir's sons, and
Thorod Drapa-Stump. Now when they came thereto, Thorbiorn called on
his men to go between them. But the others were by then so eager that
they could do nought. Grettir broke forth fiercely, and before him
were the sons of Thorir, and they both fell as he thrust them from
him; they waxed exceeding furious thereat, insomuch that Gunnar dealt
a death-blow at a house-carle of Atli; and when Thorbiorn saw that,
he bade them part, saying withal that he would aid which side soever
should pay heed to his words. By then were fallen two house-carles of
Kormak, but Grettir saw, that it would hardly do if Thorbiorn should
bring aid to them against him, wherefore now he gave up the battle,
and all were wounded who had been at that meeting. But much it
misliked Grettir that they had been parted.

Thereafter either side rode home, nor did they settle peace after
these slayings. Thorbiorn the Tardy made much mocking at all this,
therefore things began to worsen betwixt the men of Biarg and
Thorbiorn Oxmain, so that therefrom fell much ill-will as came to be
known after. No boot was bidden to Atli for his house-carle, but
he made as if he knew it not. Grettir sat at home at Biarg until
Twainmonth.[15] Nor is it said in story that he and Kormak met ever
again after these things betid.

[Footnote 15: The second month in the year, corresponding to our
September.]




CHAP. XXXI.

<i>How Grettir met Bardi, the Son of Gudmund, as he came back from the
Heath-slayings</i>.


Bardi, the son of Gudmund, and his brothers, rode home to Asbiornsness
after their parting with Grettir.

They were the sons of Gudmund, the son of Solmund. The mother of
Solmund was Thorlaug, the daughter of Saemund, the South-Island man,
the foster-brother of Ingimund the Old, and Bardi was a very noble
man.

Now soon he rode to find Thorarin the Wise, his foster-father. He
welcomed Bardi well, and asked what gain he had got of followers and
aid, for they had before taken counsel over Bardi's journey. Bardi
answered that he had got the aid of that man to his fellow, whose aid
he deemed better than that of any other twain. Thorarin got silent
thereat, and then said,

"That man will be Grettir Asmundson."

"<i>Sooth is the sage's guess</i>," said Bardi; "that is the very man,
foster-father."

Thorarin answered, "True it is, that Grettir is much before any other
man of those who are to choose in our land, and late will he be won
with weapons, if he be hale, yet it misdoubts me how far he will bring
thee luck; but of thy following all must not be luckless, and enough
ye will do, though he fare not with thee: nowise shall he go if I may
have my will."

"This I could not have deemed, foster-father," said he, "that thou
wouldst grudge me the aid of the bravest of men, if my need should be
hard. A man cannot foresee all things when he is driven on as methinks
I am."

"Thou wilt do well," said Thorarin; "though thou abidest by my
foresight."

Now thus must things be, even as Thorarin would, that no word more was
sent to Grettir, but Bardi fared south to Burgfirth, and then befell
the Heath-slayings.

Grettir was at Biarg when he heard that Bardi had ridden south; he
started up in anger for that no word had been sent to him, and said
that not thus should they part. He had news of them when they
were looked for coming from the south, and thereat he rode down to
Thorey's-peak, for the waylaying of Bardi's folk as they came back
from the south: he fared from the homestead up on to the hill-side,
and abode there. That same day rode Bardi and his men north over
Twodaysway, from the Heath-slayings; they were six in all, and every
man sore wounded; and when they came forth by the homestead, then said
Bardi--

"A man there is up on the hill-side; a big man, armed. What man do ye
take him to be?"

They said that they wotted not who he was.

Bardi said, "Methinks there," quoth he, "is Grettir Asmundson; and if
so it is, there will he meet us. I deem that it has misliked him that
he fared not with us, but methinks we are not in good case, if he be
bent on doing us harm. I now shall send after men to Thorey's-peak,
and stake nought on the chance of his ill-will."

They said this was a good rede, and so was it done.

Thereafter Bardi and his folk rode on their way. Grettir saw where
they fared, and went in the way before them, and when they met, either
greeted other.

Grettir asked for tidings, but Bardi told them fearlessly, even as
they were. Grettir asked what men were in that journey with him. Bardi
said that there were his brothers, and Eyulf his brother-in-law.

"Thou hast now cleared thyself from all blame," said Grettir; "but now
is it best that we try between us who is of most might here."

Said Bardi, "Too nigh to my garth have deeds of hard need been, than
that I should fight with thee without a cause, and well methinks have
I thrust these from me."

"Thou growest soft, methinks, Bardi," said Grettir, "since thou durst
not fight with me."

"Call that what thou wilt," said Bardi; "but in some other stead would
I that thou wreak thine high-handedness than here on me; and that is
like enough, for now does thy rashness pass all bounds."

Grettir thought ill of his spaedom, and now doubted within himself
whether he should set on one or other of them; but it seemed rash to
him, as they were six and he one: and in that nick of time came up the
men from Thorey's-peak to the aid of Bardi and his folk; then Grettir
drew off from them, and turned aside to his horse. But Bardi and his
fellows went on their way, nor were there farewells between them at
parting.

No further dealings between Bardi and Grettir are told of after these
things betid.

Now so has Grettir said that he deemed himself well matched to fight
with most men, though they were three together, but he would have no
mind to flee before four, without trying it; but against more would
he fight only if he must needs defend his hand, as is said in this
stave--

  "My life trust I 'gainst three
  Skilled in Mist's mystery;
  Whatso in Hilda's weather
  Shall bring the swords together;
  If over four they are
  My wayfaring that bar
  No gale of swords will I
  Wake with them willingly."

After his parting with Bardi, Grettir fared to Biarg, and very ill he
it thought that he might nowhere try his strength, and searched all
about if anywhere might be somewhat wherewith he might contend.




CHAP. XXXII.

<i>Of the Haunting at Thorhall-stead; and how Thorhall took a Shepherd
by the rede of Skapti the Lawman, and of what befell thereafter</i>.


There was a man hight Thorhall, who dwelt at Thorhall-stead, in
Shady-vale, which runs up from Waterdale. Thorhall was the son of
Grim, son of Thorhall, the son of Fridmund, who settled Shady-vale.
Thorhall had a wife hight Gudrun. Grim was their son, and Thurid their
daughter; they were well-nigh grown up.

Thorhall was a rich man, but mostly in cattle, so that no man had so
much of live-stock as he. He was no chief, but an honest bonder he
was. Much was that place haunted, and hardly could he get a shepherd
that he deemed should serve his turn. He sought counsel of many men
as to what he might do therewith, but none gave him a rede that might
serve him. Thorhall rode each summer to the Thing, and good horses
he had. But one summer at the Althing, Thorhall went to the booth
of Skapti Thorodson the Lawman. Skapti was the wisest of men, and
wholesome were his redes when folk prayed him for them. But he and his
father differed thus much, that Thorod was foretelling, and yet was
called under-handed of some folk; but Skapti showed forth to every
man what he deemed would avail most, if it were not departed from,
therefore was he called "Father-betterer."

Now Thorhall went into Skapti's booth, and Skapti greeted him well,
for he knew that he was a man rich in cattle, and he asked him what
were the tidings.

Thorhall answered, "A wholesome counsel would I have from thee."

"Little am I meet for that," said Skapti; "but what dost thou stand in
need of?"

Thorhall said, "So is the matter grown to be, that but a little while
do my shepherds avail me; for ever will they get badly hurt; but
others will not serve to the end, and now no one will take the job
when he knows what bides in the way."

Skapti answered, "Some evil things shall be there then, since men
are more unwilling to watch thy sheep than those of other men. Now,
therefore, as thou hast sought rede of me, I shall get thee a shepherd
who is hight Glam, a Swede, from Sylgsdale, who came out last summer,
a big man and a strong, though he is not much to the mind of most
folk."

Thorhall said he heeded that little if he watched the sheep well.

Skapti said that little would be the look out for others, if he could
not watch them, despite his strength and daring.

Then Thorhall went out from him, and this was towards the breaking
up of the Thing. Thorhall missed two dun horses, and fared himself to
seek for them; wherefore folk deem that he was no great man. He went
up to Sledgehill, and south along the fell which is called Armansfell;
then he saw how a man fared down from Godi's-wood, and bore faggots on
a horse. Soon they met together, and Thorhall asked him of his name.
He said that he was called Glam. This man was great of growth,
uncouth to look on; his eyes were grey and glaring, and his hair was
wolf-grey.

Thorhall stared at him somewhat when he saw this man, till he saw that
this was he to whom he had been sent.

"What work hast thou best will to do?" said Thorhall.

Glam said, "That he was of good mind to watch sheep in winter."

"Wilt thou watch my sheep?" said Thorhall. "Skapti has given thee to
my will."

"So only shall my service avail thee, if I go of my own will, for I am
evil of mood if matters mislike me," quoth Glam.

"I fear no hurt thereof," said Thorhall, "and I will that thou fare to
my house."

"That may I do," said Glam, "perchance there are some troubles there?"

"Folk deem the place haunted," said Thorhall.

"Such bugs will not scare me," quoth Glam; "life seems to me less
irksome thereby."

"It must needs seem so," said Thorhall, "and truly it is better that a
mannikin be not there."

Thereafter they struck bargain together, and Glam is to come at winter
nights: then they parted, and Thorhall found his horses even where he
had just been searching. Thorhall rode home, and thanked Skapti for
his good deed.

Summer slipped away, and Thorhall heard nought of his shepherd, nor
did any man know aught about him; but at the appointed time he came
to Thorhall-stead. The bonder greeted him well, but none of the other
folk could abide him, and the good wife least of all.

Now he took to the sheep-watching, and little trouble it seemed to
give him; he was big-voiced and husky, and all the beasts would run
together when he whooped. There was a church at Thorhall-stead, but
nowise would Glam come therein; he was a loather of church-song, and
godless, foul-tempered, and surly, and no man might abide him.

Now passed the time till it came to Yule-eve; then Glam got up and
straightway called for his meat. The good wife said--

"No Christian man is wont to eat meat this day, be-. cause that on the
morrow is the first day of Yule," says she, "wherefore must men first
fast to-day."

He answers, "Many follies have ye, whereof I see no good come, nor
know I that men fare better now than when they paid no heed to such
things; and methinks the ways of men were better when they were called
heathens; and now will I have my meat, and none of this fooling."

Then said the housewife, "I know for sure that thou shall fare ill
to-day, if thou takest up this evil turn."

Glam bade her bring food straightway, and said that she should fare
the worse else. She durst do but as he would, and so when he was full,
he went out, growling and grumbling.

Now the weather was such, that mirk was over all, and the snow-flakes
drave down, and great din there was, and still all grew much the
worse, as the day slipped away.

Men heard the shepherd through the early morning, but less of him
as the day wore; then it took to snowing, and by evening there was
a great storm; then men went to church, and thus time drew on to
nightfall; and Glam came not home; then folk held talk, as to whether
search should not be made for him, but, because of the snow-storm and
pitch darkness, that came to nought.

Now he came not home on the night of Yule-eve; and thus men abide till
after the time of worship; but further on in the day men fared out to
the search, and found the sheep scattered wide about in fens, beaten
down by the storm, or strayed up into the mountains. Thereafter they
came on a great beaten place high up in the valley, and they thought
it was as if strong wrestling had gone on there; for that all about
the stones had been uptorn and the earth withal; now they looked
closely and saw where Glam lay a little way therefrom; he was dead,
and as blue as hell, and as great as a neat.

Huge loathing took them, at the sight of him, and they shuddered in
their souls at him, yet they strove to bring him to church, but could
get him only as far as a certain gil-edge a little way below.

Then they fared home to the farm, and told the bonder what had happed.
He asked what was like to have been Glam's bane. They said they had
tracked steps as great as if a cask-bottom had been stamped down, from
there where the beaten place was, up to beneath sheer rocks which were
high up the valley, and there along went great stains of blood. Now
men drew from this, that the evil wight which had been there before
had killed Glam, but had got such wounds as had been full enough for
him, for of him none has since been ware.

The second day of Yule men went afresh to try to bring Glam to church;
drag horses were put to him, but could move him nowhere where they
had to go on even ground and not down hill; then folk had to go away
therefrom leaving things done so far.

The third day the priest fared with them, and they sought all day, but
found not Glam. The priest would go no more on such search, but the
herdsman was found whenso the priest was not in their company. Then
they let alone striving to bring him to church, and buried him there
whereto he had been brought.

A little time after men were ware that Glam lay not quiet. Folk got
great hurt therefrom, so that many fell into swoons when they saw him,
but others lost their wits thereby. But just after Yule men thought
they saw him home at the farm. Folk became exceeding afeard thereat,
and many fled there and then. Next Glam took to riding the house-roofs
at night, so that he went nigh to breaking them in. Now he walked
well-nigh night and day. Hardly durst men fare up into the dale,
though they had errands enough there. And much scathe the men of the
country-side deemed all this.




CHAP. XXXIII.

<i>Of the doings of Glam at Thorhall-stead</i>.


In the spring Thorhall got serving-men, and set up house at his farm;
then the hauntings began to go off while the sun was at its height;
and so things went on to midsummer. That summer a ship came out to
Hunawater, wherein was a man named Thorgaut. He was an outlander of
kin, big and stout, and two men's strength he had. He was unhired
and single, and would fain do some work, for he was moneyless. Now
Thorhall rode to the ship, and asked Thorgaut if he would work for
him. Thorgaut said that might be, and moreover that he was not nice
about work.

"Be sure in thy mind," said Thorhall, "that mannikins are of small
avail there because of the hauntings that have been going on there for
one while now; for I will not draw thee on by wiles."

Thorgaut answers, "I deem not myself given up, though I should see
some wraithlings; matters will not be light when I am scared, nor will
I give up my service for that."

Now they come speedily to a bargain, and Thorgaut is to watch the
sheep when winter comes. So the summer wore on, and Thorgaut betook
himself to the shepherding at winter nights, and all liked him well.
But ever came Glam home and rode the house-roofs; this Thorgaut deemed
sport enough, and quoth he--

"The thrall must come nigher to scare me."

Thorhall bade him keep silence over that. "Better will it be that ye
have no trial together."

Thorgaut said, "Surely all might is shaken out of you, nor shall I
drop down betwixt morn and eve at such talk."

Now so things go through the winter till Yule-tide. On Yule eve the
shepherd would fare out to his sheep. Then said the good wife--

"Need is it that things go not the old way."

He answered, "Have no fear thereof, goodwife; something worth telling
of will betide if I come not back."

And thereafter he went to his sheep; and the weather was somewhat
cold, and there was much snow. Thorgaut was wont to come home when
twilight had set in, and now he came not at that time. Folk went to
church as they were wont. Men now thought things looked not unlike
what they did before; the bonder would have search made for the
shepherd, but the church-goers begged off, and said that they would
not give themselves into the hands of trolls by night; so the bonder
durst not go, and the search came to nought.

Yule-day, when men were full, they fared out and searched for the
shepherd; they first went to Glam's cairn, because men thought that
from his deeds came the loss of the herdsman. But when they came nigh
to the cairn, there they saw great tidings, for there they found the
shepherd, and his neck was broken, and every bone in him smashed.
Then they brought him to church, and no harm came to men from Thorgaut
afterwards.

But Glam began afresh to wax mighty; and such deeds he wrought, that
all men fled away from Thorhall-stead, except the good man and his
goodwife. Now the same neatherd had long been there, and Thorhall
would not let him go, because of his good will and safe ward; he was
well on in years, and was very loth to fare away, for he saw that all
things the bonder had went to nought from not being watched.

Now after midwinter one morning the housewife fared to the byre to
milk the cows after the wonted time; by then was it broad daylight,
for none other than the neatherd would trust themselves out before
day; but he went out at dawn. She heard great cracking in the byre,
with bellowing and roaring; she ran back crying out, and said she knew
not what uncouth things were going on in the byre.

The bonder went out and came to the cows, which were goring one
another; so he thought it not good to go in there, but went in to the
hay-barn. There he saw where lay the neatherd, and had his head in one
boose[16] and his feet in the other; and he lay cast on his back. The
bonder went up to him, and felt him all over with his hand, and finds
soon that he was dead, and the spine of him broken asunder; it had
been broken over the raised stone-edge of a boose.

[Footnote 16: Boose, a cow-stall.]

Now the goodman thought there was no abiding there longer; so he fled
away from the farm with all that he might take away; but all such live
stock as was left behind Glam killed, and then he fared all over the
valley and destroyed farms up from Tongue. But Thorhall was with his
friends the rest of the winter.

No man might fare up the dale with horse or hound, because straightway
it was slain. But when spring came, and the sun-light was the
greatest, somewhat the hauntings abated; and now would Thorhall
go back to his own land; he had no easy task in getting servants,
nathless he set up house again at Thorhall-stead; but all went the
same way as before; for when autumn came, the hauntings began to wax
again; the bonder's daughter was most set on, and fared so that she
died thereof. Many redes were sought, but nought could be done; men
thought it like that all Waterdale would be laid waste if nought were
found to better this.




CHAP. XXXIV.

<i>Grettir hears of the Hauntings</i>.


Now we take up the story where Grettir Asmundson sat at Biarg through
the autumn after they parted, he and Slaying-Bardi at Thoreys-peak;
and when the time of winter-nights had well-nigh come, Grettir
rode from home north over the neck to Willowdale, and guested at
Audunstead; he and Audun made a full peace, and Grettir gave Audun a
good axe, and they talked of friendship between them. Audun dwelt
long at Audunstead, and was a man of many and hopeful kin; his son was
Egil, who married Ulfheid, daughter of Eyulf Gudmundson, and their son
was Eyulf, who was slain at the Althing, he was the father of Orm, who
was the chaplain of Bishop Thorlak.

Grettir rode north to Waterdale, and came to see his kin at Tongue. In
those days dwelt there Jokull, the son of Bard, the mother's brother
of Grettir: Jokull was a big man and a strong, and the most violent
of men; he was a seafaring man, very wild, and yet a man of great
account.

He greeted Grettir well, and he was there three nights. There were so
many words about Glam's hauntings, that nought was so much spoken of
as of that. Grettir asked closely about all things that had happed.
Jokull said that thereof was told no more than the very truth; "And,
perchance, thou art wishful to go there, kinsman?"

Grettir said that so it was.

Jokull bade him do it not, "Because it is a great risk for thy good
luck, and thy kinsmen have much to hazard where thou art," said he,
"for of young men we think there is none such as thou; but <i>from ill
cometh ill</i> whereas Glam is; and far better it is to deal with men
than with such evil wights."

Grettir said, "That he had a mind to go to Thorhall-stead and see how
things went there."

Said Jokull, "Now I see it is of no avail to let thee; but so it is,
as men say, <i>Good luck and goodliness are twain</i>."

"<i>Woe is before one's own door when it is inside one's
neighbour's</i>; think how it may fare with thyself ere things are
ended," said Grettir.

Jokull answered, "Maybe we may both see somewhat of things to come,
but neither may help aught herein."

They parted thereafter, and neither thought well of the other's
foretelling.




CHAP. XXXV.

<i>Grettir goes to Thorhall-stead, and has to do with Glam</i>.


Grettir rode to Thorhall-stead, and the bonder gave him good welcome;
he asked whither Grettir was minded to fare, but Grettir said he would
be there that night if the bonder would have it so.

Thorhall said that he thanked him therefor, "But few have thought it
a treat to guest here for any time; thou must needs have heard what
is going on here, and I fain would that thou shouldest have no trouble
from me: but though thou shouldest come off whole thyself, that know
I for sure, that thou wilt lose thy horse, for none keeps his horse
whole who comes here."

Grettir said that horses were to be had in plenty whatsoever might hap
to this. Then Thorhall was glad that Grettir was to be there, and gave
him a hearty welcome.

Now Grettir's horse was locked up in a strong house, and they went to
sleep; and so the night slipped by, and Glam came not home.

Then said Thorhall, "Things have gone well at thy coming, for every
night is Glam wont to ride the house-roofs, or break open doors, as
thou mayest well see."

Grettir said, "Then shall one of two things be, either he shall not
hold himself back for long, or the hauntings will abate for more than
one night; I will bide here another night and see how things fare."

Thereafter they went to Grettir's horse, and nought had been tried
against it; then all seemed to the bonder to go one way.

Now is Grettir there another night, and neither came the thrall home;
that the farmer deemed very hopeful; withal he fared to see after
Grettir's horse. When the farmer came there, he found the house broken
into, but the horse was dragged out to the door, and every bone in
him broken to pieces. Thorhall told Grettir what had happed there, and
bade him save himself, "For sure is thy death if thou abidest Glam."

Grettir answered, "I must not have less for my horse than a sight of
the thrall."

The bonder said it was no boon to see him, for he was unlike any shape
of man; "but good methinks is every hour that thou art here."

Now the day goes by, and when men should go to sleep Grettir would
not put off his clothes, but lay down on the seat over against the
bonder's lock-bed. He had a drugget cloak over him, and wrapped one
skirt of it under his feet, and twined the other under his head, and
looked out through the head-opening; a seat-beam was before the seat,
a very strong one, and against this he set his feet. The door-fittings
were all broken from the outer door, but a wrecked door was now bound
thereby, and all was fitted up in the wretchedest wise. The panelling
which had been before the seat athwart the hall, was all broken away
both above and below the cross-beam; all beds had been torn out of
place, and an uncouth place it was.

Light burned in the hall through the night; and when the third part
of the night was passed, Grettir heard huge din without, and then one
went up upon the houses and rode the hall, and drave his heels against
the thatch so that every rafter cracked again.

That went on long, and then he came down from the house and went
to the door; and as the door opened, Grettir saw that the thrall
stretched in his head, which seemed to him monstrously big, and
wondrous thick cut.

Glam fared slowly when he came into the door and stretched himself
high up under the roof, and turned looking along the hall, and laid
his arms on the tie-beam, and glared inwards over the place. The
farmer would not let himself be heard, for he deemed he had had enough
in hearing himself what had gone on outside. Grettir lay quiet, and
moved no whit; then Glam saw that some bundle lay on the seat, and
therewith he stalked up the hall and griped at the wrapper wondrous
hard; but Grettir set his foot against the beam, and moved in no wise;
Glam pulled again much harder, but still the wrapper moved not at all;
the third time he pulled with both hands so hard, that he drew Grettir
upright from the seat; and now they tore the wrapper asunder between
them.

Glam gazed at the rag he held in his hand, and wondered much who might
pull so hard against him; and therewithal Grettir ran under his hands
and gripped him round the middle, and bent back his spine as hard as
he might, and his mind it was that Glam should shrink thereat; but the
thrall lay so hard on Grettir's arms, that he shrank all aback because
of Glam's strength.

Then Grettir bore back before him into sundry seats; but the
seat-beams were driven out of place, and all was broken that was
before them. Glam was fain to get out, but Grettir set his feet
against all things that he might; nathless Glam got him dragged from
out the hall; there had they a wondrous hard wrestling, because the
thrall had a mind to bring him out of the house; but Grettir saw that
ill as it was to deal with Glam within doors, yet worse would it be
without; therefore he struggled with all his might and main against
going out-a-doors.

Now Glam gathered up his strength and knit Grettir towards him when
they came to the outer door; but when Grettir saw that he might not
set his feet against that, all of a sudden in one rush he drave his
hardest against the thrall's breast, and spurned both feet against the
half-sunken stone that stood in the threshold of the door; for this
the thrall was not ready, for he had been tugging to draw Grettir to
him, therefore he reeled aback and spun out against the door, so that
his shoulders caught the upper door-case, and the roof burst asunder,
both rafters and frozen thatch, and therewith he fell open-armed aback
out of the house, and Grettir over him.

Bright moonlight was there without, and the drift was broken, now
drawn over the moon, now driven from off her; and, even as Glam fell,
a cloud was driven from the moon, and Glam glared up against her. And
Grettir himself says that by that sight only was he dismayed amidst
all that he ever saw.

Then his soul sank within him so, from all these things both from
weariness, and because he had seen Glam turn his eyes so horribly,
that he might not draw the short-sword, and lay well-nigh 'twixt home
and hell.

But herein was there more fiendish craft in Glam than in most other
ghosts, that he spake now in this wise--

"Exceeding eagerly hast thou wrought to meet me, Grettir, but no
wonder will it be deemed, though thou gettest no good hap of me; and
this must I tell thee, that thou now hast got half the strength and
manhood, which was thy lot if thou hadst not met me: now I may not
take from thee the strength which thou hast got before this; but that
may I rule, that thou shalt never be mightier than now thou art;
and nathless art thou mighty enow, and that shall many an one learn.
Hitherto hast thou earned fame by thy deeds, but henceforth will
wrongs and man-slayings fall on thee, and the most part of thy doings
will turn to thy woe and ill-hap; an outlaw shalt thou be made, and
ever shall it be thy lot to dwell alone abroad; therefore this weird I
lay on thee, ever in those days to see these eyes with thine eyes,
and thou wilt find it hard to be alone--and that shall drag thee unto
death."

Now when the thrall had thus said, the astonishment fell from Grettir
that had lain on him, and therewith he drew the short-sword and hewed
the head from Glam, and laid it at his thigh.

Then came the farmer out; he had clad himself while Glam had his spell
going, but he durst come nowhere nigh till Glam had fallen.

Thorhall praised God therefor, and thanked Grettir well for that he
had won this unclean spirit. Then they set to work and burned Glam
to cold coals, thereafter they gathered his ashes into the skin of a
beast, and dug it down whereas sheep-pastures were fewest, or the ways
of men. They walked home thereafter, and by then it had got far
on towards day; Grettir laid him down, for he was very stiff: but
Thorhall sent to the nearest farm for men, and both showed them and
told them how all things had fared.

All men who heard thereof deemed this a deed of great worth, and in
those days it was said by all that none in all the land was like to
Grettir Asmundson for great heart and prowess.

Thorhall saw off Grettir handsomely, and gave him a good horse and
seemly clothes, for those were all torn to pieces that he had worn
before; so they parted in friendly wise. Grettir rode thence to the
Ridge in Waterdale, and Thorvald received him well, and asked closely
about the struggle with Glam. Grettir told him all, and said thereto
that he had never had such a trial of strength, so long was their
struggle.

Thorvald bade him keep quiet, "Then all will go well with thee, else
wilt thou be a man of many troubles."

Grettir said that his temper had been nowise bettered by this, that he
was worse to quiet than before, and that he deemed all trouble worse
than it was; but that herein he found the greatest change, in that he
was become so fearsome a man in the dark, that he durst go nowhither
alone after nightfall, for then he seemed to see all kinds of horrors.

And that has fallen since into a proverb, that Glam lends eyes, or
gives Glamsight to those who see things nowise as they are.

But Grettir rode home to Biarg when he had done his errands, and sat
at home through the winter.




CHAP. XXXVI.

<i>Of Thorbiorn Oxmain's autumn-feast, and the mocks of Thorbiorn
Tardy</i>.


Thorbiorn Oxmain held a great autumn feast, and many men came thither
to him, and that was while Grettir fared north to Waterdale in the
autumn; Thorbiorn the Tardy was there at the feast, and many things
were spoken of there. There the Ramfirthers asked of those dealings of
Grettir on the neck the summer before.

Thorbiorn Oxmain told the story right fairly as towards Grettir, and
said that Kormak would have got the worst of it, if none had come
there to part them.

Then spake Thorbiorn the Tardy, "Both these things are true," said he:
"I saw Grettir win no great honour, and I deem withal that fear shot
through his heart when we came thereto, and right blithe was he to
part, nor did I see him seek for vengeance when Atli's house-carle was
slain; therefore do I deem that there is no heart in him if he is not
holpen enow."

And thereat Thorbiorn went on gabbling at his most; but many put in a
word, and said that this was worthless fooling, and that Grettir would
not leave things thus, if he heard that talk.

Nought else befell worth telling of at the feast, and men went home;
but much ill-will there was betwixt them that winter, though neither
set on other; nor were there other tidings through the winter.




CHAP. XXXVII.

<i>Olaf the Saint, King in Norway; the slaying of Thorbiorn Tardy;
Grettir goes to Norway</i>.


Early the spring after came out a ship from Norway; and that was
before the Thing; these folk knew many things to tell, and first that
there was change of rulers in Norway, for Olaf Haraldson was come to
be king, and Earl Svein had fled the country in the spring after the
fight at Ness. Many noteworthy matters were told of King Olaf, and
this withal, that he received such men in the best of ways who were of
prowess in any deeds, and that he made such his men.

Thereat were many young men glad, and listed to go abroad, and when
Grettir heard the tidings he became much minded to sail out; for he,
like others, hoped for honour at the king's hands.

A ship lay in Goose-ere in Eyjafirth, therein Grettir got him a berth
and made ready for the voyage, nor had he yet much of faring-goods.

Now Asmund was growing very feeble with eld, and was well-nigh
bedridden; he and Asdis had a young son who was called Illugi, and was
the hopefullest of men; and, by this time, Atli tended all farming and
money-keeping, and this was deemed to better matters, because he was a
peaceable and foreseeing man.

Now Grettir went shipward, but in that same ship had Thorbiorn the
Tardy taken passage, before folk knew that Grettir would sail therein.
Now men would hinder Thorbiorn from sailing in the same ship with
Grettir, but Thorbiorn said that he would go for all that. He gat him
ready for the voyage out, and was somewhat late thereat, nor did he
come to the north to Goose-ere before the ship was ready for sea; and
before Thorbiorn fared from the west, Asmund the Greyhaired fell sick
and was bedridden.

Now Thorbiorn the Tardy came late one day down to the sand; men were
getting ready to go to table, and were washing their hands outside the
booths; but when Thorbiorn rode up the lane betwixt the booths, he
was greeted, and asked for tidings. He made as if there was nought
to tell, "Save that I deem that Asmund, the champion of Biarg, is now
dead."

Many men said that there where he went, departed a worthy goodman from
the world.

"But what brought it about?" said they.

He answered, "Little went to the death of that champion, for in the
chamber smoke was he smothered like a dog; nor is there loss therein,
for he was grown a dotard."

"Thou speakest marvellously of such a man," said they, "nor would
Grettir like thy words well, if he heard them."

"That must I bear," said Thorbiorn, "and higher must Grettir bear the
sword than he did last summer at Ramfirth-neck, if I am to tremble at
him."

Now Grettir heard full well what Thorbiorn said, and paid no heed
thereto while he let his tale run on; but when he had made an end,
then spake Grettir--

"That fate I foretell for thee, Tardy," said he, "that thou wilt not
die in chamber smoke, yet may be withal thou wilt not die of eld; but
it is strangely done to speak scorn of sackless men."

Thorbiorn said, "I have no will to hold in about these things, and
methinks thou didst not bear thyself so briskly when we got thee off
that time when the men of Meals beat thee like a neat's head."

Then sang Grettir--

  "Day by day full over long,
  Arrow-dealer, grows thy tongue;
  Such a man there is, that thou
  Mayst be paid for all words now;
  Many a man, who has been fain,
  Wound-worm's tower with hands to gain,
  With less deeds his death has bought,
  Than thou, Tardy-one, hast wrought."

Said Thorbiorn, "About as feign do I deem myself as before, despite
thy squealing."

Grettir answered, "Heretofore my spaedom has not been long-lived, and
so shall things go still; now beware if thou wilt, hereafter will no
out-look be left."

Therewith Grettir hewed at Thorbiorn, but he swung up his hand, with
the mind to ward the stroke from him, but that stroke came on his arm
about the wrist, and withal the short-sword drave into his neck so
that the head was smitten off.

Then said the chapmen that he was a man of mighty strokes, and
that such should king's men be; and no scathe they deemed it though
Thorbiorn were slain, in that he had been both quarrelsome and
spiteful.

A little after they sailed into the sea, and came in late summer to
Norway, south at Hordaland, and then they heard that King Olaf was
north at Drontheim; then Grettir took ship in a trading keel to go
north therefrom, because he would fain see the king.




CHAP. XXXVIII.

<i>Of Thorir of Garth and his sons; and how Grettir fetched fire for
his shipmates</i>.


There was a man named Thorir, who lived at Garth, in Maindale, he was
the son of Skeggi, the son of Botulf. Skeggi had settled Well-wharf up
to Well-ness; he had to wife Helga, daughter of Thorkel, of Fishbrook;
Thorir, his son, was a great chief, and a seafaring man. He had two
sons, one called Thorgeir and one Skeggi, they were both hopeful men,
and fully grown in those days. Thorir had been in Norway that summer,
when King Olaf came east from England, and got into great friendship
with the king, and with Bishop Sigurd as well; and this is a token
thereof, that Thorir had had a large ship built in the wood, and
prayed Bishop Sigurd to hallow it, and so he did. Thereafter Thorir
fared out to Iceland and caused the ship to be broken up, when he grew
weary of sailing, but the beaks of the ship, he had set up over his
outer door, and they were there long afterwards, and were so full of
weather wisdom, that the one whistled before a south wind, and the
other before a north wind.

But when Thorir knew that King Olaf had got the sole rule over all
Norway, he deemed that he had some friendship there to fall back on;
then he sent his sons to Norway to meet the king, and was minded that
they should become his men. They came there south, late in autumn, and
got to themselves a row-barge, and fared north along the land, with
the mind to go and meet the king.

They came to a haven south of Stead, and lay there some nights, and
kept themselves in good case as to meat and drink, and were not much
abroad when the weather was foul.

Now it is to be told that Grettir and his fellows fared north
along the land, and often had hard weather, because it was then the
beginning of winter; and when they bore down north on Stead, they had
much foul weather, with snow and frost, and with exceeding trouble
they make land one evening all much worn with wet; so they lay to by
a certain dyke, and could thus save their money and goods; the chapmen
were hard put to it for the cold, because they could not light any
fire, though thereon they deemed well-nigh their life and health lay.

Thus they lay that evening in evil plight; but as the night wore on
they saw that a great fire sprang up in the midst of the sound over
against there whereas they had come. But when Grettir's shipmates saw
the fire, they said one to the other that he would be a happy man who
might get it, and they doubted whether they should unmoor the ship,
but to all of them there seemed danger in that. Then they had a long
talk over it, whether any man was of might enow to fetch that fire.

Grettir gave little heed thereto, but said, that such men had been as
would not have feared the task. The chapmen said that they were not
bettered by what had been, if now there was nought to take to.

"Perchance thou deemest thyself man enough thereto, Grettir," said
they, "since thou art called the man of most prowess among the men of
Iceland, and thou wottest well enough what our need is."

Grettir answered, "It seems to me no great deed to fetch the fire, but
I wot not if ye will reward it according to the prayer of him who does
it."

They said, "Why deemest thou us such shameful men as that we should
reward that deed but with good?"

Quoth he, "I may try this if so be that ye think much lies on it, but
my mind bids me hope to get nought of good thereby."

They said that that should never be, and bade all hail to his words;
and thereafter Grettir made ready for swimming, and cast his clothes
from off him; of clothes he had on but a cape and sail-cloth breeches;
he girt up the cape and tied a bast-rope strongly round his middle,
and had with him a cask; then he leaped overboard; he stretched across
the sound, and got aland.

There he saw a house stand, and heard therefrom the talk of men, and
much clatter, and therewith he turned toward that house.

Now is it to be said of those that were there before, that here were
come the sons of Thorir, as is aforesaid; they had lain there many
nights, and bided there the falling of the gale, that they might
have wind at will to go north, beyond Stead. They had set them down
a-drinking, and were twelve men in all; their ship rode in the main
haven, and they were at a house of refuge for such men to guest in, as
went along the coast.

Much straw had been borne into the house, and there was a great fire
on the floor; Grettir burst into the house, and wotted not who was
there before; his cape was all over ice when he came aland, and he
himself was wondrous great to behold, even as a troll; now those first
comers were exceeding amazed at him, and deemed he must be some evil
wight; they smote at him with all things they might lay hold of, and
mighty din went on around them; but Grettir put off all blows strongly
with his arms, then some smote him with fire-brands, and the fire
burst off over all the house, and therewith he got off with the fire
and fared back again to his fellows.

They mightily praised his journey and the prowess of it, and said
that his like would never be. And now the night wore, and they deemed
themselves happy in that they had got the fire.

The next morning the weather was fair; the chapmen woke early and got
them ready to depart, and they talked together that now they should
meet those who had had the rule of that fire, and wot who they were.

Now they unmoored their ship, and crossed over the sound; there they
found no hall, but saw a great heap of ashes, and found therein many
bones of men; then they deemed that this house of refuge had been
utterly burned up, with all those men who had been therein.

Thereat they asked if Grettir had brought about that ill-hap, and said
that it was the greatest misdeed.

Grettir said, that now had come to pass even as he had misdoubted,
that they should reward him ill for the fetching of the fire, and that
it was ill to help unmanly men.

Grettir got such hurt of this, that the chapmen said, wheresoever they
came, that Grettir had burned those men. The news soon got abroad that
in that house were lost the aforenamed sons of Thorir of Garth, and
their fellows; then they drave Grettir from their ship and would not
have him with them; and now he became so ill looked on that scarce any
one would do good to him.

Now he deemed that matters were utterly hopeless, but before all
things would go to meet the king, and so made north to Drontheim. The
king was there before him, and knew all or ever Grettir came there,
who had been much slandered to the king. And Grettir was some days in
the town before he could get to meet the king.




CHAP. XXXIX.

<i>How Grettir would fain bear Iron before the King</i>.


Now on a day when the king sat in council, Grettir went before the
king and greeted him well. The king looked at him and said, "Art thou
Grettir the Strong?"

He answered, "So have I been called, and for that cause am I come to
thee, that I hope from thee deliverance from the evil tale that is
laid on me, though I deem that I nowise wrought that deed."

King Olaf said, "Thou art great enough, but I know not what luck thou
mayest bear about to cast off this matter from thee; but it is like,
indeed, that thou didst not willingly burn the men."

Grettir said he was fain to put from him this slander, if the king
thought he might do so; the king bade him tell truthfully, how it had
gone betwixt him and those men: Grettir told him all, even as has been
said before, and this withal, that they were all alive when he came
out with the fire--

"And now I will offer to free myself in such wise as ye may deem will
stand good in law therefor."

Olaf the king said, "We will grant thee to bear iron for this matter
if thy luck will have it so."

Grettir liked this exceeding well; and now took to fasting for the
iron; and so the time wore on till the day came whereas the trial
should come off; then went the king to the church, and the bishop and
much folk, for many were eager to have a sight of Grettir, so much as
had been told of him.

Then was Grettir led to the church, and when he came thither, many of
those who were there before gazed at him and said one to the other,
that he was little like to most folk, because of his strength and
greatness of growth.

Now, as Grettir went up the church-floor, there started up a lad of
ripe growth, wondrous wild of look, and he said to Grettir--

"Marvellous is now the custom in this land, as men are called
Christians therein, that ill-doers, and folk riotous, and thieves
shall go their ways in peace and become free by trials; yea, and what
would the evil man do but save his life while he might? So here now
is a misdoer, proven clearly a man of misdeeds, and has burnt sackless
men withal, and yet shall he, too, have a trial to free him; ah, a
mighty ill custom!"

Therewith he went up to Grettir and pointed finger, and wagged head at
him, and called him mermaid's son, and many other ill names.

Grettir grew wroth beyond measure hereat, and could not keep himself
in; he lifted up his fist, and smote the lad under the ear, so that
forthwith he fell down stunned, but some say that he was slain there
and then. None seemed to know whence that lad came or what became
of him, but men are mostly minded to think, that it was some unclean
spirit, sent thither for Grettir's hurt.

Now a great clamour rose in the church, and it was told the king, "He
who should bear the iron is smiting all about him;" then King Olaf
went down the church, and saw what was going on, and spake--

"A most unlucky man art thou," said he, "that now the trial should not
be, as ready as all things were thereto, nor will it be easy to deal
with thine ill-luck."

Grettir answered, "I was minded that I should have gained more honour
from thee, Lord, for the sake of my kin, than now seems like to be;"
and he told withal how men were faring to King Olaf, as was said
afore, "and now I am fain," said he, "that thou wouldest take me to
thee; thou hast here many men with thee, who will not be deemed more
like men-at-arms than I?"

"That see I well," said the king, "that few men are like unto thee for
strength and stoutness of heart, but thou art far too luckless a man
to abide with us: now shall thou go in peace for me, wheresoever thou
wilt, the winter long, but next summer go thou out to Iceland, for
there will it be thy fate to leave thy bones."

Grettir answered, "First would I put from me this affair of the
burning, if I might, for I did not the deed willingly."

"It is most like," said the king; "but yet, because the trial is now
come to nought for thy heedlessness' sake, thou will not get this
charge cast from thee more than now it is, <i>For ill-heed still to
ill doth lead</i>, and if ever man has been cursed, of all men must
thou have been."

So Grettir dwelt a while in the town thereafter, but dealt no more
with the king than has been told.

Then he fared into the south country, and was minded east for
Tunsberg, to find Thorstein Dromond, his brother, and there is nought
told of his travels till he came east to Jadar.




CHAP. XL.

<i>Of Grettir and Snoekoll</i>.


At yule came Grettir to a bonder who was called Einar, he was a rich
man, and was married and had one daughter of marriageable age, who was
called Gyrid; she was a fair woman, and was deemed a right good match;
Einar bade Grettir abide with him through Yule, and that proffer he
took.

Then was it the wont far and wide in Norway that woodmen and misdoers
would break out of the woods and challenge men for their women, or
they took away men's goods with violence, whereas they had not much
help of men.

Now it so befell here, that one day in Yule there came to Einar the
bonder many ill-doers together, and he was called Snoekoll who was the
head of them, and a great bearserk he was. He challenged goodman Einar
to give up his daughter, or to defend her, if he thought himself man
enough thereto; but the bonder was then past his youth, and was no man
for fighting; he deemed he had a great trouble on his hands, and asked
Grettir, in a whisper, what rede he would give thereto: "Since thou
art called a famous man." Grettir bade him say yea to those things
alone, which he thought of no shame to him.

The bearserk sat on his horse, and had a helm on his head, but the
cheek-pieces were not made fast; he had an iron-rimmed shield before
him, and went on in the most monstrous wise.

Now he said to the bonder, "Make one or other choice speedily, or what
counsel is that big churl giving thee who stands there before thee; is
it not so that he will play with me?"

Grettir said, "We are about equal herein, the bonder and I, for
neither of us is skilled in arms."

Snoekoll said, "Ye will both of you be somewhat afraid to deal with
me, if I grow wroth."

"That is known when it is tried," said Grettir.

Now the bearserk saw that there was some edging out of the matter
going on, and he began to roar aloud, and bit the rim of his shield,
and thrust it up into his mouth, and gaped over the corner of the
shield, and went on very madly. Grettir took a sweep along over the
field, and when he came alongside of the bearserk's horse, sent up
his foot under the tail of the shield so hard, that the shield went up
into the mouth of him, and his throat was riven asunder, and his jaws
fell down on his breast. Then he wrought so that, all in one rush, he
caught hold of the helmet with his left hand, and swept the viking off
his horse; and with the other hand drew the short-sword that he was
girt withal, and drave it at his neck, so that off the head flew. But
when Snoekoll's fellows saw that, they fled, each his own way, and
Grettir had no mind to follow, for he saw there was no heart in them.

The bonder thanked him well for his work and many other men too; and
that deed was deemed to have been wrought both swiftly and hardily.

Grettir was there through Yule, and the farmer saw him off handsomely:
then he went east to Tunsberg, and met his brother Thorstein; he
received Grettir fondly, and asked of his travels and how he won the
bearserk. Then Grettir sang a stave--

  "There the shield that men doth save
  Mighty spurn with foot I gave.
  Snoekoll's throat it smote aright,
  The fierce follower of the fight,
  And by mighty dint of it
  Were the tofts of tooth-hedge split;
  The strong spear-walk's iron rim,
  Tore adown the jaws of him."

Thorstein said, "Deft wouldst thou be at many things, kinsman, if
mishaps went not therewith."

Grettir answered, "<i>Deeds done will be told of</i>."




CHAP. XLI.

<i>Of Thorstein Dromond's Arms, and what he deemed they might do</i>.


Now Grettir was with Thorstein for the rest of the winter and on into
the spring; and it befell one morning, as those brothers, Thorstein
and Grettir, lay in their sleeping-loft, that Grettir had laid his
arms outside the bed-clothes; and Thorstein was awake and saw it. Now
Grettir woke up a little after, and then spake Thorstein:

"I have seen thine arms, kinsman," said he, "and I deem it nowise
wonderful, though thy strokes fall heavy on many, for no man's arms
have I seen like thine."

"Thou mayst know well enough," said Grettir, "that I should not have
brought such things to pass as I have wrought, if I were not well
knit."

"Better should I deem it," said Thorstein, "if they were slenderer and
somewhat luckier withal."

Grettir said, "True it is, as folk say, <i>No man makes himself</i>;
but let me see thine arms," said he.

Thorstein did so; he was the longest and gauntest of men; and Grettir
laughed, and said,

"No need to look at that longer; hooked together are the ribs in thee;
nor, methinks, have I ever seen such tongs as thou bearest about, and
I deem thee to be scarce of a woman's strength."

"That may be," said Thorstein; "yet shall thou know that these same
thin arms shall avenge thee, else shall thou never be avenged; who may
know what shall be, when all is over and done?"

No more is told of their talk together; the spring wore on, and
Grettir took ship in the summer. The brothers parted in friendship,
and saw each other never after.




CHAP. XLII.

<i>Of the Death of Asmund the Grey haired</i>.


Now must the tale be taken up where it was left before, for Thorbiorn
Oxmain heard how Thorbiorn Tardy was slain, as aforesaid, and broke
out into great wrath, and said it would please him well that <i>now
this and now that should have strokes in his garth</i>.

Asmund the Greyhaired lay long sick that summer, and when he thought
his ailings drew closer on him, he called to him his kin, and said
that it was his will, that Atli should have charge of all his goods
after his day.

"But my mind misgives me," said Asmund, "that thou mayst scarce sit
quiet because of the iniquity of men, and I would that all ye of my
kin should help him to the uttermost but of Grettir nought can I say,
for methinks overmuch on a whirling wheel his life turns; and though
he be a mighty man, yet I fear me that he will have to heed his own
troubles more than the helping of his kin: but Illugi, though he
be young, yet shall he become a man of prowess, if he keep himself
whole."

So, when Asmund had settled matters about his sons as he would, his
sickness lay hard on him, and in a little while he died, and was laid
in earth at Biarg; for there had he let make a church; but his death
his neighbours deemed a great loss.

Now Atli became a mighty bonder, and had many with him, and was a
great gatherer of household-stuff. When the summer was far gone, he
went out to Snowfellness to get him stockfish. He drave many horses,
and rode from home to Meals in Ramfirth to Gamli his brother-in-law;
and on this journey rode with him Grim Thorhallson, Gamli's brother,
and another man withal. They rode west to Hawkdale Pass, and so on,
as the road lay west to Ness: there they bought much stockfish, and
loaded seven horses therewith, and turned homeward when they were
ready.




CHAP. XLIII.

<i>The Onset on Atli at the Pass and the Slaying of Gunnar and
Thorgeir</i>.


Thorbiorn Oxmain heard that Atli and Grim were on a journey from home,
and there were with him the sons of Thorir from the Pass, Gunnar and
Thorgeir. Now Thorbiorn envied Atli for his many friendships, and
therefore he egged on the two brothers, the sons of Thorir, to way-lay
Atli as he came back from the outer ness. Then they rode home to the
Pass, and abode there till Atli and his fellows went by with their
train; but when they came as far as the homestead at the Pass, their
riding was seen, and those brothers brake out swiftly with their
house-carles and rode after them; but when Atli and his folk saw their
faring, Atli bade them take the loads from the horses, "for perchance
they will give me atonement for my house-carle, whom Gunnar slew last
summer. Let us not begin the work, but defend ourselves if they be
first to raise strife with us."

Now the brothers came up and leaped off their horses. Atli welcomed
them, and asked for tidings: "Perchance, Gunnar, thou wilt give me
some atonement for my house-carle."

Gunnar answered, "Something else is your due, men of Biarg, than that
I should lay down aught good therefor; yea, atonement is due withal
for the slaying of Thorbiorn, whom Grettir slew."

"It is not for me to answer thereto," said Atli; "nor art thou a
suitor in that case."

Gunnar said he would stand in that stead none-the-less. "Come, let us
set on them, and make much of it, that Grettir is not nigh them now."

Then they ran at Atli, eight of them altogether, but Atli and his folk
were six.

Atli went before his men, and drew the sword, Jokul's gift, which
Grettir had given him.

Then said Thorgeir, "Many like ways have those who deem themselves
good; high aloft did Grettir bear his short-sword last summer on the
Ramfirth-neck."

Atli answered, "Yea, he is more wont to deal in great deeds than I."

Thereafter they fought; Gunnar set on Atli exceeding fiercely, and was
of the maddest; and when they had fought awhile, Atli said,

"No fame there is in thus killing workmen each for the other; more
seeming it is that we ourselves play together, for never have I fought
with weapons till now."

Gunnar would not have it so, but Atli bade his house-carles look to
the burdens; "But I will see what these will do herein."

Then he went forward so mightily that Gunnar and his folk shrunk
back before him, and he slew two of the men of those brothers, and
thereafter turned to meet Gunnar, and smote at him, so that the shield
was cleft asunder almost below the handle, and the stroke fell on his
leg below the knee, and then he smote at him again, and that was his
bane.

Now is it to be told of Grim Thorhallson that he went against
Thorgeir, and they strove together long, for each was a hardy man.
Thorgeir saw the fall of his brother Gunnar, and was fain to draw off.
Grim ran after him, and followed him till Thorgeir stumbled, and
fell face foremost; then Grim smote at him with an axe betwixt the
shoulders, so that it stood deep sunken therein.

Then they gave peace to three of their followers who were left; and
thereafter they bound up their wounds, and laid the burdens on the
horses, and then fared home, and made these man-slayings known.

Atli sat at home with many men through the winter. Thorbiorn Oxmain
took these doings exceedingly ill, but could do naught therein because
Atli was a man well befriended. Grim was with him through the winter,
and Gamli, his brother-in-law; and there was Glum, son of Uspak,
another kinsman-in-law of his, who at that time dwelt at Ere in Bitra.
They had many men dwelling at Biarg, and great mirth was thereat
through the winter.




CHAP. XLIV.

<i>The Suit for the Slaying of the Sons of Thorir of the Pass</i>.


Thorbiorn Oxmain took on himself the suit for the slaying of the sons
of Thorir of the Pass. He made ready a suit against Grim and Atli,
but they set forth for their defence onset and attack, to make those
brothers fall unatoned. The suit was brought to the Hunawater Thing,
and men came thronging to both sides. Atli had good help because he
was exceeding strong of kin.

Now the friends of both stood forth and talked of peace, and all
said that Atli's ways were good, a peaceful man, but stout in danger
none-the-less.

Now Thorbiorn deemed that by nought would his honour be served better
than by taking the peace offered. Atli laid down before-hand that he
would have neither district outlawry nor banishment.

Then were men chosen for the judges. Thorvald, son of Asgeir, on
Atli's side, and on Thorbiorn's, Solvi the Proud, who was the son of
Asbrand, the son of Thorbrand, the son of Harald Ring, who had settled
all Waterness from the Foreland up to Bond-maids River on the west,
but on the east all up to Cross-river, and there right across to
Berg-ridge, and all on that side of the Bergs down to the sea:
this Solvi was a man of great stateliness and a wise man, therefore
Thorbiorn chose him to be judge on his behoof.

Now they set forth their judgment, that half-fines should be paid for
the sons of Thorir, but half fell away because of the onslaught and
attack, and attempt on Atli's life, the slaying of Atli's house-carle,
who was slain on Ramfirth-neck, and the slaying of those twain who
fell with the sons of Thorir were set off one against the other. Grim
Thorhallson should leave dwelling in the district, but Atli alone
should pay the money atonement.

This peace pleased Atli much, but Thorbiorn misliked it, but they
parted appeased, as far as words went; howsoever it fell from
Thorbiorn that their dealings would not be made an end of yet, if
things went as he would.

But Atli rode home from the Thing, and thanked Thorvald well for his
aid. Grim Thorhallson went south to Burgfirth, and dwelt at Gilsbank,
and was a great bonder.




CHAP. XLV.

<i>Of the Slaying of Atli Asmundson</i>.


There was a man with Thorbiorn Oxmain who was called Ali; he was a
house-carle, a somewhat lazy and unruly man.

Thorbiorn bade him work better, or he would beat him. Ali said he had
no list thereto, and was beyond measure worrying. Thorbiorn would not
abide it, and drave him under him, and handled him hardly. Then Ali
went off from his service, and fared over the Neck to Midfirth,
and made no stay till he came to Biarg. Atli was at home, and asked
whither he went. He said that he sought service.

"Art thou not Thorbiorn's workman?" said Atli.

"That did not go off so pleasantly," said Ali; "I was not there long,
and evil I deemed it while I was there, and we parted, so that I
deemed his song about my throat nowise sweet; and I will go to dwell
there no more, whatso else may hap to me; and true it is that much
unlike ye are in the luck ye have with servants, and now I would fain
work with thee if I might have the choice."

Atli answered, "Enough I have of workmen, though I reach not out to
Thorbiorn's hands for such men as he has hired, and methinks there is
no gain in thee, so go back to him."

Ali said, "Thither I go not of my own free-will."

And now he dwells there awhile; but one morning he went out to
work with Atli's house-carles, and worked so that his hands were
everywhere, and thus he went on till far into summer. Atli said nought
to him, but bade give him meat, for he liked his working well.

Now Thorbiorn hears that Ali is at Biarg; then he rode to Biarg with
two men, and called out Atli to talk with him. Atli went out and
welcomed him.

Thorbiorn said, "Still wilt thou take up afresh ill-will against me,
and trouble me, Atli. Why hast thou taken my workman? Wrongfully is
this done."

Atli answered, "It is not proven to me that he is thy workman, nor
will I withhold him from thee, if thou showest proofs thereof, yet am
I loth to drag him out of my house."

"Thou must have thy will now," said Thorbiorn; "but I claim the man,
and forbid him to work here; and I will come again another time, and I
know not if we shall then part better friends than now."

Atli said, "I shall abide at home, and take what may come to hand."

Then Thorbiorn rode home; but when the workmen come home in the
evening, Atli tells all the talk betwixt him and Thorbiorn, and bids
Ali go his way, and said he should not abide there longer.

Ali answered, "True is the old saw, <i>over-praised and first to
fail</i>. I deemed not that thou wouldst drive me away after I had
toiled here all the summer enough to break my heart, and I hoped that
thou wouldst stand up for me somehow; but this is the way of you,
though ye look as if good might be hoped from you. I shall be beaten
here before thine eyes if thou givest me not some defence or help."

Atli altered his mind at this talk of his, and had no heart now to
drive him away from him.

Now the time wore, till men began hay-harvest, and one day, somewhat
before midsummer, Thorbiorn Oxmain rode to Biarg, he was so attired
that he had a helm on his head, and was girt with a sword, and had a
spear in his hand. A barbed spear it was, and the barbs were broad.

It was wet abroad that day. Atli had sent his house-carles to the
mowing, but some of them were north at Horn a-fishing. Atli was at
home, and few other men.

Thorbiorn came there about high-noon; alone he was, and rode up to
the outer door; the door was locked, and no men were abroad. Thorbiorn
smote on the door, and then drew aback behind the houses, so that none
might see him from the door. The home-folk heard that the door was
knocked at, and a woman went out. Thorbiorn had an inkling of the
woman, and would not let himself be seen, for he had a mind to do
something else.

Now the woman went into the chamber, and Atli asked who was come
there. She said, "I have seen nought stirring abroad." And even as
they spake Thorbiorn let drive a great stroke on the door.

Then said Atli, "This one would see me, and he must have some errand
with me, whatever may be the gain thereof to me."

Then he went forth and out of the door, and saw no one without.
Exceeding wet it was, therefore he went not out, but laid a hand on
either door-post, and so peered about him.

In that point of time Thorbiorn swung round before the door, and
thrust the spear with both hands amidst of Atli, so that it pierced
him through.

Then said Atli, when he got the thrust, "<i>Broad spears are about
now</i>," says he, and fell forward over the threshold.

Then came out women who had been in the chamber, and saw that Atli was
dead. By then was Thorbiorn on horseback, and he gave out the slaying
as having been done by his hand, and thereafter rode home.

The goodwife Asdis sent for her men, and Atli's corpse was laid out,
and he was buried beside his father. Great mourning folk made for his
death, for he had been a wise man, and of many friends.

No weregild came for the slaying of Atli, nor did any claim atonement
for him, because Grettir had the blood-suit to take up if he should
come out; so these matters stood still for that summer. Thorbiorn
was little thanked for that deed of his; but he sat at peace in his
homestead.




CHAP. XLVI.

<i>Grettir outlawed at the Thing at the Suit of Thorir of Garth</i>.


This summer, whereof the tale was telling e'en now, a ship came out
to Goose-ere before the Thing. Then was the news told of Grettir's
travels, and therewithal men spake of that house-burning; and at that
story was Thorir of Garth mad wroth, and deemed that there whereas
Grettir was he had to look for vengeance for his sons. He rode with
many men and set forth at the Thing the case for the burning, but
men deemed they knew nought to say therein, while there was none to
answer.

Thorir said that he would have nought, but that Grettir should be made
an outlaw throughout the land for such misdeeds.

Then answered Skapti the Lawman, "Surely an ill deed it is, if things
are as is said; but a tale is half told if one man tells it, for most
folk are readiest to bring their stories to the worser side when there
are two ways of telling them; now, therefore, I shall not give my word
that Grettir be made guilty for this that has been done."

Now Thorir was a man of might in his district and a great chief, and
well befriended of many great men; and he pushed on matters so hard
that nought could avail to acquit Grettir; and so this Thorir made
Grettir an outlaw throughout all the land, and was ever thenceforth
the heaviest of all his foes, as things would oft show.

Now he put a price on his head, as was wont to be done with other
wood-folk, and thereafter rode home.

Many men got saying that this was done rather by the high hand than
according to law; but so it stood as it was done; and now nought else
happed to tell of till past midsummer.




CHAP. XLVII.

<i>Grettir comes out to Iceland again</i>.


When summer was far spent came Grettir Asmundson out to Whiteriver
in Burgfirth; folk went down to the ship from thereabout, and these
tidings came all at once to Grettir; the first, that his father was
dead, the second, that his brother was slain, the third, that he
himself was made an outlaw throughout all the land. Then sang Grettir
this stave:--

  "Heavy tidings thick and fast
  On the singer now are cast;
  My father dead, my brother dead,
  A price set upon my head;
  Yet, O grove of Hedin's maid,
  May these things one day be paid;
  Yea upon another morn
  Others may be more forlorn."

So men say that Grettir changed nowise at these tidings, but was even
as merry as before.

Now he abode with the ship awhile, because he could get no horse to
his mind. But there was a man called Svein, who dwelt at Bank up from
Thingness, he was a good bonder and a merry man, and often sang such
songs as were gamesome to hear; he had a mare black to behold, the
swiftest of all horses, and her Svein called Saddle-fair.

Now Grettir went one night away from the wolds, but he would not that
the chapmen should be ware of his ways; he got a black cape, and threw
it over his clothes, and so was disguised; he went up past Thingness,
and so up to Bank, and by then it was daylight. He saw a black horse
in the homefield and went up to it, and laid bridle on it, leapt on
the back of it, and rode up along Whiteriver, and below Bye up to
Flokedale-river, and then up the tracks above Kalfness; the workmen
at Bank got up now and told the bonder of the man who had got on his
mare; he got up and laughed, and sang--

  "One that helm-fire well can wield
  Rode off from my well-fenced field,
  Helm-stalk stole away from me
  Saddle-fair, the swift to see;
  Certes, more great deeds this Frey
  Yet shall do in such-like way
  As this was done; I deem him then
  Most overbold and rash of men."

Then he took horse and rode after him; Grettir rode on till he came
up to the homestead at Kropp; there he met a man called Hall, who
said that he was going down to the ship at the Wolds; Grettir sang a
stave--

  "In broad-peopled lands say thou
  That thou sawest even now
  Unto Kropp-farm's gate anigh,
  Saddle-fair and Elm-stalk high;
  That thou sawest stiff on steed
  (Get thee gone at greatest speed),
  One who loveth game and play
  Clad in cape of black to-day."

Then they part, and Hall went down the track and all the way down to
Kalfness, before Svein met him; they greeted one another hastily, then
sang Svein--

  "Sawest thou him who did me harm
  On my horse by yonder farm?
  Even such an one was he,
  Sluggish yet a thief to see;
  From the neighbours presently
  Doom of thief shall he abye
  And a blue skin shall he wear,
  If his back I come anear."

"That thou mayst yet do," said Hall, "I saw that man who said that he
rode on Saddle-fair, and bade me tell it over the peopled lands and
settlements; great of growth he was, and was clad in a black cape."

"He deems he has something to fall back on," said the bonder, "but I
shall ride after him and find out who he is."

Now Grettir came to Deildar-Tongue, and there was a woman without the
door; Grettir went up to talk to her, and sang this stave--

  "Say to guard of deep-sea's flame
  That here worm-land's haunter came;
  Well-born goddess of red gold,
  Thus let gamesome rhyme be told.
  'Giver forth of Odin's mead
  Of thy black mare have I need;
  For to Gilsbank will I ride,
  Meed of my rash words to bide.'"

The woman learned this song, and thereafter Grettir rode on his way;
Svein came there a little after, and she was not yet gone in, and as
he came he sang this--

  "What foreteller of spear-shower
  E'en within this nigh-passed hour,
  Swift through the rough weather rode
  Past the gate of this abode?
  He, the hound-eyed reckless one,
  By all good deeds left alone,
  Surely long upon this day
  From my hands will flee away."

Then she told him what she had been bidden to; he thought over the
ditty, and said, "It is not unlike that he will be no man to play
with; natheless, I will find him out."

Now he rode along the peopled lands, and each man ever saw the other's
riding; and the weather was both squally and wet.

Grettir came to Gilsbank that day, and when Grim Thorhallson knew
thereof, he welcomed him with great joy, and bade him abide with him.
This Grettir agreed to; then he let loose Saddle-fair, and told Grim
how she had been come by. Therewith came Svein, and leapt from his
horse, and saw his own mare, and sang this withal--

  "Who rode on my mare away?
  What is that which thou wilt pay?
  Who a greater theft has seen?
  What does the cowl-covered mean?"

Grettir by then had doft his wet clothes, and he heard the stave, and
answered--

  "I did ride thy mare to Grim
  (Thou art feeble weighed with him),
  Little will I pay to thee,
  Yet good fellows let us be."

"Well, so be it then," said the farmer, "and the ride is well paid
for."

Then each sang his own songs, and Grettir said he had no fault to
find, though he failed to hold his own; the bonder was there that
night, and the twain of them together, and great game they made of
this: and they called all this Saddle-fair's lays. Next morning the
bonder rode home, and he and Grettir parted good friends.

Now Grim told Grettir of many things from the north and Midfirth,
that had befallen while he was abroad, and this withal, that Atli was
unatoned, and how that Thorbiorn Oxmain waxed so great, and was so
high-handed, that it was not sure that goodwife Asdis might abide at
Biarg if matters still went so.

Grettir abode but few nights with Grim, for he was fain that no news
should go before him north over the Heaths. Grim bade him come thither
if he should have any need of safeguard.

"Yet shall I shun being made guilty in law for the harbouring of
thee."

Grettir said he did well. "But it is more like that later on I may
need thy good deed more."

Now Grettir rode north over Twodaysway, and so to Biarg, and came
there in the dead of night, when all folk were asleep save his mother.
He went in by the back of the house and through a door that was there,
for the ways of the house were well known to him, and came to the
hall, and got to his mother's bed, and groped about before him.

She asked who was there, and Grettir told her; then she sat up and
kissed him, and sighed withal, heavily, and spake, "Be welcome; son,"
she said, "but my joyance in my sons is slipping from me; for he is
slain who was of most avail, and thou art made an outlaw and a guilty
man, and the third is so young; that he may do nought for me."

"An old saw it is," said Grettir, "<i>Even so shall bale be bettered,
by biding greater bale</i>; but there are more things to be thought of
by men than money atonements alone, and most like it is that Atli will
be avenged; but as to things that may fall to me, many must even take
their lot at my hand in dealing with me, and like it as they may."

She said that was not unlike. And now Grettir was there a while with
the knowledge of few folk; and he had news of the doings of the folk
of the country-side; and men knew not that Grettir was come into
Midfirth: but he heard that Thorbiorn Oxmain was at home with few men;
and that was after the homefield hay-harvest.




CHAP. XLVIII.

<i>The Slaying of Thorbiorn Oxmain</i>.


On a fair day Grettir rode west over the Necks to Thorodstead, and
came there about noon, and knocked at the door; women came out and
welcomed him, but knew him not; he asked for Thorbiorn, but they said
he was gone to the meadow to bind hay, and with him his son of sixteen
winters, who was called Arnor; for Thorbiorn was a very busy man, and
well-nigh never idle.

So when Grettir knew this, he bade them well betide, and went his
way on the road toward Reeks, there a marsh stretches down from the
hill-side, and on it was much grass to mow, and much hay had Thorbiorn
made there, and now it was fully dry, and he was minded to bind it up
for home, he and the lad with him, but a woman did the raking.

Now Grettir rode from below up into the field, but the father and
son were higher up, and had bound one load, and were now at another;
Thorbiorn had set his shield and sword against the load, and the lad
had a hand-axe beside him.

Now Thorbiorn saw a man coming, and said to the lad, "Yonder is a man
riding toward us, let us leave binding the hay, and know what he will
with us."

So did they, and Grettir leapt off his horse; he had a helm on his
head, and was girt with the short-sword, and bore a great spear in his
hand, a spear without barbs, and the socket inlaid with silver. Now
he sat down and knocked out the socket-nail, because he would not that
Thorbiorn should cast the spear back.

Then said Thorbiorn, "He is a big man, and no man in field know I, if
that is not Grettir Asmundson, and he must needs think he has enough
against us; so let us meet him sharply, and let him see no signs of
failing in us. We shall deal cunningly; for I will go against him in
front, and take thou heed how matters go betwixt us, for I will trust
myself against any man if I have one alone to meet; but do thou
go behind him, and drive the axe at him with both hands atwixt his
shoulders; thou needest not fear that he will do thee hurt, as his
back will be turned to thee."

Neither Thorbiorn nor his son had a helm.

Now Grettir got into the mead, and when he came within spear-throw of
them, he cast his spear at Thorbiorn, but the head was looser on the
shaft than he deemed it would be, and it swerved in its flight, and
fell down from the shaft to the earth: then Thorbiorn took his shield,
and put it before him, but drew his sword and went against Grettir
when he knew him; then Grettir drew his short-sword, and turned about
somewhat, so that he saw how the lad stood at his back, wherefore he
kept himself free to move here or there, till he saw that the lad was
come within reach of him, and therewith he raised the short-sword
high aloft, and sent it back against Arnor's head so mightily that the
skull was shattered, and that was his bane. Then Thorbiorn ran against
Grettir and smote at him, but he thrust forth his buckler with his
left hand, and put the blow from him, and smote with the short-sword
withal, and cleft the shield of Thorbiorn, and the short-sword smote
so hard into his head that it went even unto the brain, and he fell
dead to earth beneath that stroke, nor did Grettir give him any other
wound.

Then he sought for his spear-head, and found it not; so he went to his
horse and rode out to Reeks, and there told of the slayings. Withal
the woman who was in the meadow saw the slayings, and ran home full of
fear, and said that Thorbiorn was slain, and his son both; this took
those of the house utterly unawares, for they knew nought of Grettir's
travelling. So were men sent for to the next homestead, and soon came
many folk, and brought the bodies to church. Thorod Drapa-Stump took
up the blood-suit for these slayings and had folk a-field forthwith.

But Grettir rode home to Biarg, and found his mother, and told her
what had happed; and she was glad thereat, and said that now he got to
be like unto the Waterdale kin. "Yet will this be the root and stem of
thine outlawry, and I know for sooth that thou mayest not abide here
long because of the kin of Thorbiorn; but now may they know that thou
mayest be angered."

Grettir sang this stave thereupon--

  "Giant's friend fell dead to earth
  On the grass of Wetherfirth,
  No fierce fighting would avail,
  Oxmain in the Odin's gale.
  So, and in no other wise,
  Has been paid a fitting price
  For that Atli, who of yore,
  Lay dead-slain anigh his door."

Goodwife Asdis said that was true; "But I know not what rede thou art
minded to take?"

Grettir said that he would seek help of his friends and kin in the
west; "But on thee shall no trouble fall for my sake," said he.

So he made ready to go, and mother and son parted in love; but first
he went to Meals in Ramfirth, and told Gamli his brother-in-law all,
even as it had happed, concerning the slaying of Thorbiorn.

Gamli told him he must needs depart from Ramfirth while Thorbiorn's
kin had their folk about; "But our aid in the suit for Atli's slaying
we shall yield thee as we may."

So thereafter Grettir rode west over Laxdale-heath, and stayed not
till he came to Liarskogar to Thorstein Kuggson, where he dwelt long
that autumn.




CHAP. XLIX.

<i>The gathering to avenge Thorbiorn Oxmain</i>.


Thorod Drapa-Stump sought tidings of this who might have slain
Thorbiorn and his son, and when he came to Reeks, it was told him that
Grettir had been there and given out the slayings as from his hand.
Now, Thorod deemed he saw how things had come to pass; so he went to
Biarg, and there found many folk, but he asked if Grettir were there.

The goodwife said he had ridden away, and that she would not slip him
into hiding-places if he were there.

"Now ye will be well pleased that matters have so been wrought; nor
was the slaying of Atli over-avenged, though this was paid for it.
Ye asked not then what grief of heart I had; and now, too, it is well
that things are even so."

Therewith they rode home, and found it not easy to do aught therein.

Now that spear-head which Grettir lost was not found till within the
memory of men living now; it was found in the latter days of Sturla
Thordson the lawman, and in that marsh where Thorbiorn fell, which is
now called Spear-mead; and that sign men have to show that Thorbiorn
was slain there, though in some places it is said that he was slain on
Midfit.

Thorod and his kin heard that Grettir abode at Liarskogar; then they
gathered men, and were minded to go thither; but when Gamli of Meals
was ware thereof, he made Thorstein and Grettir sure of the farings
of the Ramfirthers; and when Thorstein knew it, he sent Grettir in to
Tongue to Snorri Godi, for then there was no strife between them, and
Thorstein gave that counsel to Grettir that he should pray Snorri the
Godi for his watch and ward; but if he would not grant it, he made
Grettir go west to Reek-knolls to Thorgils Arisen, "and he will take
thee to him through this winter, and keep within the Westfirths till
these matters are settled."

Grettir said he would take good heed to his counsels; then he rode
into Tongue, and found Snorri the Godi, and talked with him, and
prayed him to take him in.

Snorri answered, "I grow an old man now, and loth am I to harbour
outlawed men if no need drive me thereto. What has come to pass that
the elder put thee off from him?"

Grettir said that Thorstein had often done well to him; "But more
shall I need than him alone, if things are to go well."

Said Snorri, "My good word I shall put in for thee if that may avail
thee aught, but in some other place than with me must thou seek a
dwelling."

With these words they parted, and Grettir turned west to Reekness;
the Ramfirthers with their band got as far as Samstead, and there they
heard that Grettir had departed from Liarskogar, and thereat they went
back home.




CHAP. L.

<i>Grettir and the Foster-brothers at Reek-knolls</i>.


Now Grettir came to Reek-knolls about winter-nights, and prayed
Thorgils for winter abode; Thorgils said, that for him as for other
free men meat was ready; "but the fare of guests here is nowise
choice." Grettir said he was not nice about that.

"There is yet another thing here for thy trouble," said Thorgils:
"Men are minded to harbour here, who are deemed somewhat hard to keep
quiet, even as those foster-brothers, Thorgeir and Thormod; I wot not
how meet it may be for you to be together; but their dwelling shall
ever be here if they will it so: now mayst thou abide here if thou
wilt, but I will not have it that either of you make strife with the
other."

Grettir said he would not be the first to raise strife with any man,
and so much the less as the bonder's will was such.

A little after came those foster-brothers home; things went not
merrily betwixt Thorgeir and Grettir, but Thormod bore himself well.
Goodman Thorgils said to the foster-brothers even as he had said
to Grettir; and of such worth they held him, that neither cast an
untoward word at the other although their minds went nowise the same
way: and so wore the early winter.

Now men say that Thorgils owned those isles, which are called
Olaf's-isles, and lie out in the firth a sea-mile and a half off
Reekness; there had bonder Thorgils a good ox that he might not fetch
home in the autumn; and he was ever saying that he would fain have him
against Yule. Now, one day those foster-brothers got ready to seek the
ox, if a third man could be gotten to their aid: Grettir offered to go
with them, and they were well pleased thereat; they went, the three of
them, in a ten-oared boat: the weather was cold, and the wind shifting
from the north, and the craft lay up on Whaleshead-holm.

Now they sail out, and somewhat the wind got up, but they came to the
isle and got hold of the ox; then asked Grettir which they would do,
bear the ox aboard or keep hold of the craft, because the surf at
the isle was great; then they bade him hold the boat; so he stood
amidships on that side which looked from shore, and the sea took him
up to the shoulder-blades, yet he held her so that she moved nowise:
but Thorgeir took the ox behind and Thormod before, and so hove it
down to the boat; then they sat down to row, and Thormod rowed in the
bows, Thorgeir amidships, and Grettir aft, and therewith they made out
into the open bay; but when they came off Goat-rock, a squall caught
them, then said Thorgeir, "The stern is fain to lag behind."

Then said Grettir, "The stern will not be left if the rowing afore be
good."

Thereat Thorgeir fell to rowing so hard that both the tholes were
broken: then said he, "Row on, Grettir, while I mend the thole-pins."

Then Grettir pulled mightily while Thorgeir did his mending, but when
Thorgeir took to rowing again, the oars had got so worn that Grettir
shook them asunder on the gunwale.

"Better," quoth Thormod, "to row less and break nought."

Then Grettir caught up two unshapen oar beams that lay in the boat and
bored large holes in the gunwales, and rowed withal so mightily
that every beam creaked, but whereas the craft was good, and the men
somewhat of the brisker sort, they reached Whaleshead-holm.

Then Grettir asked whether they would rather go home with the ox or
haul up the boat; they chose to haul up the boat, and hauled it up
with all the sea that was in it, and all the ice, for it was much
covered with icicles: but Grettir led home the ox, and exceeding stiff
in tow he was, and very fat, and he grew very weary, and when they
came up below Titling-stead could go no more.

The foster-brothers went up to the house, for neither would help the
other in his allotted work; Thorgils asked after Grettir, but they
told him where they had parted; then he sent men to meet him, and when
they came down to Cave-knolls they saw how there came towards them a
man with a neat on his back, and lo, there was Grettir come, bearing
the ox: then all men wondered at his great might.

Now Thorgeir got very envious of Grettir's strength, and one day
somewhat after Yule, Grettir went alone to bathe; Thorgeir knew
thereof, and said to Thormod, "Let us go on now, and try how Grettir
will start if I set on him as he comes from his bathing."

"That is not my mind," said Thormod, "and no good wilt thou get from
him."

"I will go though," says Thorgeir; and therewith he went down to the
slope, and bore aloft an axe.

By then was Grettir walking up from the bath, and when they met,
Thorgeir said; "Is it true, Grettir," says he, "that thou hast said so
much as that thou wouldst never run before one man?"

"That I know not for sure," said Grettir, "yet but a little way have I
run before thee."

Thorgeir raised aloft the axe, but therewith Grettir ran in under
Thorgeir and gave him an exceeding great fall: then said Thorgeir to
Thormod, "Wilt thou stand by and see this fiend drive me down under
him?"

Thormod caught hold of Grettir's feet, and was minded to pull him
from off Thorgeir, but could do nought thereat: he was girt with a
short-sword and was going to draw it, when goodman Thorgils came up
and bade them be quiet and have nought to do with Grettir.

So did they and turned it all to game, and no more is told of their
dealings; and men thought Thorgils had great luck in that he kept such
reckless men in good peace.

But when spring came they all went away; Grettir went round to
Codfirth, and he was asked, how he liked the fare of the winter abode
at Reek-knolls; he answered, "There have I ever been as fain as might
be of my meals when I got at them."

Thereafter he went west over the heaths.




CHAP. LI.

<i>Of the suit for the Slaying of Thorbiorn Oxmain, and how Thorir of
Garth would not that Grettir should be made sackless</i>.


Thorgils Arison rode to the Thing with many men; and thither came all
the great men of the land. Now Thorgils and Skapti the Lawman soon
met, and fell to talking.

Then said Skapti, "Is it true, Thorgils, that thou hast harboured
those three men through the winter who are deemed to be the wildest of
all men; yea, and all of them outlawed withal, and yet hast kept them
so quiet, that no one of them has done hurt to the other?"

Thorgils said it was true enough.

Skapti said that great might over men it showed forth in him; "But how
goes it, thinkest thou, with the temper of each of them; and which of
them thinkest thou the bravest man?"

Thorgils said, "I deem they are all of them full stout of heart; but
two of them I deem know what fear is, and yet in unlike ways; for
Thormod is a great believer and fears God much; but Grettir is so
fearsome in the dark, that he dares go nowhither after dusk has set
in, if he may do after his own mind. But my kinsman Thorgeir I deem
knows not how to fear."

"Yea, so it is with their minds as thou sayest," said Skapti; and with
that they left talking.

Now, at this Althing Thorod Drapa-Stump brought forward a suit for the
slaying of Thorbiorn Oxmain, which he had not brought to a hearing at
the Hunawater Thing, because of the kin of Atli, and he deemed that
here his case would be less like to be thrown over. The kinsmen of
Atli sought counsel of Skapti about the case; and he said he saw in
it a lawful defence, so that full atonement would be forthcoming
therefor. Then were these matters laid unto umpiredom, and most men
were minded that the slayings of Atli and Thorbiorn should be set one
against the other.

But when Skapti knew that, he went to the judges, and asked whence
they had that? They said that they deemed the slain men were bonders
of equal worth.

Then Skapti asked, which was the first, the outlawry of Grettir or
the slaying of Atli? So, when that was reckoned up, there was a week's
space betwixt Grettir's outlawry at the Althing and the slaying of
Atli, which befell just after it.

Then said Skapti, "Thereof my mind misgave me, that ye had made an
oversight in setting on foot the suit in that ye made him a suitor,
who was outlawed already, and could neither defend nor prosecute his
own case. Now I say that Grettir has nought to do with the case of the
slaying, but let him take up the blood-suit, who is nighest of kin by
law."

Then said Thorod Drapa-Stump, "And who shall answer for the slaying of
Thorbiorn my brother?"

"See ye to that for yourselves," said Skapti; "but the kin of Grettir
will never pour out fee for him or his works, if no peace is to be
bought for him."

Now when Thorvald Asgeirson was aware that Grettir was set aside from
following the blood-suit, he and his sought concerning who was the
next of kin; and that turned out to be Skeggi, son of Gamli of
Meals, and Uspak, son of Glum of Ere in Bitra; they were both of them
exceeding zealous and pushing.

Now must Thorod give atonement for Atli's slaying, and two hundreds in
silver he had to pay.

Then spake Snorri the Godi, "Will ye now, Ramfirthers," says he, "that
this money-fine should fall away, and that Grettir be made sackless
withal, for in my mind it is that as a guilty man he will be sorely
felt?"

Grettir's kin took up his word well, and said that they heeded the
fee nought if he might have peace and freedom. Thorod said that he saw
Grettir's lot would be full of heavy trouble, and made as if he would
take the offer, for his part. Then Snorri bade them first know if
Thorir of Garth would give his leave to Grettir being made free; but
when Thorir heard thereof he turned away exceeding wroth, and said
that Grettir should never either get out of his outlawry or be brought
out of it: "And the more to bring that about," said he, "a greater
price shall be put on his head than on the head of any outlaw or
wood-man yet."

So, when he took the thing so ill, the freeing of Grettir came to
nought, and Gamli and his fellows took the money to them, and kept it
in their ward; but Thorod Drapa-Stump had no atonement for his brother
Thorbiorn.

Now Thorir and Thorod set each of them on Grettir's head three marks
of silver, and that folk deemed a new thing, for never had any greater
price been laid down to such an end before than three marks in all.

Snorri said it was unwisely done to make a sport of keeping a man in
outlawry who might work so much ill, and that many a man would have to
pay for it.

But now men part and ride home from the Thing.




CHAP. LII.

<i>How Grettir was taken by the Icefirth Carles</i>.


When Grettir came over Codfirth-heath down into Longdale, he swept up
unsparingly the goods of the petty bonders, and had of every man what
he would; from some he took weapons, from some clothes; and these folk
gave up in very unlike ways; but as soon as he was gone, all said they
gave them unwillingly.

In those days dwelt in Waterfirth Vermund the Slender, the brother of
Slaying-Styr; he had to wife Thorbiorg, the daughter of Olaf Peacock,
son of Hoskuld. She was called Thorbiorg the Big; but at the time that
Grettir was in Longdale had Vermund ridden to the Thing.

Now Grettir went over the neck to Bathstead. There dwelt a man called
Helgi, who was the biggest of bonders thereabout: from there had
Grettir a good horse, which the bonder owned, and thence he went to
Giorvidale, where farmed a man named Thorkel. He was well stored with
victuals, yet a mannikin withal: therefrom took Grettir what he would,
nor durst Thorkel blame him or withhold aught from him.

Thence went Grettir to Ere, and out along the side of the firth, and
had from every farm victuals and clothes, and dealt hardly with many;
so that most men deemed him a heavy trouble to live under.

Now he fared fearlessly withal, and took no keep of himself, and
so went on till he came to Waterfirth-dale, and went to the
mountain-dairy, and there he dwelt a many nights, and lay in the woods
there, and took no heed to himself; but when the herdsmen knew that,
they went to the farm, and said that to that stead was a fiend come
whom they deemed nowise easy to deal with; then the farmers gathered
together, and were thirty men in all: they lurked in the wood, so that
Grettir was unaware of them, and let a shepherd spy on Grettir till
they might get at him, yet they wotted not clearly who the man was.

Now so it befell that on a day as Grettir lay sleeping, the bonders
came upon him, and when they saw him they took counsel how they should
take him at the least cost of life, and settled so that ten men should
leap on him, while some laid bonds on his feet; and this they did, and
threw themselves on him, but Grettir broke forth so mightily that they
fell from off him, and he got to his knees, yet thereby they might
cast the bonds over him, and round about his feet; then Grettir
spurned two of them so hard about the ears that they lay stunned on
the earth. Now one after the other rushed at him, and he struggled
hard and long, yet had they might to overcome him at the last, and so
bound him.

Thereafter they talked over what they should do with him, and they
bade Helgi of Bathstead take him and keep him in ward till Vermund
came home from the Thing. He answered--

"Other things I deem more helpful to me than to let my house-carles
sit over him, for my lands are hard to work, nor shall he ever come
across me."

Then they bade Thorkel of Giorvidale take and keep him, and said that
he was a man who had enow.

But Thorkel spake against it, and said that for nought would he do
that: "Whereas I live alone in my house with my Carline, far from
other men; nor shall ye lay that box on me," said he.

"Then, Thoralf of Ere," said they, "do thou take Grettir and do well
to him till after the Thing; or else bring him on to the next farm,
and be answerable that he get not loose, but deliver him bound as now
thou hast him."

He answers, "Nay, I will not take Grettir, for I have neither victuals
nor money to keep him withal, nor has he been taken on my land, and I
deem it more trouble than honour to take him, or to have aught to do
with him, nor shall he ever come into my house."

Thereafter they tried it with every bonder, but one and all spake
against it; and after this talk have merry men made that lay which is
hight Grettir's-faring, and added many words of good game thereto for
the sport of men.

So when they had talked it over long, they said, with one assent, that
they would not make ill hap of their good-hap; so they went about and
straightway reared up a gallows there in the wood, with the mind to
hang Grettir, and made great clatter thereover.

Even therewith they see six folk riding down below in the dale, and
one in coloured clothes, and they guessed that there would goodwife
Thorbiorg be going from Waterfirth; and so it was, and she was
going to the mountain-dairy. Now she was a very stirring woman, and
exceeding wise; she had the ruling of the neighbourhood, and settled
all matters, when Vermund was from home. Now she turned to where the
men were gathered, and was helped off her horse, and the bonders gave
her good welcome.

Then said she, "What have ye here? or who is the big-necked one who
sits in bonds yonder?"

Grettir named himself, and greeted her.

She spake again, "What drove thee to this, Grettir," says she, "that
thou must needs do riotously among my Thing-men?"

"I may not look to everything; I must needs be somewhere," said he.

"Great ill luck it is," says she, "that these milksops should take
thee in such wise that none should fall before thee. What are ye
minded to do with him?"

The bonders told her that they were going to tie him up to the gallows
for his lawlessness.

She answers, "Maybe Grettir is guilty enough therefor, but it is
too great a deed for you, Icefirthers, to take his life, for he is a
famous man, and of mighty kin, albeit he is no lucky man; but now what
wilt thou do for thy life, Grettir, if I give it thee?"

He answered, "What sayest thou thereto?"

She said, "Thou shalt make oath to work no evil riots here in
Icefirth, and take no revenge on whomsoever has been at the taking of
thee."

Grettir said that she should have her will, and so he was loosed; and
he says of himself that at that time of all times did he most rule his
temper, when he smote them not as they made themselves great before
him.

Now Thorbiorg bade him go home with her, and gave him a horse for his
riding; so he went to Waterfirth and abode there till Vermund came
home, and the housewife did well to him, and for this deed was she
much renowned far and wide in the district.

But Vermund took this ill at his coming home, and asked what made
Grettir there? Then Thorbiorg told him how all had gone betwixt
Grettir and the Icefirthers.

"What reward was due to him," said Vermund, "that thou gavest him his
life?"

"Many grounds there were thereto," said Thorbiorg; "and this, first of
all, that thou wilt be deemed a greater chief than before in that thou
hast a wife who has dared to do such a deed; and then withal surely
would Hrefna his kinswoman say that I should not let men slay him;
and, thirdly, he is a man of the greatest prowess in many wise."

"A wise wife thou art withal," said Vermund, "and have thou thanks
therefor."

Then he said to Grettir, "Stout as thou art, but little was to be paid
for thee, when thou must needs be taken of mannikins; but so ever it
fares with men riotous."

Then Grettir sang this stave--

  "Ill luck-to me
  That I should be
  On sea-roof-firth
  Borne unto earth;
  Ill luck enow
  To lie alow,
  This head of mine
  Griped fast by swine."

"What were they minded to do to thee," said Vermund, "when they took
thee there?"

Quoth Grettir--

  "There many men
  Bade give me then
  E'en Sigar's meed
  For lovesome deed;
  Till found me there
  That willow fair,
  Whose leaves are praise,
  Her stems good days."

Vermund asked, "Would they have hanged thee then, if they alone had
had to meddle with matters?"

Said Grettir--

  "Yea, to the snare
  That dangled there
  My head must I
  Soon bring anigh;
  But Thorbiorg came
  The brightest dame,
  And from that need
  The singer freed."

Then said Vermund, "Did she bid thee to her?"

Grettir answered--

  "Sif's lord's good aid,
  My saviour, bade
  To take my way
  With her that day;
  So did it fall;
  And therewithal
  A horse she gave;
  Good peace I have."

"Mighty will thy life be and troublous," said Vermund; "but now thou
hast learned to beware of thy foes; but I have no will to harbour
thee, and gain therefor the ill-will of many rich men; but best is it
for thee to seek thy kinsmen, though few men will be willing to take
thee in if they may do aught else; nor to most men art thou an easy
fellow withal."

Now Grettir was in Waterfirth a certain space, and then fared thence
to the Westfirths, and sought shelter of many great men; but something
ever came to pass whereby none of them would harbour him.




CHAP. LIII.

<i>Grettir with Thorstein Kuggson</i>.


When the autumn was somewhat spent, Grettir turned back by the south,
and made no stay till he came to Liarskogar to Thorstein Kuggson, his
kinsman, and there had he good welcome, for Thorstein bade him abide
there through the winter, and that bidding he agreed to. Thorstein
was a busy man and a good smith, and kept men close to their work;
but Grettir had little mind to work, wherefore their tempers went but
little together.

Thorstein had let make a church at his homestead; and a bridge he had
made out from his house, wrought with great craft; for in the outside
bridge, under the beams that held it up, were rings wrought all about,
and din-bells, so that one might hear over to Scarf-stead, half a
sea-mile off, if aught went over the bridge, because of the shaking of
the rings. Thorstein had much to do over this work, for he was a great
worker of iron; but Grettir went fiercely at the iron-smiting, yet was
in many minds thereover; but he was quiet through the winter, so
that nought befell worthy telling. But when the Ramfirthers knew
that Grettir was with Thorstein, they had their band afoot as soon as
spring came. So when Thorstein knew that, he bade Grettir seek some
other shelter than his house, "For I see thou wilt not work, and men
who will do nought are not meet men for me."

"Where wouldst thou have me go, then?" said Grettir.

Thorstein bade him fare to the south country, and find his kin, "But
come to me if they avail thee not."

Now so Grettir wrought that he went south to Burgfirth, to Grim
Thorhallson, and dwelt there till over the Thing. Then Grim sent him
on to Skapti the Lawman at Hjalli, and he went south by the lower
heaths and stayed not till he came to Thorhall, son of Asgrim, son
of Ellida-grim, and went little in the peopled lands. Thorhall knew
Grettir because of his father and mother, and, indeed, by then was
the name of Grettir well renowned through all the land because of his
great deeds.

Thorhall was a wise man, and he did well to Grettir, but would not let
him abide there long.




CHAP. LIV.

<i>Grettir meets Hallmund on the Keel</i>.


Now Grettir fared from Tongue up to Hawkdale, and thence north upon
the Keel, and kept about there long that summer; nor was there trust
of him that he would not take men's goods from them, as they went from
or to the north over the Keel, because he was hard put to it to get
wares.

Now on a day, when as Grettir would keep about the north at
Doveness-path, he saw a man riding from the north over the Keel; he
was huge to behold on horseback, and had a good horse, and an embossed
bridle well wrought; another horse he had in tow and bags thereon;
this man had withal a slouched hat on his head, nor could his face be
clearly seen.

Now Grettir looked hard at the horse and the goods thereon, and went
to meet the man, and greeting him asked his name, but he said he was
called Air. "I wot well what thou art called," said he, "for thou
shalt be Grettir the Strong, the son of Asmund. Whither art thou
bound?"

"As to the place I have not named it yet," said Grettir; "but as to
my errand, it is to know if thou wilt lay down some of the goods thou
farest with."

Said Air, "Why should I give thee mine own, or what wilt thou give me
therefor?"

Grettir answers, "Hast thou not heard that I take, and give no money
again? and yet it seems to most men that I get what I will."

Said Air, "Give such choice as this to those who deem it good, but not
thus will I give up what I have; let each of us go his own way."

And therewithal he rode forth past Grettir and spurred his horse.

"Nay, we part not so hastily," said Grettir, and laid hold of the
reins of Air's horse in front of his hands, and held on with both
hands.

Said Air, "Go thy ways, nought thou hast of me if I may hold mine
own."

"That will now be proven," said Grettir.

Now Air stretched his hands down the head-gear and laid hold of the
reins betwixt Grettir's hands and the snaffle-rings and dragged at
them so hard that Grettir's hands were drawn down along the reins,
till Air dragged all the bridle from him.

Grettir looked into the hollow of his hands, and saw that this man
must have strength in claws rather than not, and he looked after him,
and said, "Whither art thou minded to fare?"

Air answered and sang--

  "To the Kettle's side
  Now will I ride,
  Where the waters fall
  From the great ice-wall;
  If thou hast mind
  There mayest thou find
  With little stone[17]
  Fist's land alone."

[Footnote 17: Hall, a "stone": mund, is hand, and by periphrasis "land
of fist"; so that Hallmund is meant by this couplet, and that was the
real name of "Air," who is not a mere man, but a friendly spirit of
the mountains.]

Grettir said, "It is of no avail to seek after thine abode if thou
tellest of it no clearer than this."

Then Air spake and sang--

  "I would not hide
  Where I abide,
  If thou art fain
  To see me again;
  From that lone weald,
  Over Burgfirth field,
  That ye men name
  Balljokul, I came."

Thereat they parted, and Grettir sees that he has no strength against
this man; and therewithal he sang a stave--

  "Too far on this luckless day,
  Atli, good at weapon-play,
  Brisk Illugi were from me;
  Such-like oft I shall not be
  As I was, when I must stand
  With the reins drawn through my hand
  By the unflinching losel Air.
  Maids weep when they know I fear."

Thereafter Grettir went to the south from the Keel; and rode to Hjalli
and found Skapti, and prayed for watch and ward from him.

Skapti said, "It is told me that thou farest somewhat lawlessly, and
layest hand on other men's goods; and this beseems thee ill, great of
kin as thou art. Now all would make a better tale, if thou didst not
rob and reive; but whereas I have to bear the name of lawman in the
land, folk would not abide that I should take outlawed men to me, and
break the laws thereby. I will that thou seek some place wherein thou
wilt not have need to take men's goods from them."

Grettir said he would do even so, yet withal that he might scarcely be
alone because he so feared the dark.

Skapti said that of that one thing then, which he deemed the best, he
might not avail himself; "But put not such trust in any as to fare as
thou didst in the Westfirths; it has been many a man's bane that he
has been too trustful."

Grettir thanked him for his wholesome redes, and so turned back to
Burgfirth in the autumn, and found Grim Thorhallson, his friend,
and told him of Skapti's counsels; so Grim bade him fare north to
Fishwater lakes on Ernewaterheath; and thus did he.




CHAP. LV.

<i>Of Grettir on Ernewaterheath, and his dealings with Grim there</i>.


Grettir went up to Ernewaterheath and made there a hut for himself
(whereof are yet signs left) and dwelt there, for now was he fain to
do anything rather than rob and reive; he got him nets and a boat
and caught fish for his food; exceeding dreary he deemed it in the
mountains, because he was so fearsome of the dark.

But when other outlaws heard this, that Grettir was come down there,
many of them had a mind to see him, because they thought there was
much avail of him. There was a man called Grim, a Northlander, who
was an outlaw; with him the Northlanders made a bargain that he should
slay Grettir, and promised him freedom and gifts of money, if he
should bring it to pass; so he went to meet Grettir, and prayed him to
take him in.

Grettir answers, "I see not how thou art the more holpen for being
with me, and troublous to heed are ye wood-folk; but ill I deem it to
be alone, if other choice there were; but I will that such an one only
be with me as shall do whatso work may befall."

Grim said he was of no other mind, and prayed hard that he might dwell
there; then Grettir let himself be talked round, and took him in; and
he was there on into the winter, and watched Grettir, but deemed it
no little matter to set on him. Grettir misdoubted him, and had his
weapons by his side night and day, nor durst Grim attack him while he
was awake.

But one morning whenas Grim came in from fishing, he went into the hut
and stamped with his foot, and would know whether Grettir slept, but
he started in nowise, but lay still; and the short-sword hung up over
Grettir's head.

Now Grim thought that no better chance would happen, so he made a
great noise, that Grettir might chide him, therefore, if he were
awake, but that befell not. Now he thought that Grettir must surely
be asleep, so he went stealthily up to the bed and reached out for the
short-sword, and took it down, and unsheathed it. But even therewith
Grettir sprang up on to the floor, and caught the short-sword just as
the other raised it aloft, and laid the other hand on Grim betwixt the
shoulders, and cast him down with such a fall, that he was well-nigh
stunned; "Ah, such hast thou shown thyself," said he, "though thou
wouldest give me good hope of thee." Then he had a true story from
him, and thereafter slew him.

And now Grettir deemed he saw what it was to take in wood-folk, and
so the winter wore; and nothing Grettir thought to be of more trouble
than his dread of the dark.




CHAP. LVI.

<i>Of Grettir and Thorir Redbeard</i>.


Now Thorir of Garth heard where Grettir had set himself down, and was
fain to set afoot some plot whereby he might be slain. There was a
man called Thorir Redbeard; he was the biggest of men, and a great
man-slayer, and therefore was he made outlaw throughout the land.
Thorir of Garth sent word to him, and when they met he bade him go on
an errand of his, and slay Grettir the Strong. Redbeard said that was
no easy task, and that Grettir was a wise man and a wary.

Thorir bade him make up his mind to this; "A manly task it is for so
brisk a fellow as thou; but I shall bring thee out of thine outlawry,
and therewithal give thee money enough."

So by that counsel Redbeard abode, and Thorir told him how he should
go about the winning of Grettir. So thereafter he went round the
land by the east, for thus he deemed his faring would be the less
misdoubted; so he came to Ernewaterheath when Grettir had been there a
winter. But when he met Grettir, he prayed for winter dwelling at his
hands.

Grettir answered, "I cannot suffer you often to play the like play
with me that he did who came here last autumn, who bepraised me
cunningly, and when he had been here a little while lay in wait for my
life; now, therefore, I have no mind to run the risk any more of the
taking in of wood-folk."

Thorir answered, "My mind goes fully with thine in that thou deemest
ill of outlawed men: and thou wilt have heard tell of me as of a
man-slayer and a misdoer, but not as of a doer of such foul deeds as
to betray my master. Now, <i>ill it is ill to be</i>, for many deem
others to do after their own ways; nor should I have been minded to
come hither, if I might have had a choice of better things; withal I
deem we shall not easily be won while we stand together; thou mightest
risk trying at first how thou likest me, and let me go my ways whenso
thou markest ill faith in me."

Grettir answered, "Once more then will I risk it, even with thee; but
wot thou well, that if I misdoubt me of thee, that will be thy bane."

Thorir bade him do even so, and thereafter Grettir received him, and
found this, that he must have the strength of twain, what work soever
he took in hand: he was ready for anything that Grettir might set him
to, and Grettir need turn to nothing, nor had he found his life so
good since he had been outlawed, yet was he ever so wary of himself
that Thorir never got a chance against him.

Thorir Redbeard was with Grettir on the heath for two winters, and now
he began to loathe his life on the heath, and falls to thinking what
deed he shall do that Grettir will not see through; so one night
in spring a great storm arose while they were asleep; Grettir awoke
therewith, and asked where was their boat. Thorir sprang up, and ran
down to the boat, and brake it all to pieces, and threw the broken
pieces about here and there, so that it seemed as though the storm had
driven them along. Then he went into the hut, and called out aloud,

"Good things have not befallen us, my friend," said he; "for our
boat is all broken to pieces, and the nets lie a long way out in the
water."

"Go and bring them in then," said Grettir, "for methinks it is with
thy goodwill that the boat is broken."

Thorir answered, "Among manly deeds swimming is the least handy to
me, but most other deeds, I think, I may do against men who are not
marvellous; thou mayest wot well enough that I was minded that thou
shouldst not have to work while I abode here, and this I would not bid
if it were in me to do it."

Then Grettir arose and took his weapons, and went to the water-side.
Now the land was so wrought there that a ness ran into the water, and
a great creek was on the other side, and the water was deep right up
to the shore.

Now Grettir spake: "Swim off to the nets, and let me see how skilled a
man thou art."

"I told thee before," said Thorir, "that I might not swim; and now I
know not what is gone with thy manliness and daring."

"Well, the nets I may get in," said Grettir, "but betray thou me not,
since I trust in thee."

Said Thorir, "Deem me not to be so shamed and worthless."

"Thou wilt thyself prove thyself, what thou art," said Grettir, and
therewith he put off his clothes and weapons, and swam off for the
nets. He swept them up together, and brought them to land, and cast
them on to the bank; but when he was minded to come aland, then Thorir
caught up the short-sword and drew it hastily, and ran therewith
swiftly on Grettir, and smote at him as he set foot on the bank; but
Grettir fell on his back down into the water, and sank like a stone;
and Thorir stood gazing out on to the water, to keep him off from
the shore if he came up again; but Grettir dived and groped along the
bottom as near as he might to the bank, so that Thorir might not see
him till he came into the creek at his back, and got aland; and Thorir
heeded him not, and felt nought till Grettir heaved him up over his
head, and cast him down so hard that the short-sword flew out of his
hand; then Grettir got hold of it and had no words with him, but smote
off his head straightway, and this was the end of his life.

But after this would Grettir never take outlaws to him, yet hardly
might he bear to be alone.




CHAP. LVII.

<i>How Thorir of Garth set on Grettir on Ernewaterheath</i>.


At the Althing Thorir of Garth heard of the slaying of Thorir
Redbeard, and now he thought he saw that he had no light task to
deal with; but such rede he took that he rode west over the lower
heathlands from the Thing with well-nigh eighty men, and was minded to
go and take Grettir's life: but when Grim Thorhallson knew thereof he
sent Grettir word and bade him beware of himself, so Grettir ever took
heed to the goings of men. But one day he saw many men riding who took
the way to his abode; so he ran into a rift in the rocks, nor would he
flee because he had not seen all the strength of those folk.

Then up came Thorir and all his men, and bade them smite Grettir's
head from his body, and said that the ill-doer's life would be had
cheaply now.

Grettir answered, "<i>Though the spoon has taken it up, yet the mouth
has had no sup</i>. From afar have ye come, and marks of the game
shall some have ere we part."

Then Thorir egged on his men busily to set on him; but the pass was
narrow, and he could defend it well from one side; yet hereat he
marvelled, that howsoever they went round to the back of him, yet
no hurt he got thereby; some fell of Thorir's company, and some were
wounded, but nothing might they do.

Then said Thorir, "Oft have I heard that Grettir is a man of marvel
before all others for prowess and good heart, but never knew I that he
was so wise a wizard as now I behold him; for half as many again fall
at his back as fall before him; lo, now we have to do with trolls and
no men."

So he bid them turn away and they did so. Grettir marvelled how that
might be, for withal he was utterly foredone.

Thorir and his men turn away and ride toward the north country, and
men deemed their journey to be of the shame fullest; eighteen men had
they left there and many were wounded withal.

Now Grettir went up into the pass, and found there one great of
growth, who sat leaning against the rock and was sore wounded. Grettir
asked him of his name, and he said he was hight Hallmund.

"And this I will tell thee to know me by, that thou didst deem me to
have a good hold of the reins that summer when we met on the Keel;
now, methinks, I have paid thee back therefor."

"Yea, in sooth," said Grettir, "I deem that thou hast shown great
manliness toward me; whenso I may, I will reward thee."

Hallmund said, "But now I will that thou come to my abode, for thou
must e'en think time drags heavily here on the heaths."

Grettir said he was fain thereof; and now they fare both together
south under Balljokul, and there had Hallmund a huge cave, and a
daughter great of growth and of high mind; there they did well to
Grettir, and the woman healed the wounds of both of them, and Grettir
dwelt long there that summer, and a lay he made on Hallmund, wherein
is this--

  "Wide and high doth Hallmund stride
  In the hollow mountain side."

And this stave also is therein--

  "At Ernewater, one by one,
  Stole the swords forth in the sun,
  Eager for the road of death
  Swept athwart by sharp spears' breath;
  Many a dead Wellwharfer's lands
  That day gave to other hands.
  Hallmund, dweller in the cave,
  Grettir's life that day did save."

Men say that Grettir slew six men in that meeting, but Hallmund
twelve.

Now as the summer wore Grettir yearned for the peopled country, to see
his friends and kin; Hallmund bade him visit him when he came to the
south country again, and Grettir promised him so to do; then he went
west to Burgfirth, and thence to the Broadfirth Dales, and sought
counsel of Thorstein Kuggson as to where he should now seek for
protection, but Thorstein said that his foes were now so many that few
would harbour him; "But thou mightest fare south to the Marshes and
see what fate abides thee there."

So in the autumn Grettir went south to the Marshes.




CHAP. LVIII.

<i>Grettir in Fairwoodfell</i>.


In those days dwelt at Holm Biorn the Hitdale-Champion, who was the
son of Arngeir, the son of Berse the Godless, the son of Balk, who
settled Ramfirth as is aforesaid; Biorn was a great chief and a hardy
man, and would ever harbour outlawed men.

Now Grettir came to Holm, and Biorn gave him good cheer, for there had
been friendship between the earlier kin of both of them; so Grettir
asked if he would give him harbourage; but Biorn said that he had
got to himself so many feuds through all the land that men would shun
harbouring him so long as to be made outlaws therefor: "But some gain
will I be to thee, if thou lettest those men dwell in peace who are
under my ward, whatsoever thou dost by other men in the country-side."

Grettir said yea thereto. Then said Biorn, "Well, I have thought over
it, and in that mountain, which stretches forth outside of Hitriver,
is a stead good for defence, and a good hiding-place withal, if it be
cunningly dealt with; for there is a hollow through the mountain, that
is seen from the way below; for the highway lies beneath it, but above
is a slip of sand and stones so exceeding steep, that few men may come
up there if one hardy man stand on his defence above in the lair.
Now this seems to me the best rede for thee, and the one thing worth
talking of for thine abode, because, withal, it is easy to go thence
and get goods from the Marshes, and right away to the sea."

Grettir said that he would trust in his foresight if he would give him
any help. Then he went up to Fairwoodfell and made his abode there;
he hung grey wadmal before the hole in the mountain, and from the way
below it was like to behold as if one saw through. Now he was wont
to ride for things needful through the country-side, and men deemed a
woful guest had come among them whereas he went.

Thord Kolbeinson dwelt at Hitness in those days, and a good skald he
was; at that time was there great enmity betwixt him and Biorn; and
Biorn was but half loth, though Grettir wrought some ill on Thord's
men or his goods.

Grettir was ever with Biorn, and they tried their skill in many
sports, and it is shown in the story of Biorn that they were deemed
equal in prowess, but it is the mind of most that Grettir was the
strongest man ever known in the land, since Orm the son of Storolf,
and Thoralf the son of Skolm, left off their trials of strength.
Grettir and Biorn swam in one spell all down Hitriver, from the lake
right away to the sea: they brought those stepping-stones into the
river that have never since been washed away either by floods, or the
drift of ice, or glacier slips.

So Grettir abode in Fairwoodfell for one winter, in such wise, that
none set on him, though many lost their goods at his hands and could
do nought therefor, for a good place for defence he had, and was ever
good friend to those nighest to him.




CHAP. LIX.

<i>Gisli's meeting with Grettir</i>.


There was a man hight Gisli, the son of that Thorstein whom Snorri
Godi had slain. Gisli was a big man and strong, a man showy in
weapons and clothes, who made much of himself, and was somewhat of
a self-praiser; he was a seafaring man, and came one summer out to
Whiteriver, whenas Grettir had been a winter on the fell. Thord, son
of Kolbein, rode to his ship, and Gisli gave him good welcome, and
bade him take of his wares whatso he would; thereto Thord agreed, and
then they fell to talk one with the other, and Gisli said:

"Is that true which is told me, that ye have no counsel that avails to
rid you of a certain outlaw who is doing you great ill?"

Thord said, "We have not tried aught on him yet, but to many he seems
a man hard to deal with, and that has been proven on many a man."

"It is like, methinks, that you should find Biorn a heavy trouble, if
ye may not drive away this man: luckless it is for you withal, that I
shall be too far off this winter to better matters for you."

"Thou wilt be better pleased to deal with him by hearsay."

"Nay, no need to tell me of Grettir," said Gisli; "I have borne harder
brunts when I was in warfare along with King Knut the Mighty, and west
over the Sea, and I was ever thought to hold my own; and if I should
have a chance at him I would trust myself and my weapons well enough."

Thord said he would not work for nought if he prevailed against
Grettir; "For there is more put upon his head than on the head of any
other of wood-folk; six marks of silver it was; but last summer Thorir
of Garth laid thereto yet three marks; and men deem he will have
enough to do therefor whose lot it is to win it."

"All things soever will men do for money," says Gisli, "and we chapmen
not the least; but now shall we keep this talk hushed up, for mayhap
he will be the warier," says he, "if he come to know that I am with
you against him: now I am minded to abide this winter at Snowfellsness
at Wave-ridge. Is his lair on my way at all? for he will not foresee
this, nor shall I draw together many men against him."

Thord liked the plot well, he rode home therewith and held his peace
about this; but now things went according to the saw, <i>a listening
ear in the holt is anear</i>; men had been by at the talk betwixt
Thord and Gisli, who were friends to Biorn of Hitdale, and they told
him all from end to end; so when Biorn and Grettir met, Biorn showed
forth the whole matter to him, and said that now he might prove how he
could meet a foe.

"It would not be bad sport," said he, "if thou wert to handle him
roughly, but to slay him not, if thou mightest do otherwise."

Grettir smiled thereat, but spake little.

Now at the folding time in the autumn Grettir went down to
Flysia-wharf and got sheep for himself; he had laid hold on four
wethers; but the bonders became ware of his ways and went after him;
and these two things befell at the same time, that he got up under the
fell-side, and that they came upon him, and would drive the sheep from
him, yet bare they no weapon against him; they were six altogether,
and stood thick in his path. Now the sheep troubled him and he waxed
wroth, and caught up two of those men, and cast them down over the
hill-side, so that they lay stunned; and when the others saw that,
they came on less eagerly; then Grettir took up the sheep and locked
them together by the horns, and threw them over his shoulders, two on
each side, and went up into his lair.

So the bonders turned back, and deemed they had got but ill from him,
and their lot misliked them now worse than before.

Now Gisli abode at his ship through the autumn till it was rolled
ashore. Many things made him abide there, so he was ready late, and
rode away but a little before winter-nights. Then he went from the
south, and guested under Raun on the south side of Hitriver. In the
morning, before he rode thence, he began a talk with his fellows:

"Now shall we ride in coloured clothes to-day, and let the outlaw see
that we are not like other wayfarers who are drifted about here day by
day."

So this they did, and they were three in all: but when they came west
over the river, he spake again to them:

"Here in these bents, I am told, lurks the outlaw, and no easy way is
there up to him; but may it not perchance seem good to him to come and
meet us and behold our array?"

They said that it was ever his wont so to do. Now that morning Grettir
had risen early in his lair; the weather was cold and frosty, and snow
had fallen, but not much of it. He saw how three men rode from the
south over Hitriver, and their state raiment glittered and their
inlaid shields. Then it came into his mind who these should be, and he
deems it would be good for him to get some rag of their array; and he
was right wishful withal to meet such braggarts: so he catches up his
weapons and runs down the slip-side. And when Gisli heard the clatter
of the stones, he spake thus:

"There goes a man down the hill-side, and somewhat big he is, and he
is coming to meet us: now, therefore, let us go against him briskly,
for here is good getting come to hand."

His fellows said that this one would scarce run into their very
hands, if he knew not his might; "And good it is that <i>he bewail who
brought the woe</i>."

So they leapt off their horses, and therewith Grettir came up to them,
and laid hands on a clothes-bag that Gisli had tied to his saddle
behind him, and said--

"This will I have, for oft I lowt for little things."

Gisli answers, "Nay, it shall not be; dost thou know with whom thou
hast to do?"

Says Grettir, "I am not very clear about that; nor will I have much
respect for persons, since I am lowly now, and ask for little."

"Mayhap thou thinkest it little," says he, "but I had rather pay down
thirty hundreds; but robbery and wrong are ever uppermost in thy mind
methinks; so on him, good fellows, and let see what he may do."

So did they, and Grettir gave back before them to a stone which stands
by the way and is called Grettir's-Heave, and thence defended himself;
and Gisli egged on his fellows eagerly; but Grettir saw now that he
was no such a hardy heart as he had made believe, for he was ever
behind his fellows' backs; and withal he grew aweary of this fulling
business, and swept round the short-sword, and smote one of Gisli's
fellows to the death, and leaped down from the stone, and set on so
fiercely, that Gisli shrank aback before him all along the hill-side:
there Gisli's other fellow was slain, and then Grettir spake:

"Little is it seen in thee that thou hast done well wide in the world,
and in ill wise dost thou part from thy fellows."

Gisli answers, "<i>Hottest is the fire that lies on oneself--with
hell's-man are dealings ill</i>."

Then they gave and took but a little, before Gisli cast away his
weapons, and took to his heels out along the mountain. Grettir gave
him time to cast off whatso he would, and every time Gisli saw a
chance for it he threw off somewhat of his clothes; and Grettir never
followed him so close but that there was still some space
betwixt them. Gisli ran right past that mountain and then across
Coldriver-dale, and then through Aslaug's-lithe and above by
Kolbeinstead, and then out into Burgh-lava; and by then was he in
shirt and breech alone, and was now exceeding weary. Grettir still
followed after him, and there was ever a stone's throw between them;
and now he pulled up a great bush. But Gisli made no stay till he came
out at Haf-firth-river, and it was swollen with ice and ill to ford;
Gisli made straightway for the river, but Grettir ran in on him and
seized him, and then the strength of either was soon known: Grettir
drave him down under him, and said,

"Art thou that Gisli who would fain meet Grettir Asmundson?"

Gisli answers, "I have found him now, in good sooth, nor do I know in
what wise we shall part: keep that which thou hast got, and let me go
free."

Grettir said, "Nay, thou art scarce deft enow to learn what I have to
teach thee, so needs must I give thee somewhat to remember it by."

Therewith he pulls the shirt up over his head and let the twigs go all
down his back, and along both sides of him, and Gisli strove all he
might to wriggle away from him; but Grettir flogged him through and
through, and then let him go; and Gisli thought he would learn no
more of Grettir and have such another flogging withal; nor did he ever
again earn the like skin-rubbing.

But when he got his legs under him again, he ran off unto a great
pool in the river, and swam it, and came by night to a farm called
Horseholt, and utterly foredone he was by then. There he lay a week
with his body all swollen, and then fared to his abode.

Grettir turned back, and took up the things Gisli had cast down, and
brought them to his place, nor from that time forth gat Gisli aught
thereof.

Many men thought Gisli had his due herein for the noise and swagger
he had made about himself; and Grettir sang this about their dealings
together--

  "In fighting ring where steed meets steed,
  The sluggish brute of mongrel breed,
  Certes will shrink back nothing less
  Before the stallion's dauntlessness,
  Than Gisli before me to-day;
  As, casting shame and clothes away,
  And sweating o'er the marsh with fear,
  He helped the wind from mouth and rear."

The next spring Gisli got ready to go to his ship, and bade men above
all things beware of carrying aught of his goods south along the
mountain, and said that the very fiend dwelt there.

Gisli rode south along the sea all the way to his ship, and never met
Grettir again; and now he is out of the story.

But things grew worse between Thord Kolbeinson and Grettir, and Thord
set on foot many a plot to get Grettir driven away or slain.




CHAP. LX.

<i>Of the Fight at Hitriver</i>.


When Grettir had been two winters at Fairwoodfell, and the third was
now come, he fared south to the Marshes, to the farm called Brook-bow,
and had thence six wethers against the will of him who owned them.
Then he went to Acres and took away two neat for slaughtering, and
many sheep, and then went up south of Hitriver.

But when the bonders were ware of his ways, they sent word to Thord at
Hitness, and bade him take in hand the slaying of Grettir; but he hung
back, yet for the prayers of men got his son Arnor, who was afterwards
called Earls' Skald, to go with them, and bade them withal to take
heed that Grettir escaped not.

Then were men sent throughout all the country-side. There was a man
called Biarni, who dwelt at Jorvi in Flysia-wharf, and he gathered
men together from without Hitriver; and their purpose was that a band
should be on either bank of the river.

Now Grettir had two men with him; a man called Eyolf, the son of the
bonder at Fairwood, and a stout man; and another he had besides.

First came up Thorarin of Acres and Thorfinn of Brook-bow, and there
were nigh twenty men in their company. Then was Grettir fain to make
westward across the river, but therewith came up on the west side
thereof Arnor and Biarni. A narrow ness ran into the water on the side
whereas Grettir stood; so he drave the beasts into the furthermost
parts of the ness, when he saw the men coming up, for never would he
give up what he had once laid his hands on.

Now the Marsh-men straightway made ready for an onslaught, and made
themselves very big; Grettir bade his fellows take heed that none came
at his back; and not many men could come on at once.

Now a hard fight there was betwixt them, Grettir smote with the
short-sword with both hands, and no easy matter it was to get at him;
some of the Marsh-men fell, and some were wounded; those on the other
side of the river were slow in coming up, because the ford was not
very near, nor did the fight go on long before they fell off; Thorarin
of Acres was a very old man, so that he was not at this onslaught. But
when this fight was over, then came up Thrand, son of Thorarin, and
Thorgils Ingialdson, the brother's son of Thorarin, and Finnbogi,
son of Thorgeir Thorhaddson of Hitdale, and Steinulf Thorleifson from
Lavadale; these egged on their men eagerly to set on, and yet another
fierce onslaught they made. Now Grettir saw that he must either flee
or spare himself nought; and now he went forth so fiercely that none
might withstand him; because they were so many that he saw not how
he might escape, but that he did his best before he fell; he was fain
withal that the life of such an one as he deemed of some worth might
be paid for his life; so he ran at Steinulf of Lavadale, and smote him
on the head and clave him down to the shoulders, and straightway with
another blow smote Thorgils Ingialdson in the midst and well-nigh cut
him asunder; then would Thrand run forth to revenge his kinsman, but
Grettir smote him on the right thigh, so that the blow took off all
the muscle, and straightway was he unmeet for fight; and thereafter
withal a great wound Grettir gave to Finnbogi.

Then Thorarin cried out and bade them fall back, "For the longer ye
fight the worse ye will get of him, and he picks out men even as he
willeth from your company."

So did they, and turned away; and there had ten men fallen, and five
were wounded to death, or crippled, but most of those who had been at
that meeting had some hurt or other; Grettir was marvellously wearied
and yet but a little wounded.

And now the Marsh-men made off with great loss of men, for many stout
fellows had fallen there.

But those on the other side of the river fared slowly, and came not up
till the meeting was all done; and when they saw how ill their men
had fared, then Arnor would not risk himself, and much rebuke he got
therefor from his father and many others; and men are minded to think
that he was no man of prowess.

Now that place where they fought is called Grettir's-point to-day.




CHAP. LXI.

<i>How Grettir left Fairwoodfell, and of his abiding in
Thorir's-dale</i>.


But Grettir and his men took horse and rode up to the fell, for they
were all wounded, and when they came to Fairwood there was Eyolf left;
the farmer's daughter was out of doors, and asked for tidings; Grettir
told all as clearly as might be, and sang a stave withal--

  "O thou warder of horn's wave,
  Not on this side of the grave
  Will Steinulf s head be whole again;
  Many more there gat their bane;
  Little hope of Thorgils now
  After that bone-breaking blow:
  Eight Gold-scatterers more they say,
  Dead along the river lay."

Thereafter Grettir went to his lair and sat there through the winter;
but when he and Biorn met, Biorn said to him, that he deemed that much
had been done; "and no peace thou wilt have here in the long run: now
hast thou slain both kin and friends of mine, yet shall I not cast
aside what I have promised thee whiles thou art here."

Grettir said he must needs defend his hands and life, "but ill it is
if thou mislikest it."

Biorn said that things must needs be as they were.

A little after came men to Biorn who had lost kinsmen at Grettir's
hands, and bade him not to suffer that riotous man to abide there
longer in their despite; and Biorn said that it should be as they
would as soon as the winter was over.

Now Thrand, the son of Thorarin of Acres, was healed; a stout man he
was, and had to wife Steinun, daughter of Rut of Combeness; Thorleif
of Lavadale, the father of Steinulf, was a very mighty man, and from
him are come the men of Lavadale.

Now nought more is told of the dealings of Grettir with the Marsh-men
while he was on the mountain; Biorn still kept up his friendship
with him, though his friends grew somewhat the fewer for that he let
Grettir abide there, because men took it ill that their kin should
fall unatoned.

At the time of the Thing, Grettir departed from the Marsh-country, and
went to Burgfirth and found Grim Thorhallson, and sought counsel of
him, as to what to do now. Grim said he had no strength to keep him,
therefore fared Grettir to find Hallmund his friend, and dwelt there
that summer till it wore to its latter end.

In the autumn Grettir went to Goatland, and waited there till bright
weather came on; then he went up to Goatland Jokul, and made for
the south-east, and had with him a kettle, and tools to strike fire
withal. But men deem that he went there by the counsel of Hallmund,
for far and wide was the land known of him.

So Grettir went on till he found a dale in the jokul, long and
somewhat narrow, locked up by jokuls all about, in such wise that
they overhung the dale. He came down somehow, and then he saw fair
hill-sides grass-grown and set with bushes. Hot springs there were
therein, and it seemed to him that it was by reason of earth-fires
that the ice-cliffs did not close up over the vale.

A little river ran along down the dale, with level shores on either
side thereof. There the sun came but seldom; but he deemed he might
scarcely tell over the sheep that were in that valley, so many they
were; and far better and fatter than any he had ever seen.

Now Grettir abode there, and made himself a hut of such wood as he
could come by. He took of the sheep for his meat, and there was more
on one of them than on two elsewhere: one ewe there was, brown with a
polled head, with her lamb, that he deemed the greatest beauty for
her goodly growth. He was fain to take the lamb, and so he did, and
thereafter slaughtered it: three stone of suet there was in it, but
the whole carcase was even better. But when Brownhead missed her lamb,
she went up on Grettir's hut every night, and bleated in suchwise that
he might not sleep anight, so that it misliked him above all things
that he had slaughtered the lamb, because of her troubling.

But every evening at twilight he heard some one hoot up in the valley,
and then all the sheep ran together to one fold every evening.

So Grettir says, that a half-troll ruled over the valley, a giant
hight Thorir, and in trust of his keeping did Grettir abide there;
by him did Grettir name the valley, calling it Thorir's-dale. He said
withal that Thorir had daughters, with whom he himself had good game,
and that they took it well, for not many were the new-comers thereto;
but when fasting time was, Grettir made this change therein, that fat
and livers should be eaten in Lent.

Now nought happed to be told of through the winter. At last Grettir
found it so dreary there, that he might abide there no longer: then
he gat him gone from the valley, and went south across the jokul, and
came from the north, right against the midst of Shieldbroadfell.

He raised up a flat stone and bored a hole therein, and said that
whoso put his eye to the hole in that stone should straightway behold
the gulf of the pass that leads from Thorir's-vale.

So he fared south through the land, and thence to the Eastfirths; and
in this journey he was that summer long, and the winter, and met all
the great men there, but somewhat ever thrust him aside that nowhere
got he harbouring or abode; then he went back by the north, and dwelt
at sundry places.




CHAP. LXII.

<i>Of the Death of Hallmund, Grettir's Friend</i>.


A little after Grettir had gone from Ernewaterheath, there came a man
thither, Grim by name, the son of the widow at Kropp. He had slain the
son of Eid Skeggison of the Ridge, and had been outlawed therefor;
he abode whereas Grettir had dwelt afore, and got much fish from the
water. Hallmund took it ill that he had come in Grettir's stead, and
was minded that he should have little good hap how much fish soever he
caught.

So it chanced on a day that Grim had caught a hundred fish, and he
bore them to his hut and hung them up outside, but the next morning
when he came thereto they were all gone; that he deemed marvellous,
and went to the water; and now he caught two hundred fish, went home
and stored them up; and all went the same way, for they were all gone
in the morning; and now he thought it hard to trace all to one spring.
But the third day he caught three hundred fish, brought them home and
watched over them from his shed, looking out through a hole in the
door to see if aught might come anigh. Thus wore the night somewhat,
and when the third part of the night was gone by, he heard one going
along outside with heavy footfalls; and when he was ware thereof, he
took an axe that he had, the sharpest of weapons, for he was fain
to know what this one was about; and he saw that the new-comer had a
great basket on his back. Now he set it down, and peered about, and
saw no man abroad; he gropes about to the fishes, and deems he has got
a good handful, and into the basket he scoops them one and all; then
is the basket full, but the fishes were so big that Grim thought that
no horse might bear more. Now he takes them up and puts himself under
the load, and at that very point of time, when he was about to stand
upright, Grim ran out, and with both hands smote at his neck, so that
the axe sank into the shoulder; thereat he turned off sharp, and set
off running with the basket south over the mountain.

Grim turned off after him, and was fain to know if he had got enough.
They went south all the way to Balljokul, and there this man went
into a cave; a bright fire burnt in the cave, and thereby sat a woman,
great of growth, but shapely withal. Grim heard how she welcomed her
father, and called him Hallmund. He cast down his burden heavily, and
groaned aloud; she asked him why he was all covered with blood, but he
answered and sang--

  "Now know I aright,
  That in man's might,
  And in man's bliss,
  No trust there is;
  On the day of bale
  Shall all things fail;
  Courage is o'er,
  Luck mocks no more."

She asked him closely of their dealings, but he told her all even as
it had befallen.

"Now shall thou hearken," said he, "for I shall tell of my deeds and
sing a song thereon, and thou shall cut it on a staff as I give it
out."

So she did, and he sung Hallmund's song withal, wherein is this--

  "When I drew adown
  The bridle brown
  Grettir's hard hold,
  Men deemed me bold;
  Long while looked then
  The brave of men
  In his hollow hands,
  The harm of lands.

  "Then came the day
  Of Thorir's play
  On Ernelakeheath,
  When we from death
  Our life must gain;
  Alone we twain
  With eighty men
  Must needs play then.

  "Good craft enow
  Did Grettir show
  On many a shield
  In that same field;
  Natheless I hear
  That my marks were
  The deepest still;
  The worst to fill.

  "Those who were fain
  His back to gain
  Lost head and hand,
  Till of the band,
  From the Well-wharf-side,
  Must there abide
  Eighteen behind
  That none can find.

  "With the giant's kin
  Have I oft raised din;
  To the rock folk
  Have I dealt out stroke;
  Ill things could tell
  That I smote full well;
  The half-trolls know
  My baneful blow.

  "Small gain in me
  Did the elf-folk see,
  Or the evil wights
  Who ride anights."

Many other deeds of his did Hallmund sing in that song, for he had
fared through all the land.

Then spake his daughter, "A man of no slippery hand was that; nor was
it unlike that this should hap, for in evil wise didst thou begin with
him: and now what man will avenge thee?"

Hallmund answered, "It is not so sure to know how that may be;
but, methinks, I know that Grettir would avenge me if he might come
thereto; but no easy matter will it be to go against the luck of this
man, for much greatness lies stored up for him."

Thereafter so much did Hallmund's might wane as the song wore, that
well-nigh at one while it befell that the song was done and Hallmund
dead; then she grew very sad and wept right sore. Then came Grim forth
and bade her be of better cheer, "<i>For all must fare when they are
fetched</i>. This has been brought about by his own deed, for I could
scarce look on while he robbed me."

She said he had much to say for it, "<i>For ill deed gains ill
hap</i>."

Now as they talked she grew of better cheer, and Grim abode many
nights in the cave, and got the song by heart, and things went
smoothly betwixt them.

Grim abode at Ernewaterheath all the winter after Hallmund's death,
and thereafter came Thorkel Eyulfson to meet him on the Heath, and
they fought together; but such was the end of their play that Grim
might have his will of Thorkel's life, and slew him not. So Thorkel
took him to him, and got him sent abroad and gave him many goods; and
therein either was deemed to have done well to the other. Grim betook
himself to seafaring, and a great tale is told of him.




CHAP. LXIII.

<i>How Grettir beguiled Thorir of Garth when he was nigh taking
him</i>.


Now the story is to be taken up where Grettir came from the firths of
the east-country; and now he fared with hidden-head for that he would
not meet Thorir, and lay out that summer on Madderdale-heath and in
sundry places, and at whiles he was at Reek-heath.

Thorir heard that Grettir was at Reek-heath, so he gathered men and
rode to the heath, and was well minded that Grettir should not escape
this time.

Now Grettir was scarce aware of them before they were on him; he was
just by a mountain-dairy that stood back a little from the wayside,
and another man there was with him, and when he saw their band, speedy
counsel must he take; so he bade that they should fell the horses and
drag them into the dairy shed, and so it was done.

Then Thorir rode north over the heath by the dairy, and <i>missed
friend from stead</i>, for he found nought, and so turned back withal.

But when his band had ridden away west, then said Grettir, "They will
not deem their journey good if we be not found; so now shall thou
watch our horses while I go meet them, a fair play would be shown them
if they knew me not."

His fellow strove to let him herein, yet he went none-the-less, and
did on him other attire, with a slouched hat over his face and a staff
in his hand, then he went in the way before them. They greeted him and
asked if he had seen any men riding over the heath.

"Those men that ye seek have I seen; but little was wanting e'ennow
but that ye found them, for there they were, on the south of yon bogs
to the left."

Now when they heard that, off they galloped out on to the bogs, but so
great a mire was there that nohow could they get on, and had to drag
their horses out, and were wallowing there the more part of the day;
and they gave to the devil withal the wandering churl who had so
befooled them.

But Grettir turned back speedily to meet his fellow, and when they met
he sang this stave--

  "Now make I no battle-field
  With the searching stems of shield.
  Rife with danger is my day,
  And alone I go my way:
  Nor shall I go meet, this tide,
  Odin's storm, but rather bide
  Whatso fate I next may have;
  Scarce, then, shall thou deem me brave.

  "Thence where Thorir's company
  Thronging ride, I needs must flee;
  If with them I raised the din,
  Little thereby should I win;
  Brave men's clashing swords I shun,
  Woods must hide the hunted one;
  For through all things, good and ill,
  Unto life shall I hold still."

Now they ride at their swiftest west over the heath and forth by the
homestead at Garth, before ever Thorir came from the wilderness with
his band; and when they drew nigh to the homestead a man fell in with
them who knew them not.

Then saw they how a woman, young and grand of attire, stood without,
so Grettir asked who that woman would be. The new-comer said that she
was Thorir's daughter. Then Grettir sang this stave--

  "O wise sun of golden stall,
  When thy sire comes back to hall,
  Thou mayst tell him without sin
  This, though little lies therein,
  That thou saw'st me ride hereby,
  With but two in company,
  Past the door of Skeggi's son,
  Nigh his hearth, O glittering one."

Hereby the new-comer thought he knew who this would be, and he rode to
peopled parts and told how Grettir had ridden by.

So when Thorir came home, many deemed that Grettir had done the bed
well over their heads. But Thorir set spies on Grettir's ways, whereso
he might be. Grettir fell on such rede that he sent his fellow to the
west country with his horses; but he went up to the mountains and was
in disguised attire, and fared about north there in the early winter,
so that he was not known.

But all men deemed that Thorir had got a worse part than before in
their dealings together.




CHAP. LXIV.

<i>Of the ill haps at Sand-heaps, and how Guest came to the Goodwife
there</i>.


There was a priest called Stein, who dwelt at Isledale-river, in
Bard-dale; he was good at husbandry and rich in beasts; his son was
Kiartan, a brisk man and a well grown. Thorstein the White was the
name of him who dwelt at Sand-heaps, south of Isledale-river; his wife
was called Steinvor, a young woman and merry-hearted, and children
they had, who were young in those days. But that place men deemed much
haunted by the goings of trolls.

Now it befell two winters before Grettir came into the north country
that Steinvor the goodwife of Sand-heaps fared at Yule-tide to the
stead of Isledale-river according to her wont, but the goodman abode
at home. Men lay down to sleep in the evening, but in the night they
heard a huge crashing about the bonder's bed; none durst arise and
see thereto, for very few folk were there. In the morning the goodwife
came home, but the goodman was gone, and none knew what had become of
him.

Now the next year wears through its seasons, but the winter after
the goodwife would fain go to worship, and bade her house-carle abide
behind at home; thereto was he loth, but said nathless that she must
rule; so all went the same way and the house-carle vanished; and
marvellous men deemed it; but folk saw certain stains of blood about
the outer door; therefore they deemed it sure that an evil wight had
taken them both.

Now that was heard of wide through the country-side, and Grettir
withal was told thereof; so he took his way to Bard-dale, and came to
Sand-heaps at Yule-eve, and made stay there, and called himself Guest.
The goodwife saw that he was marvellous great of growth, but the
home-folk were exceeding afeard of him; he prayed for guesting there;
the mistress said that there was meat ready for him, "but as to thy
safety see to that thyself."

He said that so he should do: "Here will I abide, but thou shalt go to
worship if thou wilt."

She answered, "Meseems thou art a brave man if thou durst abide at
home here."

"<i>For one thing alone will I not be known</i>," said he.

She said, "I have no will to abide at home, but I may not cross the
river."

"I will go with thee," says Guest.

Then she made her ready for worship, and her little daughter with her.
It thawed fast abroad, and the river was in flood, and therein was the
drift of ice great: then said the goodwife,

"No way across is there either for man or horse."

"Nay, there will be fords there," said Guest, "be not afeard."

"Carry over the little maiden first," said the goodwife; "she is the
lightest."

"I am loth to make two journeys of it," said Guest, "I will bear thee
in my arms."

She crossed herself, and said, "This will not serve; what wilt thou do
with the maiden?"

"A rede I see for that," said he, and therewith caught them both up,
and laid the little one in her mother's lap, and set both of them
thus on his left arm, but had his right free; and so he took the ford
withal, nor durst they cry out, so afeard were they.

Now the river took him up to his breast forthwith, and a great
ice-floe drave against him, but he put forth the hand that was free
and thrust it from him; then it grew so deep, that the stream broke
on his shoulder; but he waded through it stoutly, till he came to the
further shore, and there cast them aland: then he turned back, and it
was twilight already by then he came home to Sand-heaps, and called
for his meat.

So when he was fulfilled, he bade the home-folk go into the chamber;
then he took boards and loose timber, and dragged it athwart the
chamber, and made a great bar, so that none of the home-folk might
come thereover: none durst say aught against him, nor would any of
them make the least sound. The entrance to the hall was through the
side wall by the gable, and dais was there within; there Guest lay
down, but did not put off his clothes, and light burned in the chamber
over against the door: and thus Guest lay till far on in the night.

The goodwife came to Isledale-river at church-time, and men marvelled
how she had crossed the river; and she said she knew not whether a man
or a troll had brought her over.

The priest said he was surely a man, though a match for few; "But
let us hold our peace hereon," he said; "maybe he is chosen for the
bettering of thy troubles." So the goodwife was there through the
night.




CHAP. LXV.

<i>Of Guest and the Troll-wife</i>.


Now it is to be told of Guest, that when it drew towards midnight,
he heard great din without, and thereafter into the hall came a huge
troll-wife, with a trough in one hand and a chopper wondrous great in
the other; she peered about when she came in, and saw where Guest
lay, and ran at him; but he sprang up to meet her, and they fell
a-wrestling terribly, and struggled together for long in the hall. She
was the stronger, but he gave back with craft, and all that was before
them was broken, yea, the cross-panelling withal of the chamber. She
dragged him out through the door, and so into the outer doorway, and
then he betook himself to struggling hard against her. She was fain to
drag him from the house, but might not until they had broken away all
the fittings of the outer door, and borne them out on their shoulders:
then she laboured away with him down towards the river, and right down
to the deep gulfs.

By then was Guest exceeding weary, yet must he either gather his might
together, or be cast by her into the gulf. All night did they contend
in such wise; never, he deemed, had he fought with such a horror for
her strength's sake; she held him to her so hard that he might turn
his arms to no account save to keep fast hold on the middle of the
witch.

But now when they came on to the gulf of the river, he gives the hag a
swing round, and therewith got his right hand free, and swiftly seized
the short-sword that he was girt withal, and smote the troll therewith
on the shoulder, and struck off her arm; and therewithal was he free,
but she fell into the gulf and was carried down the force.

Then was Guest both stiff and weary, and lay there long on the rocks,
then he went home, as it began to grow light, and lay down in bed, and
all swollen and blue he was.

But when the goodwife came from church, she thought her house had
been somewhat roughly handled: so she went to Guest and asked what had
happed that all was broken and down-trodden. He told her all as it had
befallen: she deemed these things imported much, and asked him what
man he was in good sooth. So he told her the truth, and prayed that
the priest might be fetched, for that he would fain see him: and so it
was done.

But when Stein the priest came to Sand-heaps, he knew forthwith, that
thither was come Grettir Asmundson, under the name of Guest.

So the priest asked what he deemed had become of those men who had
vanished; and Grettir said that he thought they would have gone into
the gulf: the priest said that he might not trow that, if no signs
could be seen thereof: then said Grettir that later on that should be
known more thoroughly. So the priest went home.

Grettir lay many nights a-bed, and the mistress did well to him, and
so Yule-tide wore.

Now Grettir's story is that the troll-wife cast herself into the gulf
when she got her wound; but the men of Bard-dale say that day dawned
on her, while they wrestled, and that she burst, when he cut the arm
from her; and that there she stands yet on the cliff, a rock in the
likeness of a woman.

Now the dale-dwellers kept Grettir in hiding there; but in the winter
after Yule, Grettir fared to Isledale-river, and when he met the
priest, he said, "Well, priest, I see that thou hadst little faith in
my tale; now will I, that thou go with me to the river, and see what
likelihood there is of that tale being true."

So the priest did; and when they came to the force-side, they saw a
cave up under the cliff; a sheer rock that cliff was, so great that in
no place might man come up thereby, and well-nigh fifty fathoms was it
down to the water. Now they had a rope with them, but the priest said:

"A risk beyond all measure, I deem it to go down here."

"Nay," said Grettir, "it is to be done, truly, but men of the greatest
prowess are meetest therefor: now will I know what is in the force,
but thou shall watch the rope."

The priest bade him follow his own rede, and drave a peg down into the
sward on the cliff, and heaped stones up over it, and sat thereby.




CHAP. LXVI.

<i>Of the Dweller in the Cave under the Force</i>.


Now it is to be told of Grettir that he set a stone in a bight of the
rope and let it sink down into the water.

"In what wise hast thou mind to go?" said the priest.

"I will not go bound into the force," said Grettir; "such things doth
my heart forebode."

With that he got ready for his journey, and was lightly clad, and girt
with the short-sword, and had no weapon more.

Then he leapt off the cliff into the force; the priest saw the soles
of his feet, and knew not afterwards what was become of him. But
Grettir dived under the force, and hard work it was, because the
whirlpool was strong, and he had to dive down to the bottom, before he
might come up under the force. But thereby was a rock jutting out, and
thereon he gat; a great cave was under the force, and the river fell
over it from the sheer rocks. He went up into the cave, and there was
a great fire flaming from amidst of brands; and there he saw a giant
sitting withal, marvellously great and dreadful to look on. But when
Grettir came anigh, the giant leapt up and caught up a glaive and
smote at the new-comer, for with that glaive might a man both cut and
thrust; a wooden shaft it had, and that fashion of weapon men called
then, heft-sax. Grettir hewed back against him with the short-sword,
and smote the shaft so that he struck it asunder; then was the giant
fain to stretch aback for a sword that hung up there in the cave; but
therewithal Grettir smote him afore into the breast, and smote off
well-nigh all the breast bone and the belly, so that the bowels
tumbled out of him and fell into the river, and were driven down along
the stream; and as the priest sat by the rope, he saw certain fibres
all covered with blood swept down the swirls of the stream; then he
grew unsteady in his place, and thought for sure that Grettir was
dead, so he ran from the holding of the rope, and gat him home.
Thither he came in the evening and said, as one who knew it well, that
Grettir was dead, and that great scathe was it of such a man.

Now of Grettir must it be told that he let little space go betwixt
his blows or ever the giant was dead; then he went up the cave, and
kindled a light and espied the cave. The story tells not how much he
got therein, but men deem that it must have been something great. But
there he abode on into the night; and he found there the bones of two
men, and bore them together in a bag; then he made off from the cave
and swam to the rope and shook it, and thought that the priest would
be there yet; but when he knew that the priest had gone home, then
must he draw himself up by strength of hand, and thus he came up out
on to the cliff.

Then he fared home to Isledale-river, and brought into the church
porch the bag with the bones, and therewithal a rune-staff whereon
this song was marvellous well cut--

  "There into gloomy gulf I passed,
  O'er which from the rock's throat is cast
  The swirling rush of waters wan,
  To meet the sword-player feared of man.
  By giant's hall the strong stream pressed
  Cold hands against the singer's breast;
  Huge weight upon him there did hurl
  The swallower of the changing whirl."

And this other one withal--

  "The dreadful dweller of the cave
  Great strokes and many 'gainst me drave;
  Full hard he had to strive for it,
  But toiling long he wan no whit;
  For from its mighty shaft of tree
  The heft-sax smote I speedily;
  And dulled the flashing war-flame fair
  In the black breast that met me there."

Herein was it said how that Grettir had brought those bones from the
cave; but when the priest came to the church in the morning he found
the staff and that which went with it, but Grettir was gone home to
Sand-heaps.




CHAP. LXVII.

<i>Grettir driven from Sand-heaps to the West</i>.


But when the priest met Grettir he asked him closely about what had
happed; so he told him all the tale of his doings, and said withal
that the priest had been unfaithful to him in the matter of the
rope-holding; and the priest must needs say that so it was.

Now men deemed they could see that these evil wights had wrought the
loss of the men there in the dale; nor had folk hurt ever after from
aught haunting the valley, and Grettir was thought to have done great
deeds for the cleansing of the land. So the priest laid those bones in
earth in the churchyard.

But Grettir abode at Sand-heaps the winter long, and was hidden there
from all the world.

But when Thorir of Garth heard certain rumours of Grettir being in
Bard-dale, he sent men for his head; then men gave him counsel to get
him gone therefrom, so he took his way to the west.

Now when he came to Maddervales to Gudmund the Rich, he prayed Gudmund
for watch and ward; but Gudmund said he might not well keep him. "But
that only is good for thee," said he, "to set thee down there, whereas
thou shouldst have no fear of thy life."

Grettir said he wotted not where such a place might be.

Gudmund said, "An isle there lies in Skagafirth called Drangey; so
good a place for defence it is, that no man may come thereon unless
ladders be set thereto. If thou mightest get there, I know for sure
that no man who might come against thee, could have good hope while
thou wert on the top thereof, of overcoming thee, either by weapons or
craft, if so be thou shouldst watch the ladders well."

"That shall be tried," said Grettir, "but so fearsome of the dark am I
grown, that not even for the keeping of my life may I be alone."

Gudmund said, "Well, that may be; but trust no man whatsoever so much
as not to trust thyself better; for many men are hard to see through."

Grettir thanked him for his wholesome redes, and then fared away from
Maddervales, nor made stay before he came to Biarg; there his mother
and Illugi his brother welcomed him joyfully, and he abode there
certain nights.

There he heard of the slaying of Thorstein Kuggson, which had befallen
the autumn before Grettir went to Bard-dale; and he deemed therewithal
that felling went on fast enough.

Then Grettir rode south to Holtbeacon-heath, and was minded to avenge
Hallmund if he might meet Grim; but when he came to Northriverdale,
he heard that Grim had been gone two winters ago, as is aforesaid; but
Grettir had heard so late of these tidings because he had gone about
disguised those two winters, and the third winter he had been in
Thorirs-dale, and had seen no man who might tell him any news. Then
he betook himself to the Broadfirth-dales, and dwelt in Eastriverdale,
and lay in wait for folk who fared over Steep-brent; and once more he
swept away with the strong hand the goods of the small bonders. This
was about the height of summer-tide.

Now when the summer was well worn, Steinvor of Sand-heaps bore a
man-child, who was named Skeggi; he was first fathered on Kiartan, the
son of Stein, the priest of Isle-dale-river. Skeggi was unlike unto
his kin because of his strength and growth, but when he was fifteen
winters old he was the strongest man in the north-country, and was
then known as Grettir's son; men deemed he would be a marvel among
men, but he died when he was seventeen years of age, and no tale there
is of him.




CHAP. LXVIII.

<i>How Thorod, the Son of Snorri Godi, went against Grettir</i>.


After the slaying of Thorstein Kuggson, Snorri Godi would have little
to do with his son Thorod, or with Sam, the son of Bork the Fat; it is
not said what they had done therefor, unless it might be that they had
had no will to do some great deed that Snorri set them to; but withal
Snorri drave his son Thorod away, and said he should not come back
till he had slain some wood-dweller; and so must matters stand.

So Thorod went over to the Dales; and at that time dwelt at
Broadlair-stead in Sokkolfsdale a widow called Geirlaug; a herdsman
she kept, who had been outlawed for some onslaught; and he was a
growing lad. Now Thorod Snorrison heard thereof, and rode in to
Broadlair-stead, and asked where was the herdsman; the goodwife said
that he was with the sheep.

"What wilt thou have to do with him?"

"His life will I have," says Thorod, "because he is an outlaw, and a
wood-wight."

She answers, "No glory is it for such a great warrior as thou deemest
thyself, to slay a mannikin like that; I will show thee a greater
deed, if thine heart is so great that thou must needs try thyself."

"Well, and what deed?" says he.

She answers, "Up in the fell here, lies Grettir Asmundson; play thou
with him, for such a game is more meet for thee."

Thorod took her talk well; "So shall it be," says he, and therewith he
smote his horse with his spurs, and rode along the valley; and when he
came to the hill below Eastriver, he saw where was a dun horse, with
his saddle on, and thereby a big man armed, so he turned thence to
meet him.

Grettir greeted him, and asked who he was. Thorod named himself, and
said,

"Why askest thou not of my errand rather than of my name?"

"Why, because," said Grettir, "it is like to be such as is of little
weight: art thou son to Snorri Godi?"

"Yea, yea," says Thorod; "but now shall we try which of us may do the
most."

"A matter easy to be known," says Grettir; "hast thou not heard that
I have ever been a treasure-hill that most men grope in with little
luck?"

"Yea, I know it," said Thorod; "yet must somewhat be risked."

And now he drew his sword therewith and set on Grettir eagerly; but
Grettir warded himself with his shield, but bore no weapon against
Thorod; and so things went awhile, nor was Grettir wounded.

At last he said, "Let us leave this play, for thou wilt not have
victory in our strife."

But Thorod went on dealing blows at his maddest. Now Grettir got
aweary of dealing with him, and caught him and set him down by his
side, and said--

"I may do with thee even as I will, nor do I fear that thou wilt ever
be my bane; but the grey old carle, thy father, Snorri, I fear in good
sooth, and his counsels that have brought most men to their knees:
and for thee, thou shouldst turn thy mind to such things alone as thou
mayst get done, nor is it child's play to fight with me."

But when Thorod saw that he might bring nought to pass, he grew
somewhat appeased, and therewithal they parted. Thorod rode home to
Tongue and told his father of his dealings with Grettir. Snorri Godi
smiled thereat, and said,

"<i>Many a man lies hid within himself</i>, and far unlike were your
doings; for thou must needs rush at him to slay him, and he might have
done with thee even as he would. Yet wisely has Grettir done herein,
that he slew thee not; for I should scarce have had a mind to let thee
lie unavenged; but now indeed shall I give him aid, if I have aught to
do with any of his matters."

It was well seen of Snorri, that he deemed Grettir had done well to
Thorod, and he ever after gave his good word for Grettir.




CHAP. LXIX.

<i>How Grettir took leave of his Mother at Biarg, and fared with
Illugi his Brother to Drangey</i>.


Grettir rode north to Biarg a little after he parted with Thorod, and
lay hid there yet awhile; then so great grew his fear in the dark,
that he durst go nowhere as soon as dusk set in. His mother bade him
abide there, but said withal, that she saw that it would scarce avail
him aught, since he had so many cases against him throughout all the
land. Grettir said that she should never have trouble brought on her
for his sake.

"But I shall no longer do so much for the keeping of my life," says
he, "as to be alone."

Now Illugi his brother was by that time about fifteen winters old,
and the goodliest to look on of all men; and he overheard their talk
together. Grettir was telling his mother what rede Gudmund the Rich
had given him, and now that he should try, if he had a chance, to get
out to Drangey, but he said withal, that he might not abide there,
unless he might get some trusty man to be with him. Then said Illugi,

"I will go with thee, brother, though I know not that I shall be of
any help to thee, unless it be that I shall be ever true to thee, nor
run from thee whiles thou standest up; and moreover I shall know more
surely how thou farest if I am still in thy fellowship."

Grettir answered, "Such a man thou art, that I am gladder in thee than
in any other; and if it cross not my mother's mind, fain were I that
thou shouldst fare with me."

Then said Asdis, "Now can I see that it has come to this, that two
troubles lie before us: for meseems I may ill spare Illugi, yet I know
that so hard is thy lot, Grettir, that thou must in somewise find rede
therefor: and howsoever it grieves me, O my sons, to see you both turn
your backs on me, yet thus much will I do, if Grettir might thereby be
somewhat more holpen than heretofore."

Hereat was Illugi glad, for that he deemed it good to go with Grettir.

So she gave them much of her chattels, and they made them ready for
their journey. Asdis led them from out the garth, and before they
parted she spake thus:

"Ah, my sons twain, there ye depart from me, and one death ye shall
have together; for no man may flee from that which is wrought for him:
on no day now shall I see either of you once again; let one fate
be over you both, then; for I know not what weal ye go to get for
yourselves in Drangey, but there shall ye both lay your bones, and
many will begrudge you that abiding place. Keep ye heedfully from
wiles, yet none the less there shall ye be bitten of the edge of the
sword, for marvellously have my dreams gone: be well ware of sorcery,
for <i>little can cope with the cunning of eld</i>."

And when she had thus spoken she wept right sore.

Then said Grettir, "Weep not, mother, for if we be set on with
weapons, it shall be said of thee, that thou hast had sons, and not
daughters: live on, well and hale."

Therewithal they parted. They fared north through the country side and
saw their kin; and thus they lingered out the autumn into winter; then
they turned toward Skagafirth and went north through Waterpass and
thence to Reekpass, and down Saemunds-lithe and so unto Longholt, and
came to Dinby late in the day.

Grettir had cast his hood back on to his shoulders, for in that wise
he went ever abroad whether the day were better or worse. So they went
thence, and when they had gone but a little way, there met them a man,
big-headed, tall, and gaunt, and ill clad; he greeted them, and either
asked other for their names; they said who they were, but he called
himself Thorbiorn: he was a land-louper, a man too lazy to work, and
a great swaggerer, and much game and fooling was made with him by some
folk: he thrust himself into their company, and told them much from
the upper country about the folk there. Grettir had great game and
merriment of him; so he asked if they had no need of a man who should
work for them, "for I would fain fare with you," says he; and withal
he got so much from their talk that they suffered him to follow them.

Much snow there was that day, and it was cold; but whereas that man
swaggered exceedingly, and was the greatest of tomfools, he had a
by-name, and was called Noise.

"Great wonder had those of Dinby when thou wentest by e'en now
unhooded, in the foul weather," said Noise, "as to whether thou
wouldst have as little fear of men as of the cold: there were two
bonders' sons, both men of great strength, and the shepherd called
them forth to go to the sheep-watching with him, and scarcely could
they clothe themselves for the cold."

Grettir said, "I saw within doors there a young man who pulled on his
mittens, and another going betwixt byre and midden, and of neither of
them should I be afeared."

Thereafter they went down to Sorbness, and were there through the
night; then they fared out along the strand to a farm called Reeks,
where dwelt a man, Thorwald by name, a good bonder. Him Grettir prayed
for watch and ward, and told him how he was minded to get out to
Drangey: the bonder said that those of Skagafirth would think him no
god-send, and excused himself therewithal.

Then Grettir took a purse his mother had given to him, and gave it
to the bonder; his brows lightened over the money, and he got three
house-carles of his to bring them out in the night time by the light
of the moon. It is but a little way from Reeks out to the island, one
sea-mile only. So when they came to the isle, Grettir deemed it good
to behold, because it was grass-grown, and rose up sheer from the sea,
so that no man might come up thereon save there where the ladders were
let down, and if the uppermost ladder were drawn up, it was no man's
deed to get upon the island. There also were the cliffs full of fowl
in the summer-tide, and there were eighty sheep upon the island which
the bonders owned, and they were mostly rams and ewes which they had
mind to slaughter.

There Grettir set himself down in peace; and by then had he been
fifteen or sixteen winters in outlawry, as Sturla Thordson has said.




CHAP. LXX.

<i>Of the Bonders who owned Drangey between them</i>.


In the days when Grettir came to Drangey, these were chief men of the
country side of Skagafirth. Hialti dwelt at Hof in Hialtidale, he
was the son of Thord, the son of Hialti, the son of Thord the Scalp:
Hialti was a great chief, a right noble man, and much befriended.
Thorbiorn Angle was the name of his brother, a big man and a strong,
hardy and wild withal. Thord, the father of these twain, had married
again in his old age, and that wife was not the mother of the
brothers; and she did ill to her step-children, but served Thorbiorn
the worst, for that he was hard to deal with and reckless. And on a
day Thorbiorn Angle sat playing at tables, and his stepmother passed
by and saw that he was playing at the knave-game, and the fashion of
the game was the large tail-game. Now she deemed him thriftless, and
cast some word at him, but he gave an evil answer; so she caught up
one of the men, and drave the tail thereof into Thorbiorn's cheek-bone
wherefrom it glanced into his eye, so that it hung out on his cheek.
He sprang up, caught hold of her, and handled her roughly, insomuch
that she took to her bed, and died thereof afterwards, and folk say
that she was then big with child.

Thereafter Thorbiorn became of all men the most riotous; he took his
heritage, and dwelt at first in Woodwick.

Haldor the son of Thorgeir, who was the son of Head-Thord, dwelt at
Hof on Head-strand, he had to wife Thordis, the daughter of Thord
Hialtison, and sister to those brothers Hialti and Thorbiorn Angle.
Haldor was a great bonder, and rich in goods.

Biorn was the name of a man who dwelt at Meadness in the Fleets; he
was a friend to Haldor of Hof. These men held to each other in all
cases.

Tongue-Stein dwelt at Stonestead; he was the son of Biorn, the son of
Ufeigh Thinbeard, son of that Crow-Hreidar to whom Eric of God-dales
gave the tongue of land down from Hall-marsh. Stein was a man of great
renown.

One named Eric was the son of Holmgang-Starri, the son of Eric of
God-dales, the son of Hroald, the son of Geirmund Thick-beard; Eric
dwelt at Hof in God-dales.

Now all these were men of great account.

Two brothers there were who dwelt at a place called Broad-river
in Flat-lithe, and they were both called Thord; they were wondrous
strong, and yet withal peaceable men both of them.

All these men had share in Drangey, and it is said that no less than
twenty in all had some part in the island, nor would any sell his
share to another; but the sons of Thord, Hialti and Thorbiorn Angle,
had the largest share, because they were the richest men.




CHAP. LXXI.

<i>How those of Skagafirth found Grettir on Drangey</i>.


Now time wears on towards the winter solstice; then the bonders get
ready to go fetch the fat beasts for slaughter from the island; so
they manned a great barge, and every owner had one to go in his stead,
and some two.

But when these came anigh the island they saw men going about there;
they deemed that strange, but guessed that men had been shipwrecked,
and got aland there: so they row up to where the ladders were, when
lo, the first-comers drew up the ladders.

Then the bonders deemed that things were taking a strange turn, and
hailed those men and asked them who they were: Grettir named himself
and his fellows withal: but the bonders asked who had brought him
there.

Grettir answered, "He who owned the keel and had the hands, and who
was more my friend than yours."

The bonders answered and said, "Let us now get our sheep, but come
thou aland with us, keeping freely whatso of our sheep thou hast
slaughtered."

"A good offer," said Grettir, "but this time let each keep what he
has got; and I tell you, once for all, that hence I go not, till I am
dragged away dead; for it is not my way to let that go loose which I
have once laid hand on."

Thereat the bonders held their peace, and deemed that a woeful guest
had come to Drangey; then they gave him choice of many things, both
moneys and fair words, but Grettir said nay to one and all, and they
gat them gone with things in such a stead, and were ill content with
their fate; and told the men of the country-side what a wolf had got
on to the island.

This took them all unawares, but they could think of nought to do
herein; plentifully they talked over it that winter, but could see no
rede whereby to get Grettir from the island.




CHAP. LXXII.

<i>Of the Sports at Heron-ness Thing</i>.


Now the days wore till such time as men went to the Heron-ness Thing
in spring-tide, and many came thronging there from that part of the
country, wherefrom men had to go to that Thing for their suits. Men
sat there long time both over the suits and over sports, for there
were many blithe men in that country-side. But when Grettir heard that
all men fared to the Thing, he made a plot with his friends; for he
was in goodwill with those who dwelt nighest to him, and for them
he spared nought that he could get. But now he said that he would
go aland, and gather victuals, but that Illugi and Noise should stay
behind. Illugi thought this ill counselled, but let things go as
Grettir would.

So Grettir bade them watch the ladders well, for that all things
lay thereon; and thereafter he went to the mainland, and got what he
deemed needful: he hid himself from men whereso he came, nor did
any one know that he was on the land. Withal he heard concerning the
Thing, that there was much sport there, and was fain to go thither;
so he did on old gear and evil, and thus came to the Thing, whenas men
went from the courts home to their booths. Then fell certain young men
to talking how that the day was fair and good, and that it were well,
belike, for the young men to betake them to wrestling and merrymaking.
Folk said it was well counselled; and so men went and sat them down
out from the booths.

Now the sons of Thord, Hialti and Thorbiorn Angle, were the chief
men in this sport; Thorbiorn Angle was boisterous beyond measure, and
drove men hard and fast to the place of the sports, and every man must
needs go whereas his will was; and he would take this man and that by
the hands and drag him forth unto the playing-ground.

Now first those wrestled who were weakest, and then each man in his
turn, and therewith the game and glee waxed great; but when most men
had wrestled but those who were the strongest, the bonders fell to
talking as to who would be like to lay hand to either of the Thords,
who have been aforenamed; but there was no man ready for that. Then
the Thords went up to sundry men, and put themselves forward for
wrestling, but <i>the nigher the call the further the man</i>. Then
Thorbiorn Angle looks about, and sees where a man sits, great of
growth, and his face hidden somewhat. Thorbiorn laid hold of him,
and tugged hard at him, but he sat quiet and moved no whit. Then said
Thorbiorn,

"No one has kept his place before me to-day like thou hast; what man
art thou?"

He answers, "Guest am I hight."

Said Thorbiorn, "Belike thou wilt do somewhat for our merriment; a
wished-for guest wilt thou be."

He answered, "About and about, methinks, will things change speedily;
nor shall I cast myself into play with you here, where all is unknown
to me."

Then many men said he were worthy of good at their hands, if he, an
unknown man, gave sport to the people. Then he asked what they would
of him; so they prayed him to wrestle with some one.

He said he had left wrestling, "though time agone it was somewhat of a
sport to me."

So, when he did not deny them utterly, they prayed him thereto yet the
more.

He said, "Well, if ye are so fain that I be dragged about here, ye
must do so much therefor, as to handsel me peace, here at the Thing,
and until such time as I come back to my home."

Then they all sprang up and said that so they would do indeed; but
Hafr was the name of him who urged most that peace should be given to
the man. This Hafr was the son of Thorarin, the son of Hafr, the son
of Thord Knob, who had settled land up from the Weir in the Fleets to
Tongue-river, and who dwelt at Knobstead; and a wordy man was Hafr.

So now he gave forth the handselling grandly with open mouth, and this
is the beginning thereof.




CHAP. LXXIII.

<i>The Handselling of Peace</i>.


Says he, "<i>Herewith I establish peace betwixt all men, but most
of all betwixt all men and this same Guest who sits here, and so is
named; that is to say, all men of rule, and goodly bonders, and all
men young, and fit to bear arms, and all other men of the country-side
of Heron-ness Thing, whencesoever any may have come here, of men
named or unnamed. Let us handsel safety and full peace to that unknown
new-comer, yclept Guest by name, for game, wrestling, and all glee,
for abiding here, and going home, whether he has need to fare over
water, or over land, or over ferry; safety shall he have, in all
steads named and unnamed, even so long as needs be for his coming home
whole, under faith holden. This peace I establish on behoof of us,
and of our kin, friends, and men of affinity, women even as men,
bondswomen, even as bonds-men, swains and men of estate. Let him be
a shamed peace-breaker, who breaks the peace, or spills the troth
settled; turned away and driven forth from God, and good men of the
kingdom of Heaven, and all Holy ones. A man not to be borne of any
man, but cast out from all, as wide as wolves stray, or Christian men
make for Churches, or heathen in God's-houses do sacrifice, or fire
burns, or earth brings forth, or a child, new-come to speech, calls
mother, or mother bears son, or the sons of men kindle fire, or ships
sweep on, or shields glitter, or the sun shines, or the snow falls,
or a Finn sweeps on skates, or a fir-tree waxes, or a falcon flies
the spring-long day with a fair wind under either wing, or the
Heavens dwindle far away, or the world is built, or the wind turns</i>
<i>waters seaward, or carles sow corn. Let him shun churches, and
Christian folk, and heathen men, houses and caves, and every home but
the home of Hell. Now shall we be at peace and of one mind each with
the other, and of goodwill, whether we meet on fell or foreshore, ship
or snow-shoes, earth or ice-mount, sea or swift steed, even as each
found his friend on water, or his brother on broad ways; in just such
peace one with other, as father with son, or son with father in all
dealings together. Now we lay hands together, each and all of us,
to hold well this say of peace, and all words spoken in our settled
troth: As witness God and good men, and all those who hear my words,
and nigh this stead chance to stand</i>."




CHAP. LXXIV.

<i>Of Grettir's Wrestling: and how Thorbiorn Angle now bought the more
part of Drangey</i>.


Then many fell to saying that many and great words had been spoken
hereon; but now Guest said,

"Good is thy say and well hast thou spoken it; if ye spill not things
hereafter, I shall not withhold that which I have to show forth."

So he cast off his hood, and therewith all his outer clothes.

Then they gazed one on the other, and awe spread over their faces, for
they deemed they knew surely that this was Grettir Asmundson, for
that he was unlike other men for his growth and prowess' sake: and all
stood silent, but Hafr deemed he had made himself a fool. Now the
men of the country-side fell into twos and twos together, and one
upbraided the other, but him the most of all, who had given forth the
words of peace.

Then said Grettir; "Make clear to me what ye have in your minds,
because for no long time will I sit thus unclad; it is more your
matter than mine, whether ye will hold the peace, or hold it not."

They answered few words and then sat down: and now the sons of Thord,
and Halldor their brother-in-law, talked the matter over together;
and some would hold the peace, and some not; so as they elbowed one
another, and laid their heads together. Grettir sang a stave--

  "I, well known to men, have been
  On this morn both hid and seen;
  Double face my fortune wears,
  Evil now, now good it bears;
  Doubtful play-board have I shown
  Unto these men, who have grown
  Doubtful of their given word;
  Hafr's big noise goes overboard."

Then said Tongue-stein, "Thinkest thou that, Grettir? Knowest thou
then what the chiefs will make their minds up to? but true it is thou
art a man above all others for thy great heart's sake: yea, but dost
thou not see how they rub their noses one against the other?"

Then Grettir sang a stave--

  "Raisers-up of roof of war,
  Nose to nose in counsel are;
  Wakeners of the shield-rain sit
  Wagging beard to talk of it:
  Scatterers of the serpent's bed
  Round about lay head to head.
  For belike they heard my name;
  And must balance peace and shame."

Then spake Hialti the son of Thord; "So shall it not be," says he; "we
shall hold to our peace and troth given, though we have been beguiled,
for I will not that men should have such a deed to follow after, if we
depart from that peace, that we ourselves have settled and handselled:
Grettir shall go whither he will, and have peace until such time as
he comes back from this journey; and then and not till then shall this
word of truce be void, whatsoever may befall betwixt us meanwhile."

All thanked him therefor, and deemed that he had done as a great
chief, such blood-guilt as there was on the other side: but the speech
of Thorbiorn Angle was little and low thereupon.

Now men said that both the Thords should lay hand to Grettir, and he
bade them have it as they would: so one of the brothers stood forth;
and Grettir stood up stiff before him, and he ran at Grettir at his
briskest, but Grettir moved no whit from his place: then Grettir
stretched out his hand down Thord's back, over the head of him, and
caught hold of him by the breeches, and tripped up his feet, and cast
him backward over his head in such wise that he fell on his shoulder,
and a mighty fall was that.

Then men said that both those brothers should go against Grettir at
once; and thus was it done, and great swinging and pulling about there
was, now one side, now the other getting the best of it, though one
or other of the brothers Grettir ever had under him; but each in turn
must fall on his knee, or have some slip one of the other; and so hard
they griped each at each, that they were all blue and bruised.

All men thought this the best of sport, and when they had made an end
of it, thanked them for the wrestling; and it was the deeming of those
who sat thereby, that the two brothers together were no stronger than
Grettir alone, though each of them had the strength of two men of the
strongest: so evenly matched they were withal, that neither might get
the better of the other if they tried it between them.

Grettir abode no long time at the Thing; the bonders bade him give up
the island, but he said nay to this, nor might they do aught herein.

So Grettir fared back to Drangey, and Illugi was as fain of him as
might be; and there they abode peacefully, and Grettir told them the
story of his doings and his journeys; and thus the summer wore away.

All men deemed that those of Skagafirth had shown great manliness
herein, that they held to their peace given; and folk may well mark
how trusty men were in those days, whereas Grettir had done such deeds
against them.

Now the less rich men of the bonders spake together, that there
was little gain to them in holding small shares in Drangey; so they
offered to sell their part to the sons of Thord; Hialti said that he
would not deal with them herein, for the bonders made it part of the
bargain, that he who bought of them should either slay Grettir or get
him away. But Thorbiorn Angle said, that he would not spare to take
the lead of an onset against Grettir if they would give him wealth
therefor. So his brother Hialti gave up to him his share in the
island, for that he was the hardest man, and the least befriended of
the twain; and in likewise too did other bonders; so Thorbiorn Angle
got the more part of the island for little worth, but bound himself
withal to get Grettir away.




CHAP. LXXV.

<i>Thorbiorn Angle goes to Drangey to speak with Grettir</i>.


Whenas summer was far spent, Thorbiorn Angle went with a well-manned
barge out to Drangey, and Grettir and his fellows stood forth on the
cliff's edge; so there they talked together. Thorbiorn prayed Grettir
to do so much for his word, as to depart from the island; Grettir said
there was no hope of such an end.

Then said Thorbiorn, "Belike I may give thee meet aid if thou dost
this, for now have many bonders given up to me their shares in the
island."

Grettir answered, "Now hast thou shown forth that which brings me to
settle in my mind that I will never go hence, whereas thou sayest
that thou now hast the more part of the island; and good is it that we
twain alone share the kale: for in sooth, hard I found it to have all
the men of Skagafirth against me; but now let neither spare the
other, for not such are we twain, as are like to be smothered in the
friendship of men; and thou mayst leave coming hither, for on my side
is all over and done."

"<i>All things bide their day</i>," said Thorbiorn, "and an ill day
thou bidest."

"I am content to risk it," said Grettir; and in such wise they parted,
and Thorbiorn went home.




CHAP. LXXVI.

<i>How Noise let the fire out on Drangey, and how Grettir must needs
go aland for more</i>.


So the tale tells, that by then they had been two winters on Drangey,
they had slaughtered well-nigh all the sheep that were there, but one
ram, as men say, they let live; he was piebald of belly and head, and
exceeding big-horned; great game they had of him, for he was so wise
that he would stand waiting without, and run after them whereso they
went; and he would come home to the hut anights and rub his horns
against the door.

Now they deemed it good to abide on the island, for food was plenty,
because of the fowl and their eggs; but firewood was right hard to
come by; and ever Grettir would let the thrall go watch for drift, and
logs were often drifted there, and he would bear them to the fire;
but no need had the brothers to do any work beyond climbing into the
cliffs when it liked them. But the thrall took to loathing his work,
and got more grumbling and heedless than he was wont heretofore: his
part it was to watch the fire night by night, and Grettir gave him
good warning thereon, for no boat they had with them.

Now so it befell that on a certain night their fire went out; Grettir
was wroth thereat, and said it was but his due if Noise were beaten
for that deed; but the thrall said that his life was an evil life,
if he must lie there in outlawry, and be shaken and beaten withal if
aught went amiss.

Grettir asked Illugi what rede there was for the matter, but he said
he could see none, but that they should abide there till some keel
should be brought thither: Grettir said it was but blindness to hope
for that. "Rather will I risk whether I may not come aland."

"Much my mind misgives me thereof," said Illugi, "for we are all lost
if thou comest to any ill."

"I shall not be swallowed up swimming," said Grettir; "but
henceforward I shall trust the thrall the worse for this, so much as
lies hereon."

Now the shortest way to the mainland from the island, was a sea-mile
long.




CHAP. LXXVII.

<i>Grettir at the home-stead of Reeks</i>.


Now Grettir got all ready for swimming, and had on a cowl of
market-wadmal, and his breeches girt about him, and he got his fingers
webbed together, and the weather was fair. So he went from the island
late in the day, and desperate Illugi deemed his journey. Grettir made
out into the bay, and the stream was with him, and a calm was over
all. He swam on fast, and came aland at Reekness by then the sun had
set: he went up to the homestead at Reeks, and into a bath that night,
and then went into the chamber; it was very warm there, for there had
been a fire therein that evening, and the heat was not yet out of the
place; but he was exceeding weary, and there fell into a deep sleep,
and so lay till far on into the next day.

Now as the morning wore the home folk arose, and two women came
into the chamber, a handmaid and the goodman's daughter. Grettir was
asleep, and the bed-clothes had been cast off him on to the floor; so
they saw that a man lay there, and knew him.

Then said the handmaiden: "So may I thrive, sister! here is Grettir
Asmundson lying bare, and I call him right well ribbed about the
chest, but few might think he would be so small of growth below; and
so then that does not go along with other kinds of bigness."

The goodman's daughter answered: "Why wilt thou have everything on thy
tongue's end? Thou art a measure-less fool; be still."

"Dear sister, how can I be still about it?" says the handmaid. "I
would not have believed it, though one had told me."

And now she would whiles run up to him and look, and whiles run back
again to the goodman's daughter, screaming and laughing; but Grettir
heard what she said, and as she ran in over the floor by him he caught
hold of her, and sang this stave--

  "Stay a little, foolish one!
  When the shield-shower is all done,
  With the conquered carles and lords,
  Men bide not to measure swords:
  Many a man had there been glad,
  Lesser war-gear to have had.
  With a heart more void of fear;
  Such I am not, sweet and dear."

Therewithal he swept her up into the bed, but the bonder's daughter
ran out of the place; then sang Grettir this other stave--

  "Sweet amender of the seam,
  Weak and worn thou dost me deem:
  O light-handed dear delight,
  Certes thou must say aright.
  Weak I am, and certainly
  Long in white arms must I lie:
  Hast thou heart to leave me then,
  Fair-limbed gladdener of great men?"

The handmaid shrieked out, but in such wise did they part that she
laid no blame on Grettir when all was over.

A little after, Grettir arose, and went to Thorvald the goodman, and
told him of his trouble, and prayed bring him out; so did he, and lent
him a boat, and brought him out, and Grettir thanked him well for his
manliness.

But when it was heard that Grettir had swam a sea-mile, all deemed his
prowess both on sea and land to be marvellous.

Those of Skagafirth had many words to say against Thorbiorn Angle, in
that he drave not Grettir away from Drangey, and said they would take
back each his own share; but he said he found the task no easy one,
and prayed them be good to him, and abide awhile.




CHAP. LXXVIII.

<i>Of Haring at Drangey, and the end of him</i>.


That same summer a ship came to the Gangpass-mouth, and therein was a
man called Haering--a young man he was, and so lithe that there was no
cliff that he might not climb. He went to dwell with Thorbiorn Angle,
and was there on into the autumn; and he was ever urging Thorbiorn to
go to Drangey, saying that he would fain see whether the cliffs were
so high that none might come up them. Thorbiorn said that he should
not work for nought if he got up into the island, and slew Grettir, or
gave him some wound; and withal he made it worth coveting to Haering.
So they fared to Drangey, and set the eastman ashore in a certain
place, and he was to set on them unawares if he might come up on
to the island, but they laid their keel by the ladders, and fell to
talking with Grettir; and Thorbiorn asked him if he were minded now to
leave the place; but he said that to nought was his mind so made up as
to stay there.

"A great game hast thou played with us," said Thorbiorn; "but thou
seemest not much afeard for thyself."

Thus a long while they gave and took in words, and came nowise
together hereon.

But of Haering it is to be told that he climbed the cliffs, going on
the right hand and the left, and got up by such a road as no man has
gone by before or since; but when he came to the top of the cliff, he
saw where the brothers stood, with their backs turned toward him, and
thought in a little space to win both goods and great fame; nor were
they at all aware of his ways, for they deemed that no man might
come up, but there whereas the ladders were. Grettir was talking with
Thorbiorn, nor lacked there words of the biggest on either side; but
withal Illugi chanced to look aside, and saw a man drawing anigh them.

Then he said, "Here comes a man at us, with axe raised aloft, and in
right warlike wise he seems to fare."

"Turn thou to meet him," says Grettir, "but I will watch the ladders."

So Illugi turned to meet Haering, and when the eastman saw him, he
turned and fled here and there over the island. Illugi chased him
while the island lasted, but when he came forth on to the cliff's edge
Haering leapt down thence, and every bone in him was broken, and
so ended his life; but the place where he was lost has been called
Haering's-leap ever since.

Illugi came back, and Grettir asked how he had parted from this one
who had doomed them to die.

"He would have nought to do," says Illugi, "with my seeing after
his affairs, but must needs break his neck over the rock; so let the
bonders pray for him as one dead."

So when Angle heard that, he bade his folk make off. "Twice have I
fared to meet Grettir, but no third time will I go, if I am nought the
wiser first; and now belike they may sit in Drangey as for me; but
in my mind it is, that Grettir will abide here but a lesser time than
heretofore."

With that they went home, and men deemed this journey of theirs worser
than the first, and Grettir abode that winter in Drangey, nor in that
season did he and Thorbiorn meet again.

In those days died Skapti Thorodson the Lawman, and great scathe
was that to Grettir, for he had promised to busy himself about his
acquittal as soon as he had been twenty winters in outlawry, and this
year, of which the tale was told e'en now, was the nineteenth year
thereof.

In the spring died Snorri the Godi, and many matters befell in that
season that come not into this story.




CHAP. LXXIX.

<i>Of the Talk at the Thing about Grettir's Outlawry</i>.


That summer, at the Althing, the kin of Grettir spake many things
concerning his outlawry, and some deemed he had outworn the years
thereof, if he had come at all into the twentieth year; but they who
had blood-suits against him would not have it so, and said, that he
had done many an outlaw's deed since he was first outlawed, and deemed
his time ought to last longer therefor.

At that time was a new lawman made, Stein, the son of Thorgest, the
son of Stein the Far-sailing, the son of Thorir Autumn-mirk; the
mother of Stein was Arnora, the daughter of Thord the Yeller; and
Stein was a wise man.

Now was he prayed for the word of decision; and he bade them search
and see whether this were the twentieth summer since Grettir was made
an outlaw, and thus it seemed to be.

But then stood forth Thorir of Garth, and brought all into dispute
again, for he found that Grettir had been one winter out here a
sackless man, amidst the times of his outlawry, and then nineteen were
the winters of his outlawry found to be. Then said the lawman that no
one should be longer in outlawry than twenty winters in all, though he
had done outlaw's deeds in that time.

"But before that, I declare no man sackless."

Now because of this was the acquittal delayed for this time, but
it was thought a sure thing that he would be made sackless the next
summer. But that misliked the Skagafirthers exceeding ill, if Grettir
were to come out of his outlawry, and they bade Thorbiorn Angle do
one of two things, either give back the island or slay Grettir; but
he deemed well that he had a work on his hands, for he saw no rede for
the winning of Grettir, and yet was he fain to hold the island; and
so all manner of craft he sought for the overcoming of Grettir, if he
might prevail either by guile or hardihood, or in any wise soever.




CHAP. LXXX.

<i>Thorbiorn Angle goes with his Foster-mother out to Drangey</i>.


Thorbiorn Angle had a foster-mother, Thurid by name, exceeding old,
and meet for little, as folk deemed, very cunning she had been in
many and great matters of lore, when she was young, and men were yet
heathen; but men thought of her as of one, who had lost all that. But
now, though Christ's law were established in the land, yet abode still
many sparks of heathendom. It had been law in the land, that men were
not forbidden to sacrifice secretly, or deal with other lore of eld,
but it was lesser outlawry if such doings oozed out. Now in such wise
it fared with many, that <i>hand for wont did yearn</i>, and things
grew handiest by time that had been learned in youth.

So now, whenas Thorbiorn Angle was empty of all plots, he sought for
help there, whereas most folk deemed it most unlike that help was--at
the hands of his foster-mother, in sooth, and asked, what counsel was
in her therefor.

She answered, "Now belike matters have come to this, even as the saw
says--<i>To the goat-house for wool</i>: but what could I do less than
this, to think myself before folk of the country-side, but be a man
of nought, whenso anything came to be tried? nor see I how I may fare
worse than thou, though I may scarce rise from my bed. But if thou art
to have my rede, then shall I have my will as to how and what things
are done."

He gave his assent thereto, and said that she had long been of
wholesome counsel to him.

Now the time wore on to Twainmonth of summer; and one fair-weather day
the carline spake to Angle,

"Now is the weather calm and bright, and I will now that thou fare
to Drangey and pick a quarrel with Grettir; I shall go with thee, and
watch how heedful he may be of his words; and if I see them, I shall
have some sure token as to how far they are befriended of fortune, and
then shall I speak over them such words as seem good to me."

Angle answered, "Loth am I to be faring to Drangey, for ever am I of
worser mind when I depart thence than when I come thereto."

Then said the carline, "Nought will I do for thee if thou sufferest me
to rule in no wise."

"Nay, so shall it not be, foster-mother," said he; "but so much have
I said, as that I would so come thither the third time that somewhat
should be made of the matter betwixt us."

"The chance of that must be taken," said the carline "and many a heavy
labour must thou have, or ever Grettir be laid to earth; and oft will
it be doubtful to thee what fortune thine shall be, and heavy troubles
wilt thou get therefrom when that is done; yet art thou so bounden
here-under, that to somewhat must thou make up thy mind."

Thereafter Thorbiorn Angle let put forth a ten-oared boat, and he went
thereon with eleven men, and the carline was in their company.

So they fell to rowing as the weather went, out to Drangey; and when
the brothers saw that, they stood forth at the ladders, and they began
to talk the matter over yet once more; and Thorbiorn said, that he was
come yet again, to talk anew of their leaving the island, and that
he would deal lightly with his loss of money and Grettir's dwelling
there, if so be they might part without harm. But Grettir said that he
had no words to make atwixt and atween of his going thence.

"Oft have I so said," says he, "and no need there is for thee to talk
to me thereon; ye must even do as ye will, but here will I abide,
whatso may come to hand."

Now Thorbiorn deemed, that this time also his errand was come to
nought, and he said,

"Yea, I deemed I knew with what men of hell I had to do; and most like
it is that a day or two will pass away ere I come hither again."

"I account that not in the number of my griefs, though thou never
comest back," said Grettir.

Now the carline lay in the stern, with clothes heaped up about and
over her, and with that she moved, and said,

"Brave will these men be, and luckless withal; far hast thou outdone
them in manliness; thou biddest them choice of many goodly things,
but they say nay to all, and few things lead surer to ill, than not to
know how to take good. Now this I cast over thee, Grettir, that thou
be left of all health, wealth, and good-hap, all good heed and wisdom:
yea, and that the more, the longer thou livest; good hope I have,
Grettir, that thy days of gladness shall be fewer here in time to come
than in the time gone by."

Now when Grettir heard these words, he was astonied withal, and said,

"What fiend is there in the boat with them?" Illugi answers, "I deem
that it will be the carline, Thorbiorn's foster-mother."

"Curses on the witch-wight!" says Grettir, "nought worse could have
been looked for; at no words have I shuddered like as I shuddered
at those words she spake; and well I wot that from her, and her foul
cunning, some evil will be brought on us; yet shall she have some
token to mind her that she has sought us here."

Therewithal he caught up a marvellous great stone, and cast it down on
to the boat, and it smote that clothes-heap; and a longer stone-throw
was that than Thorbiorn deemed any man might make; but therewithal a
great shriek arose, for the stone had smitten the carline's thigh, and
broken it.

Then said Illugi, "I would thou hadst not done that!"

"Blame me not therefor," said Grettir, "I fear me the stroke has been
too little, for certes not overmuch weregild were paid for the twain
of us, though the price should be one carline's life."

"Must she alone be paid?" said Illugi, "little enough then will be
laid down for us twain."

Now Thorbiorn got him gone homeward, with no greetings at parting. But
he said to the carline,

"Now have matters gone as I thought, that a journey of little glory
thou shouldst make to the island; thou hast got maimed, and honour
is no nigher to us than before, yea, we must have bootless shame on
bootless shame."

She answered, "This will be the springing of ill-hap to them; and
I deem that henceforth they are on the wane; neither do I fear if I
live, but that I shall have revenge for this deed they have thus done
me."

"Stiff is thine heart, meseems, foster-mother," said Thorbiorn. With
that they came home, but the carline was laid in her bed, and abode
there nigh a month; by then was the hurt thigh-bone grown together
again, and she began to be afoot once more.

Great laughter men made at that journey of Thorbiorn and the carline,
and deemed he had been often enow out-played in his dealings with
Grettir: first, at the Spring-Thing in the peace handselling; next,
when Haering was lost, and now again, this third time, when the
carline's thigh-bone was broken, and no stroke had been played against
these from his part. But great shame and grief had Thorbiorn Angle
from all these words.




CHAP. LXXXI.

<i>Of the Carline's evil Gift to Grettir</i>.


Now wore away the time of autumn till it wanted but three weeks of
winter; then the carline bade bear her to the sea-shore. Thorbiorn
asked what she would there.

"Little is my errand, yet maybe," she says, "it is a foreboding of
greater tidings."

Now was it done as she bade, and when she came down to the strand,
she went limping along by the sea, as if she were led thereto, unto
a place where lay before her an uprooted tree, as big as a man might
bear on his shoulder. She looked at the tree and bade them turn it
over before her eyes, and on one side it was as if singed and rubbed;
so there whereas it was rubbed she let cut a little flat space; and
then she took her knife and cut runes on the root, and made them
red with her blood, and sang witch-words over them; then she went
backwards and widdershins round about the tree, and cast over it many
a strong spell; thereafter she let thrust the tree forth into the sea,
and spake in such wise over it, that it should drive out to Drangey,
and that Grettir should have all hurt therefrom that might be.
Thereafter she went back home to Woodwick; and Thorbiorn said that he
knew not if that would come to aught; but the carline answered that he
should wot better anon.

Now the wind blew landward up the firth, yet the carline's root went
in the teeth of the wind, and belike it sailed swifter than might have
been looked for of it.

Grettir abode in Drangey with his fellows as is aforesaid, and in
good case they were; but the day after the carline had wrought her
witch-craft on the tree the brothers went down below the cliffs
searching for firewood, so when they came to the west of the island,
there they found that tree drifted ashore.

Then said Illugi, "A big log of firewood, kinsman, let us bear it
home."

Grettir kicked it with his foot and said, "An evil tree from evil
sent; other firewood than this shall we have."

Therewithal he cast it out into the sea, and bade Illugi beware of
bearing it home, "For it is sent us for our ill-hap." And therewith
they went unto their abode, and said nought about it to the thrall.
But the next day they found the tree again, and it was nigher to the
ladders than heretofore; Grettir drave it out to sea, and said that it
should never be borne home.

Now the days wore on into summer, and a gale came on with much wet,
and the brothers were loth to be abroad, and bade Noise go search for
firewood.

He took it ill, and said he was ill served in that he had to drudge
and labour abroad in all the foulest weather; but withal he went down
to the beach before the ladders and found the carline's tree there,
and deemed things had gone well because of it; so he took it up and
bore it to the hut, and cast it down thereby with a mighty thump.

Grettir heard it and said, "Noise has got something, so I shall go out
and see what it is."

Therewithal he took up a wood-axe, and went out, and straightway Noise
said,

"Split it up in as good wise as I have brought it home, then."

Grettir grew short of temper with the thrall, and smote the axe with
both hands at the log, nor heeded what tree it was; but as soon as
ever the axe touched the wood, it turned flatlings and glanced off
therefrom into Grettir's right leg above the knee, in such wise that
it stood in the bone, and a great wound was that. Then he looked at
the tree and said,

"Now has evil heart prevailed, nor will this hap go alone, since that
same tree has now come back to us that I have cast out to sea on these
two days. But for thee, Noise, two slips hast thou had, first, when
thou must needs let the fire be slaked, and now this bearing home of
that tree of ill-hap; but if a third thou hast, thy bane will it be,
and the bane of us all."

With that came Illugi and bound up Grettir's hurt, and it bled little,
and Grettir slept well that night; and so three nights slipped by in
such wise that no pain came of the wound, and when they loosed the
swathings, the lips of the wound were come together so that it was
well-nigh grown over again. Then said Illugi,

"Belike thou wilt have no long hurt of this wound."

"Well were it then," said Grettir, "but marvellously has this
befallen, whatso may come of it; and my mind misgives me of the way
things will take."




CHAP. LXXXII.

<i>Grettir sings of his Great Deeds</i>.


Now they lay them down that evening, but at midnight Grettir began to
tumble about exceedingly. Illugi asked why he was so unquiet. Grettir
said that his leg had taken to paining him, "And methinks it is like
that some change of hue there be therein."

Then they kindled a light, and when the swathings were undone, the leg
showed all swollen and coal-blue, and the wound had broken open,
and was far more evil of aspect than at first; much pain there went
therewith so that he might not abide at rest in any wise, and never
came sleep on his eyes.

Then spake Grettir, "Let us make up our minds to it, that this
sickness which I have gotten is not done for nought, for it is of
sorcery, and the carline is minded to avenge her of that stone."

Illugi said, "Yea, I told thee that thou wouldst get no good from that
hag."

"<i>All will come to one end</i>," said Grettir, and sang this song
withal--

  "Doubtful played the foredoomed fate
  Round the sword in that debate,
  When the bearserks' outlawed crew,
  In the days of yore I slew.
  Screamed the worm of clashing lands
  When Hiarandi dropped his hands
  Biorn and Gunnar cast away,
  Hope of dwelling in the day.

  "Home again then travelled I;
  The broad-boarded ship must lie,
  Under Door-holm, as I went,
  Still with weapon play content,
  Through the land; and there the thane
  Called me to the iron rain,
  Bade me make the spear-storm rise,
  Torfi Vebrandson the wise.

  "To such plight the Skald was brought,
  Wounder of the walls of thought,
  Howsoever many men
  Stood, all armed, about us then,
  That his hand that knew the oar,
  Grip of sword might touch no more;
  Yet to me the wound who gave
  Did he give a horse to have.

  "Thorbiorn Arnor's son, men said,
  Of no great deed was afraid,
  Folk spake of him far and wide;
  He forbade me to abide
  Longer on the lovely earth;
  Yet his heart was little worth,
  Not more safe alone was I,
  Than when armed he drew anigh.

  "From the sword's edge and the spears
  From my many waylayers,
  While might was, and my good day,
  Often did I snatch away;
  Now a hag, whose life outworn
  Wicked craft and ill hath borne,
  Meet for death lives long enow,
  Grettir's might to overthrow."[18]

[Footnote 18: This song is obviously incomplete, and the second and
third stanzas speak of matters that do not come into this story.]

"Now must we take good heed to ourselves," said Grettir, "for
Thorbiorn Angle must be minded that this hap shall not go alone; and
I will, Noise, that thou watch the ladders every day from this time
forth, but pull them up in the evening, and see thou do it well and
truly, even as though much lay thereon, but if thou bewrayest us,
short will be thy road to ill."

So Noise promised great things concerning this. Now the weather grew
harder, and a north-east wind came on with great cold: every night
Grettir asked if the ladders were drawn up.

Then said Noise, "Yea, certainly! men are above all things to be
looked for now. Can any man have such a mind to take thy life, that
he will do so much as to slay himself therefor? for this gale is far
other than fair; lo now, methinks thy so great bravery and hardihood
has come utterly to an end, if thou must needs think that all things
soever will be thy bane."

"Worse wilt thou bear thyself than either of us," said Grettir, "when
the need is on us; but now go watch the ladders, whatsoever will thou
hast thereto."

So every morning they drave him out, and ill he bore it.

But Grettir's hurt waxed in such wise that all the leg swelled up, and
the thigh began to gather matter both above and below, and the lips of
the wound were all turned out, so that Grettir's death was looked for.

Illugi sat over him night and day, and took heed to nought else, and
by then it was the second week since Grettir hurt himself.




CHAP. LXXXIII.

<i>How Thorbiorn Angle gathered Force and set Sail for Drangey</i>.


Thorbiorn Angle sat this while at home at Woodwick, and was
ill-content in that he might not win Grettir; but when a certain space
had passed since the carline had put the sorcery into the root, she
comes to talk with Thorbiorn, and asks if he were not minded to go see
Grettir. He answers, that to nought was his mind so made up as that he
would not go; "perchance thou wilt go meet him, foster-mother," says
Thorbiorn.

"Nay, I shall not go meet-him," says the carline; "but I have sent my
greeting to him, and some hope I have that it has come home to him;
and good it seems to me that thou go speedily to meet him, or else
shalt thou never have such good hap as to overcome him."

Thorbiorn answered: "So many shameful journeys have I made thither,
that there I go not ever again; moreover that alone is full enough
to stay me, that such foul weather it is, that it is safe to go
nowhither, whatso the need may be."

She answered: "Ill counselled thou art, not to see how to overcome
herein. Now yet once again will I lay down a rede for this; go thou
first and get thee strength of men, and ride to Hof to Halldor thy
brother-in-law, and take counsel of him. But if I may rule in some way
how Grettir's health goes, how shall it be said that it is past hope
that I may also deal with the gale that has been veering about this
while?"

Thorbiorn deemed it might well be that the carline saw further than he
had thought she might, and straightway sent up into the country-side
for men; but speedy answer there came that none of those who had given
up their shares would do aught to ease his task, and they said that
Thorbiorn should have to himself both the owning of the island and the
onset on Grettir. But Tongue-Stein gave him two of his followers, and
Hialti, his brother, sent him three men, and Eric of God-dales one,
and from his own homestead he had six. So the twelve of them ride from
Woodwick out to Hof. Halldor bade them abide there, and asked their
errand; then Thorbiorn told it as clearly as might be. Halldor asked
whose rede this might be, and Thorbiorn said that his foster-mother
urged him much thereto.

"That will bear no good," said Halldor, "because she is cunning in
sorcery, and such-like things are now forbidden."

"I may not look closely into all these matters before-hand," said
Thorbiorn, "but in somewise or other shall this thing have an end if I
may have my will. Now, how shall I go about it, so that I may come to
the island?"

"Meseems," says Halldor, "that thou trustest in somewhat, though I wot
not how good that may be. But now if thou wilt go forward with it, go
thou out to Meadness in the Fleets to Biorn my friend; a good keel
he has, so tell him of my word, that I would he should lend you the
craft, and thence ye may sail out to Drangey. But the end of your
journey I see not, if Grettir is sound and hale: yea, and be thou sure
that if ye win him not in manly wise, he leaves enough of folk behind
to take up the blood-suit after him. And slay not Illugi if ye may do
otherwise. But methinks I see that all is not according to Christ's
law in these redes."

Then Halldor gave them six men withal for their journey; one was
called Karr, another Thorleif, and a third Brand, but the rest are not
named.

So they fared thence, eighteen in company, out to the Fleets, and came
to Meadness and gave Biorn Halldor's message, he said that it was but
due for Halldor's sake, but that he owed nought to Thorbiorn; withal
it seemed to him that they went on a mad journey, and he let them from
it all he might.

They said they might not turn back, and so went down to the sea, and
put forth the craft, and all its gear was in the boat-stand hard by;
so they made them ready for sailing, and foul enow the weather seemed
to all who stood on land. But they hoisted sail, and the craft shot
swiftly far into the firth, but when they came out into the main part
thereof into deep water, the wind abated in such wise that they deemed
it blew none too hard.

So in the evening at dusk they came to Drangey.




CHAP. LXXXIV.

<i>The Slaying of Grettir Asmundson</i>.


Now it is to be told, that Grettir was so sick, that he might not
stand on his feet, but Illugi sat beside him, and Noise was to keep
watch and ward; and many words he had against that, and said that they
would still think that life was falling from them, though nought
had happed to bring it about; so he went out from their abode right
unwillingly, and when he came to the ladders he spake to himself and
said that now he would not draw them up; withal he grew exceeding
sleepy, and lay down and slept all day long, and right on till
Thorbiorn came to the island.

So now they see that the ladders are not drawn up; then spake
Thorbiorn, "Now are things changed from what the wont was, in that
there are none afoot, and their ladder stands in its place withal;
maybe more things will betide in this our journey than we had thought
of in the beginning: but now let us hasten to the hut, and let no man
lack courage; for, wot this well, that if these men are hale, each one
of us must needs do his best."

Then they went up on to the island, and looked round about, and saw
where a man lay a little space off the landing-place, and snored hard
and fast. Therewith Thorbiorn knew Noise, and went up to him and drave
the hilt of his sword against the ear of him, and bade him, "Wake up,
beast! certes in evil stead is he who trusts his life to thy faith and
troth."

Noise looked up thereat and said, "Ah! now are they minded to go
on according to their wont; do ye, may-happen, think my freedom too
great, though I lie out here in the cold?"

"Art thou witless," said Angle, "that thou seest not that thy foes are
come upon thee, and will slay you all?"

Then Noise answered nought, but yelled out all he might, when he knew
the men who they were.

"Do one thing or other," says Angle, "either hold thy peace forthwith,
and tell us of your abode, or else be slain of us."

Thereat was Noise as silent as if he had been thrust under water; but
Thorbiorn said, "Are they at their hut, those brothers? Why are they
not afoot?"

"Scarce might that be," said Noise, "for Grettir is sick and come nigh
to his death, and Illugi sits over him."

Then Angle asked how it was with their health, and what things had
befallen. So Noise told him in what wise Grettir's hurt had come
about.

Then Angle laughed and said, "Yea, sooth is the old saw, <i>Old
friends are the last to sever</i>; and this withal, <i>Ill if a thrall
is thine only friend</i>, whereso thou art, Noise; for shamefully hast
thou bewrayed thy master, albeit he was nought good."

Then many laid evil things to his charge for his ill faith, and beat
him till he was well-nigh past booting for, and let him lie there; but
they went up to the hut and smote mightily on the door.

"Pied-belly[19] is knocking hard at the door, brother," says Illugi.

[Footnote 19: 'Pied-belly,' the name of the tame ram told of before.]

"Yea, yea, hard, and over hard," says Grettir; and therewithal the
door brake asunder.

Then sprang Illugi to his weapons and guarded the door, in such wise
that there was no getting in for them. Long time they set on him
there, and could bring nought against him save spear-thrusts, and
still Illugi smote all the spear-heads from the shafts. But when they
saw that they might thus bring nought to pass, they leapt up on to the
roof of the hut, and tore off the thatch; then Grettir got to his feet
and caught up a spear, and thrust out betwixt the rafters; but before
that stroke was Karr, a home-man of Halldor of Hof, and forthwithal it
pierced him through.

Then spoke Angle, and bade men fare warily and guard themselves well,
"for we may prevail against them if we follow wary redes."

So they tore away the thatch from the ends of the ridge-beam, and bore
on the beam till it brake asunder.

Now Grettir might not rise from his knee, but he caught up the
short-sword, Karr's-loom, and even therewith down leapt those men in
betwixt the walls, and a hard fray befell betwixt them. Grettir
smote with the short-sword at Vikar, one of the followers of Hialti
Thordson, and caught him on the left shoulder, even as he leapt in
betwixt the walls, and cleft him athwart the shoulder down unto the
right side, so that the man fell asunder, and the body so smitten
atwain tumbled over on to Grettir, and for that cause he might not
heave aloft the short-sword as speedily as he would, and therewith
Thorbiorn Angle thrust him betwixt the shoulders, and great was that
wound he gave.

Then cried Grettir, "<i>Bare is the back of the brotherless</i>." And
Illugi threw his shield over Grettir, and warded him in so stout a
wise that all men praised his defence.

Then said Grettir to Angle, "Who then showed thee the way here to the
island?"

Said Angle, "The Lord Christ showed it us."

"Nay," said Grettir, "but I guess that the accursed hag, thy
foster-mother, showed it thee, for in her redes must thou needs have
trusted."

"All shall be one to thee now," said Angle, "in whomsoever I have put
my trust."

Then they set on them fiercely, and Illugi made defence for both in
most manly wise; but Grettir was utterly unmeet for fight, both for
his wounds' sake and for his sickness. So Angle bade bear down Illugi
with shields, "For never have I met his like, amongst men of such
age."

Now thus they did, besetting him with beams and weapons till he might
ward himself no longer; and then they laid hands on him, and so held
him fast. But he had given some wound or other to the more part of
those who had been at the onset, and had slain outright three of
Angle's fellows.

Thereafter they went up to Grettir, but he was fallen forward on to
his face, and no defence there was of him, for that he was already
come to death's door by reason of the hurt in his leg, for all the
thigh was one sore, even up to the small guts; but there they gave him
many a wound, yet little or nought he bled.

So when they thought he was dead, Angle laid hold of the short-sword,
and said that he had carried it long enough; but Grettir's fingers
yet kept fast hold of the grip thereof, nor could the short-sword be
loosened; many went up and tried at it, but could get nothing done
therewith; eight of them were about it before the end, but none the
more might bring it to pass.

Then said Angle, "Why should we spare this wood-man here? lay his hand
on the block."

So when that was done they smote off his hand at the wrist, and the
fingers straightened, and were loosed from the handle. Then Angle took
the short-sword in both hands and smote at Grettir's head, and a right
great stroke that was, so that the short-sword might not abide it, and
a shard was broken from the midst of the edge thereof; and when men
saw that, they asked why he must needs spoil a fair thing in such
wise.

But Angle answered, "More easy is it to know that weapon now if it
should be asked for."

They said it needed not such a deed since the man was dead already.

"Ah! but yet more shall be done," said Angle, and hewed therewith
twice or thrice at Grettir's neck, or ever the head came off; and then
he spake,

"Now know I for sure that Grettir is dead."

In such wise Grettir lost his life, the bravest man of all who have
dwelt in Iceland; he lacked but one winter of forty-five years whenas
he was slain; but he was fourteen winters old when he slew Skeggi, his
first man-slaying; and from thenceforth all things turned to his fame,
till the time when he dealt with Glam, the Thrall; and in those days
was he of twenty winters-; but when he fell into outlawry, he was
twenty-five years old; but in outlawry was he nigh nineteen winters,
and full oft was he the while in great trials of men; and such as his
life was, and his needs, he held well to his faith and troth, and most
haps did he foresee, though he might do nought to meet them.




CHAP. LXXXV.

<i>How Thorbiorn Angle claimed Grettir's Head-money</i>.


"A great champion have we laid to earth here," said Thorbiorn; "now
shall we bring the head aland with us, for I will not lose the money
which has been laid thereon; nor may they then feign that they know
not if I have slain Grettir."

They bade him do his will, but had few words to say hereon, for to all
the deed seemed a deed of little prowess.

Then Angle fell to speaking with Illugi,

"Great scathe it is of such a brave man as thou art, that thou hast
fallen to such folly, as to betake thee to ill deeds with this outlaw
here, and must needs lie slain and unatoned therefore."

Illugi answered, "Then first when the Althing is over this summer,
wilt thou know who are outlaws; but neither thou nor the carline, thy
foster-mother, will judge in this matter, because that your sorcery
and craft of old days have slain Grettir, though thou didst, indeed,
bear steel against him, as he lay at death's door, and wrought that so
great coward's deed there, over and above thy sorcery."

Then said Angle, "In manly wise speakest thou, but not thus will it
be; and I will show thee that I think great scathe in thy death, for
thy life will I give thee if thou wilt swear an oath for us here, to
avenge thyself on none of those who have been in this journey."

Illugi said, "That might I have deemed a thing to talk about, if
Grettir had been suffered to defend himself, and ye had won him with
manliness and hardihood; but now nowise is it to be thought, that I
will do so much for the keeping of my life, as to become base, even as
thou art: and here I tell thee, once for all, that no one of men shall
be of less gain to thee than I, if I live; for long will it be or ever
I forget how ye have prevailed against Grettir.--Yea, much rather do I
choose to die."

Then Thorbiorn Angle held talk with his fellows, whether they should
let Illugi live or not; they said that, whereas he had ruled the
journey, so should he rule the deeds; so Angle said that he knew not
how to have that man hanging over his head, who would neither give
troth, nor promise aught.

But when Illugi knew that they were fully minded to slay him, he
laughed, and spake thus,

"Yea, now have your counsels sped, even as my heart would."

So at the dawning of the day they brought him to the eastern end of
the island, and there slaughtered him; but all men praised his great
heart, and deemed him unlike to any of his age.

They laid both the brothers in cairn on the island there; and
thereafter took Grettir's head, and bore it away with them, and whatso
goods there were in weapons or clothes; but the good short-sword Angle
would not put into the things to be shared, and he bare it himself
long afterwards. Noise they took with them, and he bore himself as ill
as might be.

At nightfall the gale abated, and they rowed aland in the morning.
Angle took land at the handiest place, and sent the craft out to
Biorn; but by then they were come hard by Oyce-land, Noise began to
bear himself so ill, that they were loth to fare any longer with him,
so there they slew him, and long and loud he greeted or ever he was
cut down.

Thorbiorn Angle went home to Woodwick, and deemed he had done in manly
wise in this journey; but Grettir's head they laid in salt in the
out-bower at Woodwick, which was called therefrom Grettir's-bower; and
there it lay the winter long. But Angle was exceeding ill thought
of for this work of his, as soon as folk knew that Grettir had been
overcome by sorcery.

Thorbiorn Angle sat quiet till past Yule; then he rode to meet Thorir
of Garth, and told him of these slayings; and this withal, that he
deemed that money his due which had been put on Grettir's head.
Thorir said that he might not hide that he had brought about Grettir's
outlawry,

"Yea, and oft have I dealt hardly with him, yet so much for the taking
of his life I would not have done, as to make me a misdoer, a man of
evil craft, even as thou hast done; and the less shall I lay down that
money for thee, in that I deem thee surely to be a man of forfeit life
because of thy sorcery and wizard-craft."

Thorbiorn Angle answers, "Meseems thou art urged hereto more by
closefistedness and a poor mind, than by any heed of how Grettir was
won."

Thorir said that a short way they might make of it, in that they
should abide the Althing, and take whatso the Lawman might deem
most rightful: and in such wise they parted that there was no little
ill-will betwixt Thorir and Thorbiorn Angle.




CHAP. LXXXVI.

<i>How Thorbiorn Angle brought Grettir's Head to Biarg</i>.


The kin of Grettir and Illugi were exceeding ill-content when they
heard of these slayings, and they so looked on matters as deeming that
Angle had wrought a shameful deed in slaying a man at death's door;
and that, besides that, he had become guilty of sorcery. They sought
the counsel of the wisest men, and everywhere was Angle's work ill
spoken of. As for him, he rode to Midfirth, when it lacked four weeks
of summer; and when his ways were heard of, Asdis gathered men to
her, and there came many of her friends: Gamli and Glum, her
brothers-in-law, and their sons, Skeggi, who was called the
Short-handed, and Uspak, who is aforesaid. Asdis was so well
befriended, that all the Midfirthers came to aid her; yea, even those
who were aforetime foes to Grettir; and the first man there was Thorod
Drapa-Stump, and the more part of the Ramfirthers.

Now Angle came to Biarg with twenty men, and had Grettir's head with
him; but not all those had come yet who had promised aid to Asdis;
so Angle and his folk went into the chamber with the head, and set it
down on the floor; the goodwife was there in the chamber, and many men
with her; nor did it come to greetings on either side; but Angle sang
this stave--

  "A greedy head I bring with me
  Up from the borders of the sea;
  Now may the needle-pliers weep,
  The red-haired outlaw lies asleep;
  Gold-bearer, cast adown thine eyes,
  And see how on the pavement lies,
  The peace-destroying head brought low,
  That but for salt had gone ere now."

The goodwife sat silent when he gave forth the stave, and thereafter
she sang--

  "O thou poor wretch, as sheep that flee
  To treacherous ice when wolves they see,
  So in the waves would ye have drowned
  Your shame and fear, had ye but found
  That steel-god hale upon the isle:
  Now heavy shame, woe worth the while!
  Hangs over the north country-side,
  Nor I my loathing care to hide."

Then many said that it was nought wonderful, though she had brave
sons, so brave as she herself was, amid such grief of heart as was
brought on her.

Uspak was without, and held talk with such of Angle's folk as had
not gone in, and asked concerning the slayings; and all men praised
Illugi's defence; and they told withal how fast Grettir had held the
short-sword after he was dead, and marvellous that seemed to men.

Amidst these things were seen many men riding from the west, and
thither were coming many friends of the goodwife, with Gamli and
Skeggi west from Meals.

Now Angle had been minded to take out execution after Illugi, for he
and his men claimed all his goods; but when that crowd of men came up,
Angle saw that he might do nought therein, but Gamli and Uspak were of
the eagerest, and were fain to set on Angle; but those who were wisest
bade them take the rede of Thorwald their kinsman, and the other chief
men, and said that worse would be deemed of Angle's case the more wise
men sat in judgment over it; then such truce there was that Angle rode
away, having Grettir's head with him, because he was minded to bear it
to the Althing.

So he rode home, and thought matters looked heavy enough, because
well-nigh all the chief men of the land were either akin to Grettir
and Illugi, or tied to them and theirs by marriage: that summer,
moreover, Skeggi the Short-handed took to wife the daughter of Thorod
Drapa-Stump, and therewithal Thorod joined Grettir's kin in these
matters.




CHAP. LXXXVII.

<i>Affairs at the Althing</i>.


Now men rode to the Althing, and Angle's helpers were fewer than he
had looked for, because that his case was spoken ill of far and wide.

Then asked Halldor whether they were to carry Grettir's head with them
to the Althing.

Angle said that he would bear it with him.

"Ill-counselled is that," said Halldor; "for many enough will thy foes
be, though thou doest nought to jog the memories of folk, or wake up
their grief."

By then were they come on their way, and were minded to ride south
over the Sand; so Angle let take the head, and bury it in a hillock of
sand, which is called Grettir's Hillock.

Thronged was the Althing, and Angle put forth his case, and praised
his own deeds mightily, in that he had slain the greatest outlaw in
all the land, and claimed the money as his, which had been put on
Grettir's head. But Thorir had the same answer for him as was told
afore.

Then was the Lawman prayed for a decision, and he said that he would
fain hear if any charges came against this, whereby Angle should
forfeit his blood-money, or else he said he must have whatsoever had
been put on Grettir's head.

Then Thorvald Asgeirson called on Skeggi the Short-handed to put forth
his case, and he summoned Thorbiorn Angle with a first summons for the
witch-craft and sorcery, whereby Grettir must have got his bane, and
then with another summons withal, for that they had borne weapons
against a half-dead man, and hereon he claimed an award of outlawry.

Now folk drew much together on this side and on that, but few they
were that gave aid to Thorbiorn; and things turned out otherwise
than he had looked for, because Thorvald, and Isleif, his son-in-law,
deemed it a deed worthy of death to bring men to their end by evil
sorcery; but through the words of wise men these cases had such end,
that Thorbiorn should sail away that same summer, and never come
back to Iceland while any such were alive, as had the blood-suit for
Grettir and Illugi.

And then, moreover, was it made law that all workers of olden craft
should be made outlaws.

So when Angle saw what his lot would be, he gat him gone from the
Thing, because it might well hap that Grettir's kin would set on him;
nor did he get aught of the fee that was put on Grettir's head, for
that Stein the Lawman would not that it should be paid for a deed
of shame. None of those men of Thorbiorn's company who had fallen in
Drangey were atoned, for they were to be made equal to the slaying of
Illugi, but their kin were exceeding ill content therewith.

So men rode home from the Thing, and all blood-suits that men had
against Grettir fell away.

Skeggi, the son of Gamli, who was son-in-law of Thorod Drapa-Stump,
and sister's son of Grettir, went north to Skagafirth at the instance
of Thorvald Asgeirson, and Isleif his son-in-law, who was afterwards
Bishop of Skalholt, and by the consent of all the people got to him a
keel, and went to Drangey to seek the corpses of the brothers, Grettir
and Illugi; and he brought them back to Reeks, in Reek-strand, and
buried them there at the church; and it is for a token that Grettir
lies there, that in the days of the Sturlungs, when the church of the
Reeks was moved, Grettir's bones were dug up, nor were they deemed
so wondrous great, great enough though they were. The bones of Illugi
were buried afterwards north of the church, but Grettir's head at home
in the church at Biarg.

Goodwife Asdis abode at home at Biarg, and so well beloved she was,
that no trouble was ever brought against her, no, not even while
Grettir was in outlawry.

Skeggi the Short-handed took the household at Biarg after Asdis, and
a mighty man he was; his son was Gamli, the father of Skeggi of
Scarf-stead, and Asdis the mother of Odd the Monk. Many men are come
from him.




CHAP. LXXXVIII.

<i>Thorbiorn Angle goes to Norway, and thence to Micklegarth</i>.


Thornbiorn Angle took ship at Goose-ere, with whatso of his goods he
might take with him; but Hialti his brother took to him his lands,
and Angle gave him Drangey withal. Hialti became a great chief in
aftertimes, but he has nought more to do with this tale.

So Angle fared out to Norway; he yet made much of himself, for he
deemed he had wrought a great deed in the slaying of Grettir, and so
thought many others, who knew not how all had come to pass, for many
knew how renowned a man Grettir had been; withal Angle told just so
much of their dealings together as might do him honour, and let such
of the tale lie quiet as was of lesser glory.

Now this tale came in the autumn-tide east to Tunsberg, and when
Thorstein Dromund heard of the slayings he grew all silent, because it
was told him that Angle was a mighty man and a hardy; and he called
to mind the words which he had spoken when he and Grettir talked
together, long time agone, concerning the fashion of their arms.

So Thorstein put out spies on Angle's goings; they were both in
Norway through the winter, but Thorbiorn was in the north-country, and
Thorstein in Tunsberg, nor had either seen other; yet was Angle ware
that Grettir had a brother in Norway, and thought it hard to keep
guard of himself in an unknown land, wherefore he sought counsel as to
where he should betake himself. Now in those days many Northmen went
out to Micklegarth, and took war-pay there; so Thorbiorn deemed it
would be good to go thither and get to him thereby both fee and fame,
nor to abide in the North-lands because of the kin of Grettir. So he
made ready to go from Norway, and get him gone from out the land, and
made no stay till he came to Micklegarth, and there took war-hire.




CHAP. LXXXIX.

<i>How the Short-Sword was the easier known when sought for by reason
of the notch in the blade</i>.


Thorstein Dromund was a mighty man, and of the greatest account; and
now he heard that Thorbiorn Angle had got him gone from the land out
to Micklegarth; speedy were his doings thereon, he gave over his lands
into his kinsmen's hands, and betook himself to journeying and to
search for Angle; and ever he followed after whereas Angle had gone
afore, nor was Angle ware of his goings.

So Thorstein Dromund came out to Micklegarth a little after Angle, and
was fain above all things to slay him, but neither knew the other. Now
had they will to be taken into the company of the Varangians, and
the matter went well as soon as the Varangians knew that they were
Northmen; and in those days was Michael Katalak king over Micklegarth.

Thorstein Dromund watched for Angle, if in some wise he might know
him, but won not the game because of the many people there; and ever
would he lie awake, ill-content with his lot, and thinking how great
was his loss.

Now hereupon it befell that the Varangians were to go on certain
warfare, and free the land from harrying; and their manner and law it
was before they went from home to hold a weapon-show, and so it was
now done; and when the weapon-show was established, then were all
Varangians to come there, and those withal who were minded to fall
into their company, and they were to show forth their weapons.

Thither came both Thorstein and Angle; but Thorbiorn Angle showed
forth his weapons first; and he had the short-sword, Grettir's-loom;
but when he showed it many praised it and said that it was an
exceeding good weapon, but that it was a great blemish, that notch in
the edge thereof; and asked him withal what had brought that to pass.

Angle said it was a thing worthy to be told of, "For this is the next
thing to be said," says he, "that out in Iceland I slew that champion
who was called Grettir the Strong, and who was the greatest warrior
and the stoutest-hearted of all men of that land, for him could no man
vanquish till I came forth for that end; and whereas I had the good
hap to win him, I took his life; though indeed he had my strength many
times over; then I drave this short-sword into his head, and thereby
was a shard broken from out its edge."

So those who stood nigh said, that he must have been hard of head
then, and each showed the short-sword to the other; but hereby
Thorstein deemed he knew now who this man was, and he prayed withal
to see the short-sword even as the others; then Angle gave it up with
good will, for all were praising his bravery and that daring onset,
and even in such wise did he think this one would do; and in no wise
did he misdoubt him that Thorstein was there, or that the man was akin
to Grettir.

Then Dromund took the short-sword, and raised it aloft, and hewed at
Angle and smote him on the head, and so great was the stroke that it
stayed but at the jaw-teeth, and Thorbiorn Angle fell to earth dead
and dishonoured.

Thereat all men became hushed; but the Chancellor of the town seized
Thorstein straightway, and asked for what cause he did such an
ill-deed there at the hallowed Thing.

Thorstein said that he was the brother of Grettir the Strong, and that
withal he had never been able to bring vengeance to pass till then;
so thereupon many put in their word, and said that the strong man must
needs have been of great might and nobleness, in that Thorstein had
fared so far forth into the world to avenge him: the rulers of the
city deemed that like enough; but whereas there was none there to bear
witness in aught to Thorstein's word, that law of theirs prevailed,
that whosoever slew a man should lose nought but his life.

So then speedy doom and hard enow did Thorstein get; for in a dark
chamber of a dungeon should he be cast and there abide his death, if
none redeemed him therefrom with money. But when Thorstein came into
the dungeon, there was a man there already, who had come to death's
door from misery; and both foul and cold was that abode; Thorstein
spake to that man and said,

"How deemest thou of thy life?"

He answered, "As of a right evil life, for of nought can I be holpen,
nor have I kinsmen to redeem me."

Thorstein said, "Nought is of less avail in such matters than lack of
good rede; let us be merry then, and do somewhat that will be glee and
game to us."

The man said that he might have no glee of aught.

"Nay, then, but let us try it," said Thorstein. And therewithal he
fell to singing; and he was a man of such goodly voice that scarcely
might his like be found therefor, nor did he now spare himself.

Now the highway was but a little way from the dungeon, and Thorstein
sang so loud and clear that the walls resounded therewith, and great
game this seemed to him who had been half-dead erst; and in such wise
did Thorstein keep it going till the evening.




CHAP. XC.

<i>How the Lady Spes redeemed Thorstein from the Dungeon</i>.


There was a great lady of a castle in that town called Spes, exceeding
rich and of great kin; Sigurd was the name of her husband, a rich man
too, but of lesser kin than she was, and for money had she been wedded
to him; no great love there was betwixt them, for she thought she had
been wedded far beneath her; high-minded she was and a very stirring
woman.

Now so it befell, that, as Thorstein made him merry that night, Spes
walked in the street hard by the dungeon, and heard thence so fair a
voice, that she said she had never yet heard its like. She went with
many folk, and so now she bade them go learn who had that noble voice.
So they called out and asked who lay there in such evil plight; and
Thorstein named himself.

Then said Spes, "Art thou a man as much skilled in other matters as in
singing?"

He said there was but little to show for that.

"What ill-deed hast thou done," said she, "that thou must needs be
tormented here to the death?"

He said that he had slain a man, and avenged his brother thereby, "But
I could not show that by witnesses," said Thorstein, "and therefore
have I been cast into ward here, unless some man should redeem me, nor
do I hope therefor, for no man have I here akin to me."

"Great loss of thee if thou art slain! and that brother of thine whom
thou didst avenge, was he a man so famed, then?"

He said that he was more mighty than he by the half; and so she asked
what token there was thereof. Then sang Thorstein this stave--

  "Field of rings, eight men, who raise
  Din of sword in clattering ways,
  Strove the good short-sword in vain
  From the strong dead hand to gain;
  So they ever strained and strove,
  Till at last it did behove,
  The feared quickener of the fight,
  From the glorious man to smite."

"Great prowess such a thing shows of the man," said those who
understood the stave; and when she knew thereof, she spake thus,

"Wilt thou take thy life from me, if such a choice is given thee?"

"That will I," said Thorstein, "if this fellow of mine, who sits
hereby, is redeemed along with me; or else will we both abide here
together."

She answers, "More of a prize do I deem thee than him."

"Howsoever that may be," said Thorstein, "we shall go away in company
both of us together, or else shall neither go."

Then she went there, whereas were the Varangians, and prayed for
freedom for Thorstein, and offered money to that end; and to this were
they right willing; and so she brought about by her mighty friendships
and her wealth that they were both set free. But as soon as Thorstein
came out of the dungeon he went to see goodwife Spes, and she took him
to her and kept him privily; but whiles was he with the Varangians in
warfare, and in all onsets showed himself the stoutest of hearts.




CHAP. XCI.

<i>Of the doings of Thorstein and the Lady Spes</i>.


In those days was Harald Sigurdson at Micklegarth, and Thorstein fell
into friendship with him. Of much account was Thorstein held, for Spes
let him lack no money; and greatly they turned their hearts one to
the other, Thorstein and Spes; and many folk beside her deemed great
things of his prowess.

Now her money was much squandered, because she ever gave herself to
the getting of great friends; and her husband deemed that he could see
that she was much changed, both in temper and many other of her ways,
but most of all in the spending of money; both gold and good things he
missed, which were gone from her keeping.

So on a time Sigurd her husband talks with her, and says that she has
taken to strange ways. "Thou givest no heed to our goods," says he,
"but squanderest them in many wise; and, moreover, it is even as if
I saw thee ever in a dream, nor ever wilt thou be there whereas I am;
and I know for sure that something must bring this about."

She answered, "I told thee, and my kinsfolk told thee, whenas we came
together, that I would have my full will and freedom over all such
things as it was beseeming for me to bestow, and for that cause I
spare not thy goods. Hast thou perchance aught to say to me concerning
other matters which may be to my shame?"

He answers, "Somewhat do I misdoubt me that thou holdest some man or
other whom thou deemest better than I be."

"I wot not," says she, "what ground there may be thereto; but meseems
thou mayest speak with little truth; and yet, none-the-less, we two
alone shall not speak on this matter if thou layest this slander on
me."

So he let the talk drop for that time; she and Thorstein went on in
the same way, nor were they wary of the words of evil folk, for
she ever trusted in her many and wise friends. Oft they sat talking
together and making merry; and on an evening as they sat in a certain
loft, wherein were goodly things of hers, she bade Thorstein sing
somewhat, for she thought the goodman was sitting at the drink, as
his wont was, so she bolted the door. But, when he had sung a certain
while, the door was driven at, and one called from outside to open;
and there was come the husband with many of his folk.

The goodwife had unlocked a great chest to show Thorstein her dainty
things; so when she knew who was there, she would not unlock the door,
but speaks to Thorstein, "Quick is my rede, jump into the chest and
keep silent."

So he did, and she shot the bolt of the chest and sat thereon herself;
and even therewith in came the husband into the loft, for he and his
had broken open the door thereof.

Then said the lady, "Why do ye fare with all this uproar? are your
foes after you then?"

The goodman answered, "Now it is well that thou thyself givest proof
of thyself what thou art; where is the man who trolled out that song
so well e'en now? I wot thou deemest him of far fairer voice than I
be."

She said: "Not altogether a fool is he who can be silent; but so it
fares not with thee: thou deemest thyself cunning, and art minded to
bind thy lie on my back. Well, then, let proof be made thereof! If
there be truth in thy words, take the man; he will scarce have leapt
out through the walls or the roof."

So he searched through the place, and found him not, and she said,
"Why dost thou not take him then, since thou deemest the thing so
sure?"

He was silent, nor knew in sooth amid what wiles he was come; then
he asked his fellows if they had not heard him even as he had. But
whereas they saw that the mistress misliked the matter, their witness
came to nought, for they said that oft folk heard not things as they
were in very sooth. So the husband went out, and deemed he knew that
sooth well enough, though they had not found the man; and now for a
long time he left spying on his wife and her ways.

Another time, long after, Thorstein and Spes sat in a certain
cloth-bower, and therein were clothes, both cut and uncut, which the
wedded folk owned; there she showed to Thorstein many kinds of cloth,
and they unfolded them; but when they were least ware of it the
husband came on them with many men, and brake into the loft; but while
they were about that she heaped up clothes over Thorstein, and leaned
against the clothes-stack when they came into the chamber.

"Wilt thou still deny," said the goodman, "that there was a man with
thee, when such men there are as saw you both?"

She bade them not to go on so madly. "This time ye will not fail,
belike; but let me be at peace, and worry me not."

So they searched through the place and found nought, and at last gave
it up.

Then the goodwife answered and said, "It is ever good to give better
proof than the guesses of certain folk; nor was it to be looked for
that ye should find that which was not. Wilt thou now confess thy
folly, husband, and free me from this slander?"

He said, "The less will I free thee from it in that I trow thou art
in very sooth guilty of that which I have laid to thy charge; and thou
wilt have to put forth all thy might in this case, if thou art to get
this thrust from thee."

She said that that was in nowise against her mind, and therewithal
they parted.

Thereafter was Thorstein ever with the Varangians, and men say that
he sought counsel of Harald Sigurdson, and their mind it is that
Thorstein and Spes would not have taken to those redes but for the
trust they had in him and his wisdom.

Now as time wore on, goodman Sigurd gave out that he would fare
from home on certain errands of his own. The goodwife nowise let him
herein; and when he was gone, Thorstein came to Spes, and the twain
were ever together. Now such was the fashion of her castle that it
was built forth over the sea, and there were certain chambers therein
whereunder the sea flowed; in such a chamber Thorstein and Spes ever
sat; and a little trap-door there was in the floor of it, whereof none
knew but those twain, and it might be opened if there were hasty need
thereof.

Now it is to be told of the husband that he went nowhither, save into
hiding, that he might spy the ways of the housewife; so it befell
that, one night as they sat alone in the sea-loft and were glad
together, the husband came on them unawares with a crowd of folk, for
he had brought certain men to a window of the chamber, and bade them
see if things were not even according to his word: and all said that
he spake but the sooth, and that so belike he had done aforetime.

So they ran into the loft, but when Spes heard the crash, she said to
Thorstein,

"Needs must thou go down hereby, whatsoever be the cost, but give me
some token if thou comest safe from the place."

He said yea thereto, and plunged down through the floor, and the
housewife spurned her foot at the lid, and it fell back again into its
place, and no new work was to be seen on the floor.

Now the husband and his men came into the loft, and went about
searching, and found nought, as was likely; the loft was empty, so
that there was nought therein save the floor and the cross-benches,
and there sat the goodwife, and played with the gold on her fingers;
she heeded them little, and made as if there was nought to do.

All this the goodman thought the strangest of all, and asked his folk
if they had not seen the man, and they said that they had in good
sooth seen him.

Then said the goodwife, "Hereto shall things come as is said;
<i>thrice of yore have all things happed</i>, and in likewise hast
thou fared, Sigurd," says she, "for three times hadst thou undone my
peace, meseems, and are ye any wiser than in the beginning?"

"This time I was not alone in my tale," said the goodman; "and now to
make an end, shall thou go through the freeing by law, for in nowise
will I have this shame unbooted."

"Meseems," says the goodwife, "thou biddest me what I would bid of
thee, for good above all things I deem it to free myself from this
slander, which has spread so wide and high, that it would be great
dishonour if I thrust it not from off me."

"In likewise," said the goodman, "shalt thou prove that thou hast not
given away or taken to thyself my goods."

She answers, "At that time when I free myself shall I in one wise
thrust off from me all charges that thou hast to bring against me; but
take thou heed whereto all shall come; I will at once free myself
from all words that have been spoken here on this charge that thou now
makest."

The goodman was well content therewith, and got him gone with his men.

Now it is to be told of Thorstein that he swam forth from under the
chamber, and went aland where he would, and took a burning log, and
held it up in such wise that it might be seen from the goodwife's
castle, and she was abroad for long that evening, and right into the
night, for that she would fain know if Thorstein had come aland; and
so when she saw the fire, she deemed that she knew that Thorstein had
taken land, for even such a token had they agreed on betwixt them.

The next morning Spes bade her husband speak of their matters to
the bishop, and thereto was he fully ready. Now they come before the
bishop, and the goodman put forward all the aforesaid charges against
her.

The bishop asked if she had been known for such an one aforetime,
but none said that they had heard thereof. Then he asked with what
likelihood he brought those things against her. So the goodman brought
forward men who had seen her sit in a locked room with a man beside
her, and they twain alone: and therewith the goodman said that he
misdoubted him of that man beguiling her.

The bishop said that she might well free herself lawfully from this
charge if so she would. She said that it liked her well so to do, "and
good hope I have," said Spes, "that I shall have great plenty of women
to purge me by oath in this case."

Now was an oath set forward in words for her, and a day settled
whereon the case should come about; and thereafter she went home, and
was glad at heart, and Thorstein and Spes met, and settled fully what
they should do.




CHAP. XCII.

<i>Of the Oath that Spes made before the Bishop</i>.


Now that day past, and time wore on to the day when Spes should
make oath, and she bade thereto all her friends and kin, and arrayed
herself in the best attire she had, and many noble ladies went with
her.

Wet was the weather about that time, and the ways were miry, and a
certain slough there was to go over or ever they might come to the
church; and whenas Spes and her company came forth anigh this slough,
a great crowd was there before them, and a multitude of poor folk who
prayed them of alms, for this was in the common highway, and all who
knew her deemed it was their part to welcome her, and prayed for good
things for her as for one who had oft holpen them well.

A certain staff-propped carle there was amidst those poor folk, great
of growth and long-bearded. Now the women made stay at the slough,
because that the great people deemed the passage across over miry, and
therewith when that staff-carle saw the goodwife, that she was better
arrayed than the other women, he spake to her on this wise,

"Good mistress," said he, "be so lowly as to suffer me to bear thee
over this slough, for it is the bounden duty of us staff-carles to
serve thee all we may."

"What then," says she, "wilt thou bear me well, when thou mayst not
bear thyself?"

"Yet would it show forth thy lowliness," says he, "nor may I offer
better than I have withal; and in all things wilt thou fare the
better, if thou hast no pride against poor folk."

"Wot thou well, then," says she, "that if thou bearest me not well it
shall be for a beating to thee, or some other shame greater yet."

"Well, I would fain risk it," said he; and therewithal he got on to
his feet and stood in the slough. She made as if she were sore afeard
of his carrying her, yet nathless she went on, borne on his back; and
he staggered along exceeding slowly, going on two crutches, and when
he got midmost of the slough he began to reel from side to side. She
bade him gather up his strength.

"Never shalt thou have made a worse journey than this if thou easiest
me down here."

Then the poor wretch staggers on, and gathers up all his courage and
strength, and gets close to the dry land, but stumbles withal, and
falls head-foremost in such wise, that he cast her on to the bank, but
fell into the ditch up to his armpits, and therewithal as he lay there
caught at the goodwife, and gat no firm hold of her clothes, but set
his miry hand on her knee right up to the bare thigh.

She sprang up and cursed him, and said that ever would evil come from
wretched gangrel churles: "and thy full due it were to be beaten, if I
thought it not a shame, because of thy misery."

Then said he, "Meted in unlike ways is man's bliss; me-thought I had
done well to thee, and I looked for an alms at thy hands, and lo,
in place thereof, I get but threats and ill-usage and no good again
withal;" and he made as if he were exceeding angry.

Many deemed that he looked right poor and wretched, but she said that
he was the wiliest of old churles; but whereas many prayed for him,
she took her purse to her, and therein was many a penny of gold; then
she shook down the money and said,

"Take thou this, carle; nowise good were it, if thou hadst not full
pay for the hard words thou hadst of me; now have I parted with thee,
even according to thy worth."

Then he picked up the gold, and thanked her for her good deed. Spes
went to the church, and a great crowd was there before her. Sigurd
pushed the case forward eagerly, and bade her free herself from those
charges he had brought against her.

She said, "I heed not thy charges; what man dost thou say thou hast
seen in my chamber with me? Lo now oft it befalls that some worthy man
will be with me, and that do I deem void of any shame; but hereby will
I swear that to no man have I given gold, and of no man have I had
fleshly defilement save of my husband, and that wretched staff-carle
who laid his miry hand on my thigh when I was borne over the slough
this same day."

Now many deemed that this was a full oath, and that no shame it was to
her, though the carle had laid hand on her unwittingly; but she said
that all things must be told even as they were.

Thereafter she swore the oath in such form as is said afore, and many
said thereon that she showed the old saw to be true, <i>swear loud and
say little</i>. But for her, she said that wise men would think that
this was not done by guile.

Then her kin fell to saying that great shame and grief it was for
high-born women to have such lying charges brought against them
bootless, whereas it was a crime worthy of death if it were openly
known of any woman that she had done whoredoms against her husband.
Therewithal Spes prayed the bishop to make out a divorce betwixt her
and her husband Sigurd, because she said she might nowise bear his
slanderous lying charges. Her kinsfolk pushed the matter forward for
her, and so brought it about by their urgency that they were divorced,
and Sigurd got little of the goods, and was driven away from the land
withal, for here matters went as is oft shown that they will, and
<i>the lower must lowt</i>; nor could he bring aught about to avail
him, though he had but said the very sooth.

Now Spes took to her all their money, and was deemed the greatest of
stirring women; but when folk looked into her oath, it seemed to them
that there was some guile in it, and were of a mind that wise men must
have taught her that way of swearing; and men dug out this withal,
that the staff-carle who had carried her was even Thorstein Dromund.
Yet for all that Sigurd got no righting of the matter.




CHAP. XCIII.

<i>Thorstein and Spes come out to Norway</i>.


Thorstein Dromund was with the Varangians while the talk ran highest
about these matters; so famed did he become that it was deemed that
scarce had any man of the like prowess come thither; the greatest
honours he gat from Harald Sigurdson, for he was of his kin; and after
his counsels did Thorstein do, as men are minded to think.

But a little after Sigurd was driven from the land, Thorstein fell to
wooing Spes to wife, and she took it meetly, but went to her kinsmen
for rede; then they held meetings thereon, and were of one accord that
she herself must rule the matter; then was the bargain struck, and
good was their wedded life, and they were rich in money, and all men
deemed Thorstein to be a man of exceeding good luck, since he had
delivered himself from all his troubles.

The twain were together for two winters in Micklegarth, and then
Thorstein said to his goodwife that he would fain go back to see his
possessions in Norway. She said he should have his will, so they sold
the lands they had there, and gat them great wealth of chattels, and
then betook them from that land, with a fair company, and went all the
way till they came to Norway. Thorstein's kin welcomed them both right
heartily, and soon saw that Spes was bountiful and high-minded, and
she speedily became exceeding well befriended. Some children they had
between them, and they abode on their lands, and were well content
with their life.

In those days was Magnus the Good king over Norway. Thorstein soon
went to meet him, and had good welcome of him, for he had grown famous
for the avenging of Grettir the Strong (for men scarce know of its
happening that any other Icelander, save Grettir Asmundson, was
avenged in Micklegarth); and folk say that Thorstein became a man of
King Magnus, and for nine winters after he had come to Norway he abode
in peace, and folk of the greatest honour were they deemed, he and his
wife.

Then came home from Micklegarth king Harald Sigurdson, and King Magnus
gave him half Norway, and they were both kings therein for a while;
but after the death of King Magnus many of those who had been his
friends were ill-content, for all men loved him; but folk might not
abide the temper of King Harald, for that he was hard and was wont to
punish men heavily.

But Thorstein Dromund was fallen into eld, though he was still the
halest of men; and now was the slaying of Grettir Asmundson sixteen
winters agone.




CHAP. XCIV.

<i>Thorstein Dromund and Spes leave Norway again</i>.


At that time many urged Thorstein to go meet King Harald, and become
his man; but he took not kindly to it.

Then Spes spake, "I will, Thorstein," says she, "that thou go not to
meet Harald the king, for to another king have we much more to pay,
and need there is that we turn our minds to that; for now we both
grow old and our youth is long departed, and far more have we followed
after worldly devices, than the teaching of Christ, or the ways of
justice and uprightness; now wot I well that this debt can be paid for
us neither by our kindred or our goods, and I will that we ourselves
should pay it: now will I therefore that we change our way of life
and fare away from this land and unto the abode of the Pope, because I
well believe that so only may my case be made easy to me."

Thorstein said, "As well known to me as to thee are the things thou
talkest of; and it is meet that thou have thy will herein, since thou
didst ever give me my will, in a matter of far less hope; and in all
things will we do as thou biddest."

This took men utterly unawares; Thorstein was by then sixty-seven
years of age, yet hale in all wise.

So now he bid to him all his kindred and folk allied to him, and laid
before them the things he had determined on. Wise men gave good words
thereto, though they deemed of their departing as of the greatest
loss.

But Thorstein said that there was nought sure about his coming back:
"Now do I give thanks to all of you," says he, "for the heed ye paid
to my goods when I was last away from the land; now I will offer you,
and pray you to take to you my children's havings, and my children,
and bring them up according to the manliness that is in you; for I am
fallen so far into eld that there is little to say as to whether I may
return or not, though I may live; but ye shall in such wise look after
all that I leave behind me here, even as if I should never come back
to Norway."

Then men answered, that good redes would be plenteous if the housewife
should abide behind to look after his affairs; but she said--

"For that cause did I come hither from the out-lands, and from
Micklegarth, with Thorstein, leaving behind both kin and goods,
for that I was fain that one fate might be over us both; now have I
thought it good to be here; but I have no will to abide long in Norway
or the North-lands if he goes away; ever has there been great love
betwixt us withal, and nought has happed to divide us; now therefore
will we depart together, for to both of us is known the truth about
many things that befell since we first met."

So, when they had settled their affairs in this wise, Thorstein bade
chosen folk divide his goods into halves; and his kin took the half
which his children were to own, and they were brought up by their
father's kin, and were in aftertimes the mightiest of men, and great
kin in the Wick has come from them. But Thorstein and Spes divided
their share of the goods, and some they gave to churches for their
souls' health, and some they took with them. Then they betook
themselves Romeward, and many folk prayed well for them.




CHAP. XCV.

<i>How Thorstein Dromund and Spes fared to Rome and died there</i>.


Now they went their ways till they came to Rome-town; and so when they
came before him, who was appointed to hear the shrifts of men, they
told him well and truly all things even as they had happed, and
with what cunning and craft they had joined together in wedlock;
therewithal they gave themselves up with great humility to such
penance for the amending of their lives as he should lay on them; but
because that they themselves had turned their minds to the atoning
of their faults, without any urging or anger from the rulers of the
church, they were eased of all fines as much as might be, but were
bidden gently that they should now and henceforth concern themselves
reasonably for their souls' health, and from this time forward live in
chastity, since they had gotten them release from all their guilt; and
herewith they were deemed to have fared well and wisely.

Then said Spes, "Now, meseems, our matters have gone well and are come
to an end, and no unlucky life have we had together; yet maybe fools
will do after the pattern of our former life; now therefore let us
make such an end to all, that good men also may follow after us and do
the like: so let us go bargain with those who are deft in stone-craft;
that they make for each of us a cell of stone, that we may thereby
atone for what we have done against God."

So Thorstein laid down money for the making of a stone cell for each
of them, and for such-like other things as they might need, and might
not be without for the keeping of their lives; and then, when the
stone work was done, and the time was meet therefor and all things
were ready, they departed their worldly fellowship of their own free
will, that they might the more enjoy a holy fellowship in another
world. And there they abode both in their stone cells, and lived as
long as God would have it, and so ended their lives. And most men say
that Thorstein Dromund and Spes his wife may be deemed to be folk of
the greatest good luck, all things being accounted of; but neither
his children or any of his issue have come to Iceland for a tale to be
made of them.

Now Sturla the Lawman says so much as that he deems no outlawed man
ever to have been so mighty as Grettir the Strong; and thereto he puts
forth three reasons--

And first in that he was the wisest of them all; for the longest in
outlawry he was of any man, and was never won whiles he was hale.

And again, in that he was the strongest in all the land among men of
a like age; and more fitted to lay ghosts and do away with hauntings
than any other.

And thirdly, in that he was avenged out in Micklegarth, even as
no other man of Iceland has been; and this withal, that Thorstein
Dromund, who avenged him, was so lucky a man in his last days.

So here ends the story of Grettir Asmundson, our fellow-countryman.
Thank have they who listened thereto; but thank little enow to him who
scribbled out the tale.

  GOOD PEOPLE, HERE THE WORK HATH END:
  MAY ALL FOLK TO THE GOOD GOD WEND!




NOTES AND CORRECTIONS.


P. 29. The genealogy of Gamli of Meals, as here recorded, seems to be
peculiar to Grettir's saga. Yet its statements are inconsistent in
the matter, for it gives this twofold genealogy of the man. See Ed.
Kaupmannahöfn: 1853.

P. 22. Ranveig was the wife of Gamli, the son of <i>Thorald</i>, the
son of the <i>Vendlander</i>.

P. 70. And (Thorir of the Pass) sold the land at Meals to
<i>Thorhalli</i>, son of Gamli the <i>Widelander</i>. His son was
Gamli, who had to wife Ranveig, the daughter of Asmund Greyhaired.

According to 'Landnáma,' this Gamli of Meals, Asmund's son-in-law,
was son of Thord, and great-great-grandson of Thorhrolf or Thorolf
Fasthaldi (Fastholding), who settled lands on the north coast of
Icefirth-deep (Isafjartðardjúp), and farmed at Snowfells (Snaefjöll).
We have given Thorhall in our translation in both places as the
man's name. Perhaps Thoraldr is nothing but a corruption of Thorólfr
fasthaldi; and Thorhalli again a corruption of the first. But Gamli
the Vendlander or Widelander, we have no means of identifying.

P. 30. 'Now in those times there were wont to be large fire-halls
at the homesteads.' The hall, <i>holl, skáli, stofa</i>, was the
principal room in every home. <i>Elda-skáli</i>, or fire-hall, as
the one alluded to at Biarg, was so called from its serving as a
cooking-hall and a sitting-hall at once. The main features in the
construction of a hall were the following: it was generally built from
east to west, in an oblong form, having doors either at one or both
ends through the south-side wall, where it met the gable end. These
two entrances were called carles'-door and queens'-door (<i>karldyrr,
kvenndyrr</i>), being respectively for the ingress and egress of
men and women. Sometimes the men's-door was adorned with the beaks
(<i>brandar</i>) of a hewn-up ship, as was the case with the hall of
Thorir of Garth, standing as door-posts on either side. The door led
to a front-hall (<i>forkáli, fortofa, and-dyri, framhús</i>), which,
sometimes at least, seems to have been portioned off into an inner
room (<i>klefi</i>), or bay, and the vestibule proper. In the bay were
kept victuals, such as dried fish, flour, and sometimes, no doubt,
beer. Within, the hall fell into three main portions: the main hall,
or the nave, and the aisles on either side thereof (<i>skot</i>):
The plan of the hall was much like that of one of our regular-built
churches without chancel, say like a Suffolk church of the fifteenth
century, the nave being lighted by a clerestory, and the aisles
running the whole way along the nave, and communicating behind the
dais. These aisles were used for sleeping-places; so that along the
whole length of the hall, and behind the dais, all was partitioned
into bedsteads, open or locked,--open, that is to say, communicating
with the nave by a doorless aperture,--locked, that is, shut out of
view from the nave (<i>lok-rekkja, lok-hvila</i>).

On the wall between nave and aisles, which was covered with a
panelling on its inside at least, were hung the shields and weapons
of the chief and his retainers, or home-men. Sometimes it was painted
with mythic subjects, and adorned with fantastic carvings; on great
occasions it was covered with hangings. Along both side-walls ran a
row of seats, called benches (<i>bekkr</i>), the north-most of which,
or the one which faced the sun, was called the nobler bench (<i>aeðri
bekkr</i>), the south-most one, the less noble bench, (<i>úoeðri
bekkr</i>). In the middle of either bench was a seat, called the high
seat (<i>öndvegi</i>); that of the nobler bench being occupied by the
chief or head of the house, unless he had for his guest a man nobler
than himself, in which case the latter took it; that of the less noble
bench being allotted to the noblest among the guests. The nobler bench
was on ordinary occasions the bench for the chief and the household.
The less noble for the guests. In front of the chiefs high-seat were
the high-seat-poles which in the early ages of Paganism in the North
were objects of much veneration, and must always accompany the chief
if he moved his abode, and point out his new homestead, if he fared
for it over sea, by the spot where they drifted ashore, as, when land
was sighted, they were thrown overboard. In front of the seat-rows
just described were placed the tables whereon the meals were put
forth. And when the number of people exceeded the capacity of the
ordinary benches, a new row of benches was placed in front of the
tables, so that there were two rows of benches down along either
side of the hall with the tables between them. The last-named rows of
benches were called <i>forsoeti</i>; and their occupiers, when seated
at table, faced those of the upper and lower bench. In the centre of
the hall, if of the fashion, as it probably was in early times, of a
fire-hall, was a narrow oblong stone-pavement, probably as long as the
rows of the benches, whereon fires were lit for heating of the room,
for cooking of food in some cases, and for the purpose of lighting up
the hall. The smoke that rose from the burning fuel found its way out
through the luffer or louvre, in the middle of the ridge of the roof
(<i>ljóri</i>); the <i>reyk-beri</i>, reek-bearer, seems to have been
a contrivance for creating draught to carry the smoke out through
the <i>ljóri</i>. In that end of the hall which was opposite to the
entrance was the cross-bench, dais (<i>pallr</i>), occupied by the
women. Here was also a high seat (<i>öndvegi á palli</i>), which was
generally taken by the mistress of the house. In our saga it seems
that the hall of Sand-heaps made an exception to this general rule, as
it apparently had the dais immediately within the doorway.

P. 77 (cpr. 110). It is worth observing here, that Thorvald, son of
Asgeir Madpate the younger, dwells at As in Waterdale, about 1013,
when Thorgils Makson was slain. When Grettir played, as a youth, on
Midfirth-water (or <i>cca</i>. 1010), he dwelt at Asgeirsriver. We
mention this because there has been some confusion about the matter.
On the slight authority of the Þáttr af Isleifi biskupi', Biskupa
Sögur I. 54, it has been maintained that he dwelt at Asgeirsriver
even as late as <i>cca</i>. 1035, when his daughter Dalla was wooed by
Isleif the Bishop. G. Vigfússon, Safn til Sögu Islands, I. 337. On
the other hand, the statement of Hungrvaka that he farmed at As
(<i>i.e.</i>, at the Ridge), at the time aforesaid, has given rise
to the conjecture that thereby must be meant Valdar-As, a farm in
Willowdale, near Asgeirsriver, the manor of the Madpate family. G.
Vigfússon, in Biskupa Sögur, I. 61, note 2. It seems there is no need
of setting aside the clear statement of our saga, that the As was As
in Waterdale (<i>see</i> Index), and not Valdarás in Willowdale at
all, or that Thorvald had, by 1013, moved up to the neighbouring
country-side of Waterdale, and settled among the kin of his
great-grandmother.

P. 114, 1. 1. 'The men of Meals,' is a close translation of the
original, which, however, is incorrect; for the men of Meals were
Grettir's kin-in-law, and natural allies. The saga means the men of
Meal, Kormak and his followers, and the original should be either,
þeir Mel-menn, or Mels-menn, or þeir Kormakr frá Mel.

P. 129, 1. 10, 11. We have purposely altered the text from: en þú
öruggr í einangri, <i>i.e.</i>, 'but thou stout in danger,' into:
en <i>þó, i.e.</i>, 'but stout in danger none-the-less.' The former
reading seems barely to give any sense, the last a natural and the
required one.

P. 169. Hallmund. Our saga is one among the historic sagas of Iceland
which deals with traditions of ancient belief in the spirits of the
unknown regions of the land that are interested in the well-being of
the mere men who dwell near them. Hallmund and the giant Thorir are
the representatives of these powers in our saga. Of these Hallmund is
the more interesting of the two, both for his human sympathies, his
tragic end, and the poetry ascribed to him. At one time or other he
has had a great name in the Icelandic folk-lore among the spirits of
the land, the so-called land wights <i>(land-voetir)</i>, and there is
still existing a poem of ancient type, the refrain of which is closely
similar to that of Grettir's song on Hallmund, but which is stated to
be by some cave-wight that lived in a deep and gloomy cavern somewhere
in Deepfirth, on the north side of Broadfirth. In the so-called
Bergbúaþáttr or cave-dweller's tale (Edited by G. Vigfússon in
Nordiske Old-skrifter, xxvii., pp. 123-128, and 140-143, Copenhagen,
1860), this song is said to have been heard by two men, who, on their
way to church, had lost their road, and were overtaken by the darkness
of night, and, in order to escape straying too far out of their way,
sought shelter under the lee of a sheer rock which chanced to be on
their way. They soon found a mouth of a cave where they knew not that
any cave was to be looked for, whereupon one of the wayfarers set up a
cross-mark in the door of the cave, and then with his fellow-traveller
sat down on two stones at the mouth of the cave, as they did not dare
to risk themselves too far in the gloomy abode away from the cross.
When the first third part of the night was spent they heard something
come along from within the cave doorwards out to them.[20] They signed
themselves with the sign of the cross, and prayed God's mercy to be
on them, for they thought the doings within the deep of the cavern now
grew big enough. On looking into the darkness they saw a sight like
unto two full-moons, or huge targets, with some monstrous figure
(unreadable in the MS.) between them. They thought this was nothing
but two eyes, and that nowise narrow of face might he be who bore such
torches. Next they heard a chanting of a monstrous kind and in a big
voice. A lay there was sung of twelve staves, with the final refrain
of each twice repeated.

[Footnote 20: <i>Innan eptir</i>, as here rendered, is the reading of
the MS. from which Bergbua páttr is edited. <i>Innar eptir</i>, as the
aforesaid edition of the tale has it, is wrong.]

The poem seems to be a death-song over the cave-kin of the country by
the new change of thought brought in by Christianity.

P. 189. 'Grettir lay out that summer on Madderdale-heath, and in
sundry places, and at whiles he was at Reek-heath.' A corroboration
of the saga has been clearly set forth by the discovery of a
Grettir's-lair, in Axefirth-peak, in 1862. True the saga passes over
Grettir's doings on these vast eastern wildernesses, but tradition has
preserved the name for the place, and it shows by its construction and
position that it must have been constructed by one skilled in choosing
a good fighting stand, and a good and wide view at the same time. An
Icelandic farmer has thus given an accurate and reliable description
of Grettir's lair:

'In the summer of 1850, when I came north to Axefirth, I heard talk
of a Grettir's lair upon Axefirth-peak.... Many who had seen it made
a slight matter of it, which brought me to think it must have few
peculiarities of antiquarian interest to show. But on the 7th of
September, this summer (1862), I went with the rape-ruler Arni Jónsson
of Wood-stead to inspect the lair. Walking up to it from the level
ground below took us three minutes. The lair stands in the lower part
of a slip of stones beneath some sheer rocks between a sandstone rock,
called the carline, and the stone slip from the peak. It is built
up of stones, straight as a line, and runs, 4-3/4 ells in length, 10
inches broad, and is, within walls, 7/8 of an ell deep. The half of it
is deftly covered in with flat stones, the longest of which are 2 ells
9 inches long, and about half an ell in thickness, and a little more
in breadth. Small thin fragments of stone are wedged in between these
where their junctures do not close tight, and so firmly are they
fixed, that without instruments they may not be removed. One stone in
the south wall is so large that we deemed it fully the task of
from four to six men to move it when loose. The north side wall is
beginning to give way, where the room is covered in. On the outside
it is overgrown with black scurf and grey moss. The head end we deemed
was the one which is turned to the rock and is not covered in,
and evidently has been open from the beginning. Here the floor
is overgrown with moss, grass, thyme, ferns, crow-foot, and
lady's-mantle. In all likelihood the inmate has closed that part of
the room in with hides, when needful. On sitting up, all who went to
and fro on the road below, must have been within view; not only those
who came from the north of Foxplain (Melrakkaslètta) and Nupa-sveit,
but also far toward the north he had a view even unto the open sea,
nay, even unto Budluga-haven. Looking southwards, he must have seen
all who came up from the outer firth; for from the lair there is a
clear view even unto Burn-river, past which the high-road goes. A
popular tradition says, too, that all who must needs pass this way,
when Grettir was in the Peak, had taken at last to going over the
top of the Peak, where there was no road, but the sheep-wilds of the
Axefirthers. The lair-bider, even if he was set on by an overwhelming
force, was not easily won, and least of all a man of such prowess as
Grettir, except by shot; for he might at a moment's notice take his
stand in the rock above his head, where one side only gives the chance
of an onset, and where there is an ample supply of loose stones, large
and small, on the Peak side of the rock to defend oneself; on three
sides sheer rocks hem in the position, and those overhead are many
times the height of a man's.'

P. 208. Knave-game. Perhaps the truer rendering would have been
'nut-game,' if indeed 'hnet tafl' here stands not for 'hnef-tafl,'
as we at first supposed. It is undoubtedly true that among the early
games of Iceland the 'hettafl,' 'hnottafl,' was a distinct kind of
game, as was also the 'hneftafl,' 'hnefatafl,' knave-game. If we
follow the text as it stands, the game that Thorbiorn played is
supposed to have borne some resemblance to what is now called in
Iceland 'refskák,' fox-play, anglice 'fox and geese,' the aim of
which is, by twelve pieces, called lambs, to bring the fox into such a
position as to leave him no place to move, whichso way he turns.

P. 240. Pied-belly we call the Ram, although the saga seems to mean
that he was called Autumn-belly, which is a name of little, if of
any, sense at all. We suppose that <i>haus-mögóttr</i>, p. 169, and
<i>haust-magi</i>, p. 184, is one and the same thing, the <i>t</i>
having spuriously crept into the text from a scribe's inadvertence.

P. 243 (cpr. 207, 225, 272). 'In such wise Grettir lost his life, &c.'
The hardest thing to account for, or to bring to an intelligible issue
in Grettir's saga, is the incongruity between the statements as to his
age at his death and the number of years of his outlawry, as compared
with the truthful account of the events told in the saga itself. From
the time when Grettir slew his first man, all the events of the
saga may be traced clearly year for year up to his death, and their
truthfulness is borne out whensoever they chance to run parallel to
events mentioned in other trustworthy sagas, and they fall in with the
right time nearly without an exception. But the statement on the page
referred to above, that he was fourteen years old when he slew Skeggi,
that he was twenty when he dealt with Glam; twenty-five when he fell
into outlawry, and forty-four when he was slain, is utterly confuted
by the chronology of the saga itself.

These numbers given above are obviously made to fall in with the story
in page 225 about the talk of the time of his outlawry at the Thing.
The question is stated to have been this: whether he had been a
fraction of the twentieth year an outlaw, his friends hoping that in
such case a part might count <i>pro toto</i>. But the truth of the
matter was that he had neither been an outlaw for a fraction of the
twentieth year, nor even for anything like nineteen years. He was
outlawed at the Thing held in 1016, his year of outlawry dated from
Thing to Thing; this talk befell in 1031, consequently he had been
full fifteen years and no fraction of a year in outlawry. The story,
therefore, of the twenty years, or nineteen years and a fraction, of
outlawry falls utterly to the ground when brought to the test of the
actual facts as recorded in the saga.

But, despite of this, it is not to be supposed that this episode at
the Thing in 1031 is brought in at random and without any cause. There
are two obvious reasons for assigning twenty years to the length of
Grettir's outlawry, and for bringing into the tale a discussion on
that subject just where it is done. The one we may call the reason of
traditional belief, the other the reason of dramatic effect. Grettir
was indisputably for all reasons the greatest of Icelandic outlaws,
and the fond imagination of his biographers at all times urged them
to give the longest endurance to the time of his outlawry above all
outlaws, without inquiring closely as to whether it agreed with
the saga itself or not. The other, or the dramatic motive, lies
in bringing in the discussion on this long outlawry just at this
particular Thing of 1031; for it was obviously the teller's object to
suggest to the reader the hope of the great outlaw's legal restoration
to the cherished society of man just before the falling of the
crushing blow, in order to give an enhanced tragic interest to his
end, and he undoubtedly succeeds in doing this. To these reasons,
besides others less obvious, we imagine this main inconsistency in
Grettir's saga is to be ascribed.

Nevertheless, it is worth observing that blunders of scribes may have
in a measure been at work here. If we are not mistaken most of the
existing MSS. of our saga state that when he fell (p. 243) 'he was one
winter short of--<i>var hánum vetri fátt á</i>'--whatever number
of years they give as his age. And we venture the suggestion
that originally the passage ran thus: var hánum vetri fátt á hálf
iv{tugum},[21] <i>i.e.</i>, he lacked one winter of thirty-five years,
when he was slain. If a subsequent scribe committed the easy blunder
of dropping I before V, the reading of our original (Edition, 53)
would be the natural result, and an offspring of that same blunder
would also as easily be the other reading, common to one class of the
Grettir MSS.: var hánum vetri fátt í v{tugum} or í hinum v. tug, by
dropping the syllable 'hálf.'

[Footnote 21: A man of twenty, thirty, forty, &c., is in the Icelandic
expressed by the adjective <i>tvítugr, prítugr, fertugr</i>; a man
twenty-five, thirty-five, &c., is <i>hálf-prítugr, hálf-fertugr</i>,
&c.; the units beyond the tens are expressed by the particle
<i>um</i>, a man of twenty-one, thirty-seven, or forty-nine, is said
to have <i>einn</i> (<i>i.e.</i>, vetr. winter) um = beyond, tvítugt,
sjö um þrítugt, níu um fertugt, &c.]

If the whole passage on page 243, beginning with the words quoted in
the commencement of this note, be not indeed a later interpolation, we
believe that all that follows the words, 'till the time when he dealt
with Glam, the Thrall,' must, indeed, be taken as an interpolation of
later commentators.

Our suggestion recommends itself in this at least, that it brings
about full harmony between the statements, here treated of, and the
saga itself, for when Grettir left the land in 1011 he was fourteen
years of age, and twenty years later, or 1031, he fell. How far his
age thus given agrees or not with the decrepitude of his father, who
died in 1015, having been apparently already a bedridden man for some
time, is a matter of itself, and need not affect the accuracy of our
suggestion, which, however, we only put forth as a conjecture, not
having within reach the MSS. of Grettir's saga. A critical examination
of these might, perhaps, allow of a more positive discourse on
this vexed point, which to all commentators on Grettir has hitherto
remained an insoluble riddle.

P. 251, 1. 12. The original makes Asdis daughter of Skeggi the
Short-handed. This is here corrected agreeably to Landnáma, and other
records of her family.



