
CHAPTER I


She had not meant to stay for the service.  The door had stood invitingly
open, and a glimpse of the interior had suggested to her the idea that it
would make good copy.  "Old London Churches: Their Social and Historical
Associations."  It would be easy to collect anecdotes of the famous
people who had attended them.  She might fix up a series for one of the
religious papers.  It promised quite exceptional material, this
particular specimen, rich in tombs and monuments.  There was character
about it, a scent of bygone days.  She pictured the vanished
congregations in their powdered wigs and stiff brocades.  How picturesque
must have been the marriages that had taken place there, say in the reign
of Queen Anne or of the early Georges.  The church would have been
ancient even then.  With its air of faded grandeur, its sculptured
recesses and dark niches, the tattered banners hanging from its roof, it
must have made an admirable background.  Perhaps an historical novel in
the Thackeray vein?  She could see her heroine walking up the aisle on
the arm of her proud old soldier father.  Later on, when her journalistic
position was more established, she might think of it.  It was still quite
early.  There would be nearly half an hour before the first worshippers
would be likely to arrive: just time enough to jot down a few notes.  If
she did ever take to literature it would be the realistic school, she
felt, that would appeal to her.  The rest, too, would be pleasant after
her long walk from Westminster.  She would find a secluded seat in one of
the high, stiff pews, and let the atmosphere of the place sink into her.

And then the pew-opener had stolen up unobserved, and had taken it so for
granted that she would like to be shown round, and had seemed so pleased
and eager, that she had not the heart to repel her.  A curious little old
party with a smooth, peach-like complexion and white soft hair that the
fading twilight, stealing through the yellow glass, turned to gold.  So
that at first sight Joan took her for a child.  The voice, too, was so
absurdly childish--appealing, and yet confident.  Not until they were
crossing the aisle, where the clearer light streamed in through the open
doors, did Joan see that she was very old and feeble, with about her
figure that curious patient droop that comes to the work-worn.  She
proved to be most interesting and full of helpful information.  Mary
Stopperton was her name.  She had lived in the neighbourhood all her
life; had as a girl worked for the Leigh Hunts and had "assisted" Mrs.
Carlyle.  She had been very frightened of the great man himself, and had
always hidden herself behind doors or squeezed herself into corners and
stopped breathing whenever there had been any fear of meeting him upon
the stairs.  Until one day having darted into a cupboard to escape from
him and drawn the door to after her, it turned out to be the cupboard in
which Carlyle was used to keep his boots.  So that there was quite a
struggle between them; she holding grimly on to the door inside and
Carlyle equally determined to open it and get his boots.  It had ended in
her exposure, with trembling knees and scarlet face, and Carlyle had
addressed her as "woman," and had insisted on knowing what she was doing
there.  And after that she had lost all terror of him.  And he had even
allowed her with a grim smile to enter occasionally the sacred study with
her broom and pan.  It had evidently made a lasting impression upon her,
that privilege.

"They didn't get on very well together, Mr. and Mrs. Carlyle?" Joan
queried, scenting the opportunity of obtaining first-class evidence.

"There wasn't much difference, so far as I could see, between them and
most of us," answered the little old lady.  "You're not married, dear,"
she continued, glancing at Joan's ungloved hand, "but people must have a
deal of patience when they have to live with us for twenty-four hours a
day.  You see, little things we do and say without thinking, and little
ways we have that we do not notice ourselves, may all the time be
irritating to other people."

"What about the other people irritating us?" suggested Joan.

"Yes, dear, and of course that can happen too," agreed the little old
lady.

"Did he, Carlyle, ever come to this church?" asked Joan.

Mary Stopperton was afraid he never had, in spite of its being so near.
"And yet he was a dear good Christian--in his way," Mary Stopperton felt
sure.

"How do you mean 'in his way'?" demanded Joan.  It certainly, if Froude
was to be trusted, could not have been the orthodox way.

"Well, you see, dear," explained the little old lady, "he gave up things.
He could have ridden in his carriage"--she was quoting, it seemed, the
words of the Carlyles' old servant--"if he'd written the sort of lies
that people pay for being told, instead of throwing the truth at their
head."

"But even that would not make him a Christian," argued Joan.

"It is part of it, dear, isn't it?" insisted Mary Stopperton.  "To suffer
for one's faith.  I think Jesus must have liked him for that."

They had commenced with the narrow strip of burial ground lying between
the south side of the church and Cheyne Walk.  And there the little pew-
opener had showed her the grave of Anna, afterwards Mrs. Spragg.  "Who
long declining wedlock and aspiring above her sex fought under her
brother with arms and manly attire in a flagship against the French."  As
also of Mary Astell, her contemporary, who had written a spirited "Essay
in Defence of the Fair Sex."  So there had been a Suffrage Movement as
far back as in the days of Pope and Swift.

Returning to the interior, Joan had duly admired the Cheyne monument, but
had been unable to disguise her amusement before the tomb of Mrs.
Colvile, whom the sculptor had represented as a somewhat impatient lady,
refusing to await the day of resurrection, but pushing through her coffin
and starting for Heaven in her grave-clothes.  Pausing in front of the
Dacre monument, Joan wondered if the actor of that name, who had
committed suicide in Australia, and whose London address she remembered
had been Dacre House just round the corner, was descended from the
family; thinking that, if so, it would give an up-to-date touch to the
article.  She had fully decided now to write it.  But Mary Stopperton
could not inform her.  They had ended up in the chapel of Sir Thomas
More.  He, too, had "given up things," including his head.  Though Mary
Stopperton, siding with Father Morris, was convinced he had now got it
back, and that with the remainder of his bones it rested in the tomb
before them.

There, the little pew-opener had left her, having to show the
early-comers to their seats; and Joan had found an out-of-the-way pew
from where she could command a view of the whole church.  They were
chiefly poor folk, the congregation; with here and there a sprinkling of
faded gentility.  They seemed in keeping with the place.  The twilight
faded and a snuffy old man shuffled round and lit the gas.

It was all so sweet and restful.  Religion had never appealed to her
before.  The business-like service in the bare cold chapel where she had
sat swinging her feet and yawning as a child had only repelled her.  She
could recall her father, aloof and awe-inspiring in his Sunday black,
passing round the bag.  Her mother, always veiled, sitting beside her, a
thin, tall woman with passionate eyes and ever restless hands; the women
mostly overdressed, and the sleek, prosperous men trying to look meek.  At
school and at Girton, chapel, which she had attended no oftener than she
was obliged, had had about it the same atmosphere of chill compulsion.
But here was poetry.  She wondered if, after all, religion might not have
its place in the world--in company with the other arts.  It would be a
pity for it to die out.  There seemed nothing to take its place.  All
these lovely cathedrals, these dear little old churches, that for
centuries had been the focus of men's thoughts and aspirations.  The
harbour lights, illumining the troubled waters of their lives.  What
could be done with them?  They could hardly be maintained out of the
public funds as mere mementoes of the past.  Besides, there were too many
of them.  The tax-payer would naturally grumble.  As Town Halls, Assembly
Rooms?  The idea was unthinkable.  It would be like a performance of
Barnum's Circus in the Coliseum at Rome.  Yes, they would disappear.
Though not, she was glad to think, in her time.  In towns, the space
would be required for other buildings.  Here and there some gradually
decaying specimen would be allowed to survive, taking its place with the
feudal castles and walled cities of the Continent: the joy of the
American tourist, the text-book of the antiquary.  A pity!  Yes, but then
from the aesthetic point of view it was a pity that the groves of ancient
Greece had ever been cut down and replanted with currant bushes, their
altars scattered; that the stones of the temples of Isis should have come
to be the shelter of the fisher of the Nile; and the corn wave in the
wind above the buried shrines of Mexico.  All these dead truths that from
time to time had encumbered the living world.  Each in its turn had had
to be cleared away.

And yet was it altogether a dead truth: this passionate belief in a
personal God who had ordered all things for the best: who could be
appealed to for comfort, for help?  Might it not be as good an
explanation as any other of the mystery surrounding us?  It had been so
universal.  She was not sure where, but somewhere she had come across an
analogy that had strongly impressed her.  "The fact that a man feels
thirsty--though at the time he may be wandering through the Desert of
Sahara--proves that somewhere in the world there is water."  Might not
the success of Christianity in responding to human needs be evidence in
its favour?  The Love of God, the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, the Grace
of Our Lord Jesus Christ.  Were not all human needs provided for in that
one comprehensive promise: the desperate need of man to be convinced that
behind all the seeming muddle was a loving hand guiding towards good; the
need of the soul in its loneliness for fellowship, for strengthening; the
need of man in his weakness for the kindly grace of human sympathy, of
human example.

And then, as fate would have it, the first lesson happened to be the
story of Jonah and the whale.  Half a dozen shocked faces turned suddenly
towards her told Joan that at some point in the thrilling history she
must unconsciously have laughed.  Fortunately she was alone in the pew,
and feeling herself scarlet, squeezed herself into its farthest corner
and drew down her veil.

No, it would have to go.  A religion that solemnly demanded of grown men
and women in the twentieth century that they should sit and listen with
reverential awe to a prehistoric edition of "Grimm's Fairy Stories,"
including Noah and his ark, the adventures of Samson and Delilah, the
conversations between Balaam and his ass, and culminating in what if it
were not so appallingly wicked an idea would be the most comical of them
all: the conception of an elaborately organized Hell, into which the God
of the Christians plunged his creatures for all eternity!  Of what use
was such a religion as that going to be to the world of the future?

She must have knelt and stood mechanically, for the service was ended.
The pulpit was occupied by an elderly uninteresting-looking man with a
troublesome cough.  But one sentence he had let fall had gripped her
attention.  For a moment she could not remember it, and then it came to
her: "All Roads lead to Calvary."  It struck her as rather good.  Perhaps
he was going to be worth listening to.  "To all of us, sooner or later,"
he was saying, "comes a choosing of two ways: either the road leading to
success, the gratification of desires, the honour and approval of our
fellow-men--or the path to Calvary."

And then he had wandered off into a maze of detail.  The tradesman,
dreaming perhaps of becoming a Whiteley, having to choose whether to go
forward or remain for all time in the little shop.  The statesman--should
he abide by the faith that is in him and suffer loss of popularity, or
renounce his God and enter the Cabinet?  The artist, the writer, the mere
labourer--there were too many of them.  A few well-chosen examples would
have sufficed.  And then that irritating cough!

And yet every now and then he would be arresting.  In his prime, Joan
felt, he must have been a great preacher.  Even now, decrepit and wheezy,
he was capable of flashes of magnetism, of eloquence.  The passage where
he pictured the Garden of Gethsemane.  The fair Jerusalem, only hidden
from us by the shadows.  So easy to return to.  Its soft lights shining
through the trees, beckoning to us; its mingled voices stealing to us
through the silence, whispering to us of its well-remembered ways, its
pleasant places, its open doorways, friends and loved ones waiting for
us.  And above, the rock-strewn Calvary: and crowning its summit, clear
against the starlit sky, the cold, dark cross.  "Not perhaps to us the
bleeding hands and feet, but to all the bitter tears.  Our Calvary may be
a very little hill compared with the mountains where Prometheus suffered,
but to us it is steep and lonely."

There he should have stopped.  It would have been a good note on which to
finish.  But it seemed there was another point he wished to make.  Even
to the sinner Calvary calls.  To Judas--even to him the gates of the life-
giving Garden of Gethsemane had not been closed.  "With his thirty pieces
of silver he could have stolen away.  In some distant crowded city of the
Roman Empire have lived unknown, forgotten.  Life still had its
pleasures, its rewards.  To him also had been given the choice.  The
thirty pieces of silver that had meant so much to him!  He flings them at
the feet of his tempters.  They would not take them back.  He rushes out
and hangs himself.  Shame and death.  With his own hands he will build
his own cross, none to help him.  He, too--even Judas, climbs his
Calvary.  Enters into the fellowship of those who through all ages have
trod its stony pathway."

Joan waited till the last of the congregation had disappeared, and then
joined the little pew-opener who was waiting to close the doors.  Joan
asked her what she had thought of the sermon, but Mary Stopperton, being
a little deaf, had not heard it.

"It was quite good--the matter of it," Joan told her.  "All Roads lead to
Calvary.  The idea is that there comes a time to all of us when we have
to choose.  Whether, like your friend Carlyle, we will 'give up things'
for our faith's sake.  Or go for the carriage and pair."

Mary Stopperton laughed.  "He is quite right, dear," she said.  "It does
seem to come, and it is so hard.  You have to pray and pray and pray.  And
even then we cannot always do it."  She touched with her little withered
fingers Joan's fine white hand.  "But you are so strong and brave," she
continued, with another little laugh.  "It won't be so difficult for
you."

It was not until well on her way home that Joan, recalling the
conversation, found herself smiling at Mary Stopperton's literal
acceptation of the argument.  At the time, she remembered, the shadow of
a fear had passed over her.

Mary Stopperton did not know the name of the preacher.  It was quite
common for chance substitutes to officiate there, especially in the
evening.  Joan had insisted on her acceptance of a shilling, and had made
a note of her address, feeling instinctively that the little old woman
would "come in useful" from a journalistic point of view.

Shaking hands with her, she had turned eastward, intending to walk to
Sloane Square and there take the bus.  At the corner of Oakley Street she
overtook him.  He was evidently a stranger to the neighbourhood, and was
peering up through his glasses to see the name of the street; and Joan
caught sight of his face beneath a gas lamp.

And suddenly it came to her that it was a face she knew.  In the dim-lit
church she had not seen him clearly.  He was still peering upward.  Joan
stole another glance.  Yes, she had met him somewhere.  He was very
changed, quite different, but she was sure of it.  It was a long time
ago.  She must have been quite a child.




CHAPTER II


One of Joan's earliest recollections was the picture of herself standing
before the high cheval glass in her mother's dressing-room.  Her clothes
lay scattered far and wide, falling where she had flung them; not a shred
of any kind of covering was left to her.  She must have been very small,
for she could remember looking up and seeing high above her head the two
brass knobs by which the glass was fastened to its frame.  Suddenly, out
of the upper portion of the glass, there looked a scared red face.  It
hovered there a moment, and over it in swift succession there passed the
expressions, first of petrified amazement, secondly of shocked
indignation, and thirdly of righteous wrath.  And then it swooped down
upon her, and the image in the glass became a confusion of small naked
arms and legs mingled with green cotton gloves and purple bonnet strings.

"You young imp of Satan!" demanded Mrs. Munday--her feelings of outraged
virtue exaggerating perhaps her real sentiments.  "What are you doing?"

"Go away.  I'se looking at myself," had explained Joan, struggling
furiously to regain the glass.

"But where are your clothes?" was Mrs. Munday's wonder.

"I'se tooked them off," explained Joan.  A piece of information that
really, all things considered, seemed unnecessary.

"But can't you see yourself, you wicked child, without stripping yourself
as naked as you were born?"

"No," maintained Joan stoutly.  "I hate clothes."  As a matter of fact
she didn't, even in those early days.  On the contrary, one of her
favourite amusements was "dressing up."  This sudden overmastering desire
to arrive at the truth about herself had been a new conceit.

"I wanted to see myself.  Clothes ain't me," was all she would or could
vouchsafe; and Mrs. Munday had shook her head, and had freely confessed
that there were things beyond her and that Joan was one of them; and had
succeeded, partly by force, partly by persuasion, in restoring to Joan
once more the semblance of a Christian child.

It was Mrs. Munday, poor soul, who all unconsciously had planted the
seeds of disbelief in Joan's mind.  Mrs. Munday's God, from Joan's point
of view, was a most objectionable personage.  He talked a lot--or rather
Mrs. Munday talked for Him--about His love for little children.  But it
seemed He only loved them when they were good.  Joan was under no
delusions about herself.  If those were His terms, well, then, so far as
she could see, He wasn't going to be of much use to her.  Besides, if He
hated naughty children, why did He make them naughty?  At a moderate
estimate quite half Joan's wickedness, so it seemed to Joan, came to her
unbidden.  Take for example that self-examination before the cheval
glass.  The idea had come into her mind.  It had never occurred to her
that it was wicked.  If, as Mrs. Munday explained, it was the Devil that
had whispered it to her, then what did God mean by allowing the Devil to
go about persuading little girls to do indecent things?  God could do
everything.  Why didn't He smash the Devil?  It seemed to Joan a mean
trick, look at it how you would.  Fancy leaving a little girl to fight
the Devil all by herself.  And then get angry because the Devil won!  Joan
came to cordially dislike Mrs. Munday's God.

Looking back it was easy enough to smile, but the agony of many nights
when she had lain awake for hours battling with her childish terrors had
left a burning sense of anger in Joan's heart.  Poor mazed, bewildered
Mrs. Munday, preaching the eternal damnation of the wicked--who had loved
her, who had only thought to do her duty, the blame was not hers.  But
that a religion capable of inflicting such suffering upon the innocent
should still be preached; maintained by the State!  That its educated
followers no longer believed in a physical Hell, that its more advanced
clergy had entered into a conspiracy of silence on the subject was no
answer.  The great mass of the people were not educated.  Official
Christendom in every country still preached the everlasting torture of
the majority of the human race as a well thought out part of the
Creator's scheme.  No leader had been bold enough to come forward and
denounce it as an insult to his God.  As one grew older, kindly mother
Nature, ever seeking to ease the self-inflicted burdens of her foolish
brood, gave one forgetfulness, insensibility.  The condemned criminal
puts the thought of the gallows away from him as long as may be: eats,
and sleeps and even jokes.  Man's soul grows pachydermoid.  But the
children!  Their sensitive brains exposed to every cruel breath.  No
philosophic doubt permitted to them.  No learned disputation on the
relationship between the literal and the allegorical for the easing of
their frenzied fears.  How many million tiny white-faced figures
scattered over Christian Europe and America, stared out each night into a
vision of black horror; how many million tiny hands clutched wildly at
the bedclothes.  The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children,
if they had done their duty, would have prosecuted before now the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Of course she would go to Hell.  As a special kindness some generous
relative had, on Joan's seventh birthday, given her an edition of Dante's
"Inferno," with illustrations by Dore.  From it she was able to form some
notion of what her eternity was likely to be.  And God all the while up
in His Heaven, surrounded by that glorious band of praise-trumpeting
angels, watching her out of the corner of His eye.  Her courage saved her
from despair.  Defiance came to her aid.  Let Him send her to Hell!  She
was not going to pray to Him and make up to Him.  He was a wicked God.
Yes, He was: a cruel, wicked God.  And one night she told Him so to His
face.

It had been a pretty crowded day, even for so busy a sinner as little
Joan.  It was springtime, and they had gone into the country for her
mother's health.  Maybe it was the season: a stirring of the human sap,
conducing to that feeling of being "too big for one's boots," as the
saying is.  A dangerous period of the year.  Indeed, on the principle
that prevention is better than cure, Mrs. Munday had made it a custom
during April and May to administer to Joan a cooling mixture; but on this
occasion had unfortunately come away without it.  Joan, dressed for use
rather than show, and without either shoes or stockings, had stolen
stealthily downstairs: something seemed to be calling to her.
Silently--"like a thief in the night," to adopt Mrs. Munday's
metaphor--had slipped the heavy bolts; had joined the thousand creatures
of the wood--had danced and leapt and shouted; had behaved, in short,
more as if she had been a Pagan nymph than a happy English child.  She
had regained the house unnoticed, as she thought, the Devil, no doubt,
assisting her; and had hidden her wet clothes in the bottom of a mighty
chest.  Deceitfulness in her heart, she had greeted Mrs. Munday in sleepy
tones from beneath the sheets; and before breakfast, assailed by
suspicious questions, had told a deliberate lie.  Later in the morning,
during an argument with an active young pig who was willing enough to
play at Red Riding Hood so far as eating things out of a basket was
concerned, but who would not wear a night-cap, she had used a wicked
word.  In the afternoon she "might have killed" the farmer's only son and
heir.  They had had a row.  In one of those sad lapses from the higher
Christian standards into which Satan was always egging her, she had
pushed him; and he had tumbled head over heels into the horse-pond.  The
reason, that instead of lying there and drowning he had got up and walked
back to the house howling fit to wake the Seven Sleepers, was that God,
watching over little children, had arranged for the incident taking place
on that side of the pond where it was shallow.  Had the scrimmage
occurred on the opposite bank, beneath which the water was much deeper,
Joan in all probability would have had murder on her soul.  It seemed to
Joan that if God, all-powerful and all-foreseeing, had been so careful in
selecting the site, He might with equal ease have prevented the row from
ever taking place.  Why couldn't the little beast have been guided back
from school through the orchard, much the shorter way, instead of being
brought round by the yard, so as to come upon her at a moment when she
was feeling a bit short-tempered, to put it mildly?  And why had God
allowed him to call her "Carrots"?  That Joan should have "put it" this
way, instead of going down on her knees and thanking the Lord for having
saved her from a crime, was proof of her inborn evil disposition.  In the
evening was reached the culminating point.  Just before going to bed she
had murdered old George the cowman.  For all practical purposes she might
just as well have been successful in drowning William Augustus earlier in
the day.  It seemed to be one of those things that had to be.  Mr.
Hornflower still lived, it was true, but that was not Joan's fault.  Joan,
standing in white night-gown beside her bed, everything around her
breathing of innocence and virtue: the spotless bedclothes, the chintz
curtains, the white hyacinths upon the window-ledge, Joan's Bible, a
present from Aunt Susan; her prayer-book, handsomely bound in calf, a
present from Grandpapa, upon their little table; Mrs. Munday in evening
black and cameo brooch (pale red with tomb and weeping willow in white
relief) sacred to the memory of the departed Mr. Munday--Joan standing
there erect, with pale, passionate face, defying all these aids to
righteousness, had deliberately wished Mr. Hornflower dead.  Old George
Hornflower it was who, unseen by her, had passed her that morning in the
wood.  Grumpy old George it was who had overheard the wicked word with
which she had cursed the pig; who had met William Augustus on his
emergence from the pond.  To Mr. George Hornflower, the humble instrument
in the hands of Providence, helping her towards possible salvation, she
ought to have been grateful.  And instead of that she had flung into the
agonized face of Mrs. Munday these awful words:

"I wish he was dead!"

"He who in his heart--" there was verse and chapter for it.  Joan was a
murderess.  Just as well, so far as Joan was concerned, might she have
taken a carving-knife and stabbed Deacon Hornflower to the heart.

Joan's prayers that night, to the accompaniment of Mrs. Munday's sobs,
had a hopeless air of unreality about them.  Mrs. Munday's kiss was cold.

How long Joan lay and tossed upon her little bed she could not tell.
Somewhere about the middle of the night, or so it seemed to her, the
frenzy seized her.  Flinging the bedclothes away she rose to her feet.  It
is difficult to stand upon a spring mattress, but Joan kept her balance.
Of course He was there in the room with her.  God was everywhere, spying
upon her.  She could distinctly hear His measured breathing.  Face to
face with Him, she told Him what she thought of Him.  She told Him He was
a cruel, wicked God.

There are no Victoria Crosses for sinners, or surely little Joan that
night would have earned it.  It was not lack of imagination that helped
her courage.  God and she alone, in the darkness.  He with all the forces
of the Universe behind Him.  He armed with His eternal pains and
penalties, and eight-year-old Joan: the creature that He had made in His
Own Image that He could torture and destroy.  Hell yawned beneath her,
but it had to be said.  Somebody ought to tell Him.

"You are a wicked God," Joan told Him.  "Yes, You are.  A cruel, wicked
God."

And then that she might not see the walls of the room open before her,
hear the wild laughter of the thousand devils that were coming to bear
her off, she threw herself down, her face hidden in the pillow, and
clenched her hands and waited.

And suddenly there burst a song.  It was like nothing Joan had ever heard
before.  So clear and loud and near that all the night seemed filled with
harmony.  It sank into a tender yearning cry throbbing with passionate
desire, and then it rose again in thrilling ecstasy: a song of hope, of
victory.

Joan, trembling, stole from her bed and drew aside the blind.  There was
nothing to be seen but the stars and the dim shape of the hills.  But
still that song, filling the air with its wild, triumphant melody.

Years afterwards, listening to the overture to _Tannhauser_, there came
back to her the memory of that night.  Ever through the mad Satanic
discords she could hear, now faint, now conquering, the Pilgrims' onward
march.  So through the jangled discords of the world one heard the Song
of Life.  Through the dim aeons of man's savage infancy; through the
centuries of bloodshed and of horror; through the dark ages of tyranny
and superstition; through wrong, through cruelty, through hate; heedless
of doom, heedless of death, still the nightingale's song: "I love you.  I
love you.  I love you.  We will build a nest.  We will rear our brood.  I
love you.  I love you.  Life shall not die."

Joan crept back into bed.  A new wonder had come to her.  And from that
night Joan's belief in Mrs. Munday's God began to fade, circumstances
helping.

Firstly there was the great event of going to school.  She was glad to
get away from home, a massive, stiffly furnished house in a wealthy
suburb of Liverpool.  Her mother, since she could remember, had been an
invalid, rarely leaving her bedroom till the afternoon.  Her father, the
owner of large engineering works, she only saw, as a rule, at
dinner-time, when she would come down to dessert.  It had been different
when she was very young, before her mother had been taken ill.  Then she
had been more with them both.  She had dim recollections of her father
playing with her, pretending to be a bear and growling at her from behind
the sofa.  And then he would seize and hug her and they would both laugh,
while he tossed her into the air and caught her.  He had looked so big
and handsome.  All through her childhood there had been the desire to
recreate those days, to spring into the air and catch her arms about his
neck.  She could have loved him dearly if he had only let her.  Once,
seeking explanation, she had opened her heart a little to Mrs. Munday.  It
was disappointment, Mrs. Munday thought, that she had not been a boy; and
with that Joan had to content herself.  Maybe also her mother's illness
had helped to sadden him.  Or perhaps it was mere temperament, as she
argued to herself later, for which they were both responsible.  Those
little tricks of coaxing, of tenderness, of wilfulness, by means of which
other girls wriggled their way so successfully into a warm nest of cosy
affection: she had never been able to employ them.  Beneath her
self-confidence was a shyness, an immovable reserve that had always
prevented her from expressing her emotions.  She had inherited it,
doubtless enough, from him.  Perhaps one day, between them, they would
break down the barrier, the strength of which seemed to lie in its very
flimsiness, its impalpability.

And then during college vacations, returning home with growing notions
and views of her own, she had found herself so often in antagonism with
him.  His fierce puritanism, so opposed to all her enthusiasms.  Arguing
with him, she might almost have been listening to one of his Cromwellian
ancestors risen from the dead.  There had been disputes between him and
his work-people, and Joan had taken the side of the men.  He had not been
angry with her, but coldly contemptuous.  And yet, in spite of it all, if
he had only made a sign!  She wanted to fling herself crying into his
arms and shake him--make him listen to her wisdom, sitting on his knee
with her hands clasped round his neck.  He was not really intolerant and
stupid.  That had been proved by his letting her go to a Church of
England school.  Her mother had expressed no wish.  It was he who had
selected it.

Of her mother she had always stood somewhat in fear, never knowing when
the mood of passionate affection would give place to a chill aversion
that seemed almost like hate.  Perhaps it had been good for her, so she
told herself in after years, her lonely, unguided childhood.  It had
forced her to think and act for herself.  At school she reaped the
benefit.  Self-reliant, confident, original, leadership was granted to
her as a natural prerogative.  Nature had helped her.  Nowhere does a
young girl rule more supremely by reason of her beauty than among her
fellows.  Joan soon grew accustomed to having her boots put on and taken
off for her; all her needs of service anticipated by eager slaves,
contending with one another for the privilege.  By giving a command, by
bestowing a few moments of her conversation, it was within her power to
make some small adoring girl absurdly happy for the rest of the day;
while her displeasure would result in tears, in fawning pleadings for
forgiveness.  The homage did not spoil her.  Rather it helped to develop
her.  She accepted it from the beginning as in the order of things.  Power
had been given to her.  It was her duty to see to it that she did not use
it capriciously, for her own gratification.  No conscientious youthful
queen could have been more careful in the distribution of her
favours--that they should be for the encouragement of the deserving, the
reward of virtue; more sparing of her frowns, reserving them for the
rectification of error.

At Girton it was more by force of will, of brain, that she had to make
her position.  There was more competition.  Joan welcomed it, as giving
more zest to life.  But even there her beauty was by no means a
negligible quantity.  Clever, brilliant young women, accustomed to sweep
aside all opposition with a blaze of rhetoric, found themselves to their
irritation sitting in front of her silent, not so much listening to her
as looking at her.  It puzzled them for a time.  Because a girl's
features are classical and her colouring attractive, surely that has
nothing to do with the value of her political views?  Until one of them
discovered by chance that it has.

"Well, what does Beauty think about it?" this one had asked, laughing.
She had arrived at the end of a discussion just as Joan was leaving the
room.  And then she gave a long low whistle, feeling that she had
stumbled upon the explanation.  Beauty, that mysterious force that from
the date of creation has ruled the world, what does It think?  Dumb,
passive, as a rule, exercising its influence unconsciously.  But if it
should become intelligent, active!  A Philosopher has dreamed of the vast
influence that could be exercised by a dozen sincere men acting in unity.
Suppose a dozen of the most beautiful women in the world could form
themselves into a league!  Joan found them late in the evening still
discussing it.

Her mother died suddenly during her last term, and Joan hurried back to
attend the funeral.  Her father was out when she reached home.  Joan
changed her travel-dusty clothes, and then went into the room where her
mother lay, and closed the door.  She must have been a beautiful woman.
Now that the fret and the restlessness had left her it had come back to
her.  The passionate eyes were closed.  Joan kissed the marble lids, and
drawing a chair to the bedside, sat down.  It grieved her that she had
never loved her mother--not as one ought to love one's mother,
unquestioningly, unreasoningly, as a natural instinct.  For a moment a
strange thought came to her, and swiftly, almost guiltily, she stole
across, and drawing back a corner of the blind, examined closely her own
features in the glass, comparing them with the face of the dead woman,
thus called upon to be a silent witness for or against the living.  Joan
drew a sigh of relief and let fall the blind.  There could be no
misreading the evidence.  Death had smoothed away the lines, given back
youth.  It was almost uncanny, the likeness between them.  It might have
been her drowned sister lying there.  And they had never known one
another.  Had this also been temperament again, keeping them apart?  Why
did it imprison us each one as in a moving cell, so that we never could
stretch out our arms to one another, except when at rare intervals Love
or Death would unlock for a while the key?  Impossible that two beings
should have been so alike in feature without being more or less alike in
thought and feeling.  Whose fault had it been?  Surely her own; she was
so hideously calculating.  Even Mrs. Munday, because the old lady had
been fond of her and had shown it, had been of more service to her, more
a companion, had been nearer to her than her own mother.  In self-excuse
she recalled the two or three occasions when she had tried to win her
mother.  But fate seemed to have decreed that their moods should never
correspond.  Her mother's sudden fierce outbursts of love, when she would
be jealous, exacting, almost cruel, had frightened her when she was a
child, and later on had bored her.  Other daughters would have shown
patience, unselfishness, but she had always been so self-centred.  Why
had she never fallen in love like other girls?  There had been a boy at
Brighton when she was at school there--quite a nice boy, who had written
her wildly extravagant love-letters.  It must have cost him half his
pocket-money to get them smuggled in to her.  Why had she only been
amused at them?  They might have been beautiful if only one had read them
with sympathy.  One day he had caught her alone on the Downs.  Evidently
he had made it his business to hang about every day waiting for some such
chance.  He had gone down on his knees and kissed her feet, and had been
so abject, so pitiful that she had given him some flowers she was
wearing.  And he had sworn to dedicate the rest of his life to being
worthy of her condescension.  Poor lad!  She wondered--for the first time
since that afternoon--what had become of him.  There had been others; a
third cousin who still wrote to her from Egypt, sending her presents that
perhaps he could ill afford, and whom she answered about once a year.  And
promising young men she had met at Cambridge, ready, the felt
instinctively, to fall down and worship her.  And all the use she had had
for them was to convert them to her views--a task so easy as to be quite
uninteresting--with a vague idea that they might come in handy in the
future, when she might need help in shaping that world of the future.

Only once had she ever thought of marriage.  And that was in favour of a
middle-aged, rheumatic widower with three children, a professor of
chemistry, very learned and justly famous.  For about a month she had
thought herself in love.  She pictured herself devoting her life to him,
rubbing his poor left shoulder where it seemed he suffered most, and
brushing his picturesque hair, inclined to grey.  Fortunately his eldest
daughter was a young woman of resource, or the poor gentleman, naturally
carried off his feet by this adoration of youth and beauty, might have
made an ass of himself.  But apart from this one episode she had reached
the age of twenty-three heart-whole.

She rose and replaced the chair.  And suddenly a wave of pity passed over
her for the dead woman, who had always seemed so lonely in the great
stiffly-furnished house, and the tears came.

She was glad she had been able to cry.  She had always hated herself for
her lack of tears; it was so unwomanly.  Even as a child she had rarely
cried.

Her father had always been very tender, very patient towards her mother,
but she had not expected to find him so changed.  He had aged and his
shoulders drooped.  She had been afraid that he would want her to stay
with him and take charge of the house.  It had worried her considerably.
It would be so difficult to refuse, and yet she would have to.  But when
he never broached the subject she was hurt.  He had questioned her about
her plans the day after the funeral, and had seemed only anxious to
assist them.  She proposed continuing at Cambridge till the end of the
term.  She had taken her degree the year before.  After that, she would
go to London and commence her work.

"Let me know what allowance you would like me to make you, when you have
thought it out.  Things are not what they were at the works, but there
will always be enough to keep you in comfort," he had told her.  She had
fixed it there and then at two hundred a year.  She would not take more,
and that only until she was in a position to keep herself.

"I want to prove to myself," she explained, "that I am capable of earning
my own living.  I am going down into the market-place.  If I'm no good,
if I can't take care of even one poor woman, I'll come back and ask you
to keep me."  She was sitting on the arm of his chair, and laughing, she
drew his head towards her and pressed it against her.  "If I succeed, if
I am strong enough to fight the world for myself and win, that will mean
I am strong enough and clever enough to help others."

"I am only at the end of a journey when you need me," he had answered,
and they had kissed.  And next morning she returned to her own life.




CHAPTER III


It was at Madge Singleton's rooms that the details of Joan's entry into
journalistic London were arranged.  "The Coming of Beauty," was Flora
Lessing's phrase for designating the event.  Flora Lessing, known among
her associates as "Flossie," was the girl who at Cambridge had
accidentally stumbled upon the explanation of Joan's influence.  In
appearance she was of the Fluffy Ruffles type, with childish innocent
eyes, and the "unruly curls" beloved of the _Family Herald_ novelist.  At
the first, these latter had been the result of a habit of late rising and
consequent hurried toilet operations; but on the discovery that for the
purposes of her profession they possessed a market value they had been
sedulously cultivated.  Editors of the old order had ridiculed the idea
of her being of any use to them, when two years previously she had, by
combination of cheek and patience, forced herself into their sanctum; had
patted her paternally upon her generally ungloved hand, and told her to
go back home and get some honest, worthy young man to love and cherish
her.

It was Carleton of the _Daily Dispatch_ group who had first divined her
possibilities.  With a swift glance on his way through, he had picked her
out from a line of depressed-looking men and women ranged against the
wall of the dark entrance passage; and with a snap of his fingers had
beckoned to her to follow him.  Striding in front of her up to his room,
he had pointed to a chair and had left her sitting there for
three-quarters of an hour, while he held discussion with a stream of
subordinates, managers and editors of departments, who entered and
departed one after another, evidently in pre-arranged order.  All of them
spoke rapidly, without ever digressing by a single word from the point,
giving her the impression of their speeches having been rehearsed
beforehand.

Carleton himself never interrupted them.  Indeed, one might have thought
he was not listening, so engrossed he appeared to be in the pile of
letters and telegrams that lay waiting for him on his desk.  When they
had finished he would ask them questions, still with his attention fixed
apparently upon the paper in his hand.  Then, looking up for the first
time, he would run off curt instructions, much in the tone of a Commander-
in-Chief giving orders for an immediate assault; and, finishing abruptly,
return to his correspondence.  When the last, as it transpired, had
closed the door behind him, he swung his chair round and faced her.

"What have you been doing?" he asked her.

"Wasting my time and money hanging about newspaper offices, listening to
silly talk from old fossils," she told him.

"And having learned that respectable journalism has no use for brains,
you come to me," he answered her.  "What do you think you can do?"

"Anything that can be done with a pen and ink," she told him.

"Interviewing?" he suggested.

"I've always been considered good at asking awkward questions," she
assured him.

He glanced at the clock.  "I'll give you five minutes," he said.
"Interview me."

She moved to a chair beside the desk, and, opening her bag, took out a
writing-block.

"What are your principles?" she asked him.  "Have you got any?"

He looked at her sharply across the corner of the desk.

"I mean," she continued, "to what fundamental rule of conduct do you
attribute your success?"

She leant forward, fixing her eyes on him.  "Don't tell me," she
persisted, "that you had none.  That life is all just mere blind chance.
Think of the young men who are hanging on your answer.  Won't you send
them a message?"

"Yes," he answered musingly.  "It's your baby face that does the trick.
In the ordinary way I should have known you were pulling my leg, and have
shown you the door.  As it was, I felt half inclined for the moment to
reply with some damned silly platitude that would have set all Fleet
Street laughing at me.  Why do my 'principles' interest you?"

"As a matter of fact they don't," she explained.  "But it's what people
talk about whenever they discuss you."

"What do they say?" he demanded.

"Your friends, that you never had any.  And your enemies, that they are
always the latest," she informed him.

"You'll do," he answered with a laugh.  "With nine men out of ten that
speech would have ended your chances.  You sized me up at a glance, and
knew it would only interest me.  And your instinct is right," he added.
"What people are saying: always go straight for that."

He gave her a commission then and there for a heart to heart talk with a
gentleman whom the editor of the Home News Department of the _Daily
Dispatch_ would have referred to as a "Leading Literary Luminary," and
who had just invented a new world in two volumes.  She had asked him
childish questions and had listened with wide-open eyes while he, sitting
over against her, and smiling benevolently, had laid bare to her all the
seeming intricacies of creation, and had explained to her in simple
language the necessary alterations and improvements he was hoping to
bring about in human nature.  He had the sensation that his hair must be
standing on end the next morning after having read in cold print what he
had said.  Expanding oneself before the admiring gaze of innocent
simplicity and addressing the easily amused ear of an unsympathetic
public are not the same thing.  He ought to have thought of that.

It consoled him, later, that he was not the only victim.  The _Daily
Dispatch_ became famous for its piquant interviews; especially with
elderly celebrities of the masculine gender.

"It's dirty work," Flossie confided one day to Madge Singleton.  "I trade
on my silly face.  Don't see that I'm much different to any of these poor
devils."  They were walking home in the evening from a theatre.  "If I
hadn't been stony broke I'd never have taken it up.  I shall get out of
it as soon as I can afford to."

"I should make it a bit sooner than that," suggested the elder woman.
"One can't always stop oneself just where one wants to when sliding down
a slope.  It has a knack of getting steeper and steeper as one goes on."

Madge had asked Joan to come a little earlier so that they could have a
chat together before the others arrived.

"I've only asked a few," she explained, as she led Joan into the restful
white-panelled sitting-room that looked out upon the gardens.  Madge
shared a set of chambers in Gray's Inn with her brother who was an actor.
"But I have chosen them with care."

Joan murmured her thanks.

"I haven't asked any men," she added, as she fixed Joan in an easy chair
before the fire.  "I was afraid of its introducing the wrong element."

"Tell me," asked Joan, "am I likely to meet with much of that sort of
thing?"

"Oh, about as much as there always is wherever men and women work
together," answered Madge.  "It's a nuisance, but it has to be faced."

"Nature appears to have only one idea in her head," she continued after a
pause, "so far as we men and women are concerned.  She's been kinder to
the lower animals."

"Man has more interests," Joan argued, "a thousand other allurements to
distract him; we must cultivate his finer instincts."

"It doesn't seem to answer," grumbled Madge.  "One is always told it is
the artist--the brain worker, the very men who have these fine instincts,
who are the most sexual."

She made a little impatient movement with her hands that was
characteristic of her.  "Personally, I like men," she went on.  "It is so
splendid the way they enjoy life: just like a dog does, whether it's wet
or fine.  We are always blinking up at the clouds and worrying about our
hat.  It would be so nice to be able to have friendship with them.

"I don't mean that it's all their fault," she continued.  "We do all we
can to attract them--the way we dress.  Who was it said that to every
woman every man is a potential lover.  We can't get it out of our minds.
It's there even when we don't know it.  We will never succeed in
civilizing Nature."

"We won't despair of her," laughed Joan.  "She's creeping up, poor lady,
as Whistler said of her.  We have passed the phase when everything she
did was right in our childish eyes.  Now we dare to criticize her.  That
shows we are growing up.  She will learn from us, later on.  She's a dear
old thing, at heart."

"She's been kind enough to you," replied Madge, somewhat irrelevantly.
There was a note of irritation in her tone.  "I suppose you know you are
supremely beautiful.  You seem so indifferent to it, I wonder sometimes
if you do."

"I'm not indifferent to it," answered Joan.  "I'm reckoning on it to help
me."

"Why not?" she continued, with a flash of defiance, though Madge had not
spoken.  "It is a weapon like any other--knowledge, intellect, courage.
God has given me beauty.  I shall use it in His service."

They formed a curious physical contrast, these two women in this moment.
Joan, radiant, serene, sat upright in her chair, her head slightly thrown
back, her fine hands clasping one another so strongly that the delicate
muscles could be traced beneath the smooth white skin.  Madge, with
puckered brows, leant forward in a crouching attitude, her thin nervous
hands stretched out towards the fire.

"How does one know when one is serving God?" she asked after a pause,
apparently rather of herself than of Joan.  "It seems so difficult."

"One feels it," explained Joan.

"Yes, but didn't they all feel it," Madge suggested.  She still seemed to
be arguing with herself rather than with Joan.  "Nietzsche.  I have been
reading him.  They are forming a Nietzsche Society to give lectures about
him--propagate him over here.  Eleanor's in it up to the neck.  It seems
to me awful.  Every fibre in my being revolts against him.  Yet they're
all cocksure that he is the coming prophet.  He must have convinced
himself that he is serving God.  If I were a fighter I should feel I was
serving God trying to down Him.  How do I know which of us is right?
Torquemada--Calvin," she went on, without giving Joan the chance of a
reply.  "It's easy enough to see they were wrong now.  But at the time
millions of people believed in them--felt it was God's voice speaking
through them.  Joan of Arc!  Fancy dying to put a thing like that upon a
throne.  It would be funny if it wasn't so tragic.  You can say she drove
out the English--saved France.  But for what?  The Bartholomew massacres.
The ruin of the Palatinate by Louis XIV.  The horrors of the French
Revolution, ending with Napoleon and all the misery and degeneracy that
he bequeathed to Europe.  History might have worked itself out so much
better if the poor child had left it alone and minded her sheep."

"Wouldn't that train of argument lead to nobody ever doing anything?"
suggested Joan.

"I suppose it would mean stagnation," admitted Madge.  "And yet I don't
know.  Are there not forces moving towards right that are crying to us to
help them, not by violence, which only interrupts--delays them, but by
quietly preparing the way for them?  You know what I mean.  Erasmus
always said that Luther had hindered the Reformation by stirring up
passion and hate."  She broke off suddenly.  There were tears in her
eyes.  "Oh, if God would only say what He wants of us," she almost cried;
"call to us in trumpet tones that would ring through the world,
compelling us to take sides.  Why can't He speak?"

"He does," answered Joan.  "I hear His voice.  There are things I've got
to do.  Wrongs that I must fight against.  Rights that I must never dare
to rest till they are won."  Her lips were parted.  Her breasts heaving.
"He does call to us.  He has girded His sword upon me."

Madge looked at her in silence for quite a while.  "How confident you
are," she said.  "How I envy you."

They talked for a time about domestic matters.  Joan had established
herself in furnished rooms in a quiet street of pleasant Georgian houses
just behind the Abbey; a member of Parliament and his wife occupied the
lower floors, the landlord, a retired butler, and his wife, an excellent
cook, confining themselves to the basement and the attics.  The remaining
floor was tenanted by a shy young man--a poet, so the landlady thought,
but was not sure.  Anyhow he had long hair, lived with a pipe in his
mouth, and burned his lamp long into the night.  Joan had omitted to ask
his name.  She made a note to do so.

They discussed ways and means.  Joan calculated she could get through on
two hundred a year, putting aside fifty for dress.  Madge was doubtful if
this would be sufficient.  Joan urged that she was "stock size" and would
be able to pick up "models" at sales; but Madge, measuring her against
herself, was sure she was too full.

"You will find yourself expensive to dress," she told her, "cheap things
won't go well on you; and it would be madness, even from a business point
of view, for you not to make the best of yourself."

"Men stand more in awe of a well-dressed woman than they do even of a
beautiful woman," Madge was of opinion.  "If you go into an office
looking dowdy they'll beat you down.  Tell them the price they are
offering you won't keep you in gloves for a week and they'll be ashamed
of themselves.  There's nothing _infra dig_. in being mean to the poor;
but not to sympathize with the rich stamps you as middle class."  She
laughed.

Joan was worried.  "I told Dad I should only ask him for enough to make
up two hundred a year," she explained.  "He'll laugh at me for not
knowing my own mind."

"I should let him," advised Madge.  She grew thoughtful again.  "We
cranky young women, with our new-fangled, independent ways, I guess we
hurt the old folks quite enough as it is."

The bell rang and Madge opened the door herself.  It turned out to be
Flossie.  Joan had not seen her since they had been at Girton together,
and was surprised at Flossie's youthful "get up."  Flossie explained, and
without waiting for any possible attack flew to her own defence.

"The revolution that the world is waiting for," was Flossie's opinion,
"is the providing of every man and woman with a hundred and fifty a year.
Then we shall all be able to afford to be noble and high-minded.  As it
is, nine-tenths of the contemptible things we do comes from the necessity
of our having to earn our living.  A hundred and fifty a year would
deliver us from evil."

"Would there not still be the diamond dog-collar and the motor car left
to tempt us?" suggested Madge.

"Only the really wicked," contended Flossie.  "It would classify us.  We
should know then which were the sheep and which the goats.  At present
we're all jumbled together: the ungodly who sin out of mere greed and
rapacity, and the just men compelled to sell their birthright of fine
instincts for a mess of meat and potatoes."

"Yah, socialist," commented Madge, who was busy with the tea things.

Flossie seemed struck by an idea.

"By Jove," she exclaimed.  "Why did I never think of it.  With a red flag
and my hair down, I'd be in all the illustrated papers.  It would put up
my price no end.  And I'd be able to get out of this silly job of mine.  I
can't go on much longer.  I'm getting too well known.  I do believe I'll
try it.  The shouting's easy enough."  She turned to Joan.  "Are you
going to take up socialism?" she demanded.

"I may," answered Joan.  "Just to spank it, and put it down again.  I'm
rather a believer in temptation--the struggle for existence.  I only want
to make it a finer existence, more worth the struggle, in which the best
man shall rise to the top.  Your 'universal security'--that will be the
last act of the human drama, the cue for ringing down the curtain."

"But do not all our Isms work towards that end?" suggested Madge.

Joan was about to reply when the maid's announcement of "Mrs. Denton"
postponed the discussion.

Mrs. Denton was a short, grey-haired lady.  Her large strong features
must have made her, when she was young, a hard-looking woman; but time
and sorrow had strangely softened them; while about the corners of the
thin firm mouth lurked a suggestion of humour that possibly had not
always been there.  Joan, waiting to be introduced, towered head and
shoulders above her; yet when she took the small proffered hand and felt
those steely blue eyes surveying her, she had the sensation of being
quite insignificant.  Mrs. Denton seemed to be reading her, and then
still retaining Joan's hand she turned to Madge with a smile.

"So this is our new recruit," she said.  "She is come to bring healing to
the sad, sick world--to right all the old, old wrongs."

She patted Joan's hand and spoke gravely.  "That is right, dear.  That is
youth's _metier_; to take the banner from our failing hands, bear it
still a little onward."  Her small gloved hand closed on Joan's with a
pressure that made Joan wince.

"And you must not despair," she continued; "because in the end it will
seem to you that you have failed.  It is the fallen that win the
victories."

She released Joan's hand abruptly.  "Come and see me to-morrow morning at
my office," she said.  "We will fix up something that shall be
serviceable to us both."

Madge flashed Joan a look.  She considered Joan's position already
secured.  Mrs. Denton was the doyen of women journalists.  She edited a
monthly review and was leader writer of one of the most important
dailies, besides being the controlling spirit of various social
movements.  Anyone she "took up" would be assured of steady work.  The
pay might not be able to compete with the prices paid for more popular
journalism, but it would afford a foundation, and give to Joan that
opportunity for influence which was her main ambition.

Joan expressed her thanks.  She would like to have had more talk with the
stern old lady, but was prevented by the entrance of two new comers.  The
first was Miss Lavery, a handsome, loud-toned young woman.  She ran a
nursing paper, but her chief interest was in the woman's suffrage
question, just then coming rapidly to the front.  She had heard Joan
speak at Cambridge and was eager to secure her adherence, being wishful
to surround herself with a group of young and good-looking women who
should take the movement out of the hands of the "frumps," as she termed
them.  Her doubt was whether Joan would prove sufficiently tractable.  She
intended to offer her remunerative work upon the _Nursing News_ without
saying anything about the real motive behind, trusting to gratitude to
make her task the easier.

The second was a clumsy-looking, overdressed woman whom Miss Lavery
introduced as "Mrs. Phillips, a very dear friend of mine, who is going to
be helpful to us all," adding in a hurried aside to Madge, "I simply had
to bring her.  Will explain to you another time."  An apology certainly
seemed to be needed.  The woman was absurdly out of her place.  She stood
there panting and slightly perspiring.  She was short and fat, with dyed
hair.  As a girl she had possibly been pretty in a dimpled, giggling sort
of way.  Joan judged her, in spite of her complexion, to be about forty.

Joan wondered if she could be the wife of the Member of Parliament who
occupied the rooms below her in Cowley Street.  His name, so the landlady
had told her, was Phillips.  She put the suggestion in a whisper to
Flossie.

"Quite likely," thought Flossie; "just the type that sort of man does
marry.  A barmaid, I expect."

Others continued to arrive until altogether there must have been about a
dozen women present.  One of them turned out to be an old schoolfellow of
Joan's and two had been with her at Girton.  Madge had selected those who
she knew would be sympathetic, and all promised help: those who could not
give it direct undertaking to provide introductions and recommendations,
though some of them were frankly doubtful of journalism affording Joan
anything more than the means--not always, too honest--of earning a
living.

"I started out to preach the gospel: all that sort of thing," drawled a
Miss Simmonds from beneath a hat that, if she had paid for it, would have
cost her five guineas.  "Now my chief purpose in life is to tickle silly
women into spending twice as much upon their clothes as their husbands
can afford, bamboozling them into buying any old thing that our
Advertising Manager instructs me to boom."

"They talk about the editor's opinions," struck in a fiery little woman
who was busy flinging crumbs out of the window to a crowd of noisy
sparrows.  "It's the Advertiser edits half the papers.  Write anything
that three of them object to, and your proprietor tells you to change
your convictions or go.  Most of us change."  She jerked down the window
with a slam.

"It's the syndicates that have done it," was a Mrs. Elliot's opinion.  She
wrote "Society Notes" for a Labour weekly.  "When one man owned a paper
he wanted it to express his views.  A company is only out for profit.
Your modern newspaper is just a shop.  It's only purpose is to attract
customers.  Look at the _Methodist Herald_, owned by the same syndicate
of Jews that runs the _Racing News_.  They work it as far as possible
with the same staff."

"We're a pack of hirelings," asserted the fiery little woman.  "Our pens
are for sale to the highest bidder.  I had a letter from Jocelyn only two
days ago.  He was one of the original staff of the _Socialist_.  He
writes me that he has gone as leader writer to a Conservative paper at
twice his former salary.  Expected me to congratulate him."

"One of these days somebody will start a Society for the Reformation of
the Press," thought Flossie.  "I wonder how the papers will take it?"

"Much as Rome took Savonarola," thought Madge.

Mrs. Denton had risen.

"They are right to a great extent," she said to Joan.  "But not all the
temple has been given over to the hucksters.  You shall place your
preaching stool in some quiet corner, where the passing feet shall pause
awhile to listen."

Her going was the signal for the breaking up of the party.  In a short
time Joan and Madge found themselves left with only Flossie.

"What on earth induced Helen to bring that poor old Dutch doll along with
her?" demanded Flossie.  "The woman never opened her mouth all the time.
Did she tell you?"

"No," answered Madge, "but I think I can guess.  She hopes--or perhaps
'fears' would be more correct--that her husband is going to join the
Cabinet, and is trying to fit herself by suddenly studying political and
social questions.  For a month she's been clinging like a leech to Helen
Lavery, who takes her to meetings and gatherings.  I suppose they've
struck up some sort of a bargain.  It's rather pathetic."

"Good Heavens!  What a tragedy for the man," commented Flossie.

"What is he like?" asked Joan.

"Not much to look at, if that's what you mean," answered Madge.  "Began
life as a miner, I believe.  Looks like ending as Prime Minister."

"I heard him at the Albert Hall last week," said Flossie.  "He's quite
wonderful."

"In what way?" questioned Joan.

"Oh, you know," explained Flossie.  "Like a volcano compressed into a
steam engine."

They discussed Joan's plans.  It looked as if things were going to be
easy for her.




CHAPTER IV


Yet in the end it was Carleton who opened the door for her.

Mrs. Denton was helpful, and would have been more so, if Joan had only
understood.  Mrs. Denton lived alone in an old house in Gower Street,
with a high stone hall that was always echoing to sounds that no one but
itself could ever hear.  Her son had settled, it was supposed, in one of
the Colonies.  No one knew what had become of him, and Mrs. Denton
herself never spoke of him; while her daughter, on whom she had centred
all her remaining hopes, had died years ago.  To those who remembered the
girl, with her weak eyes and wispy ginger coloured hair, it would have
seemed comical, the idea that Joan resembled her.  But Mrs. Denton's
memory had lost itself in dreams; and to her the likeness had appeared
quite wonderful.  The gods had given her child back to her, grown strong
and brave and clever.  Life would have a new meaning for her.  Her work
would not die with her.

She thought she could harness Joan's enthusiasm to her own wisdom.  She
would warn her of the errors and pitfalls into which she herself had
fallen: for she, too, had started as a rebel.  Youth should begin where
age left off.  Had the old lady remembered a faded dogs-eared volume
labelled "Oddments" that for many years had rested undisturbed upon its
shelf in her great library, and opening it had turned to the letter E,
she would have read recorded there, in her own precise thin penmanship,
this very wise reflection:

"Experience is a book that all men write, but no man reads."

To which she would have found added, by way of complement, "Experience is
untranslatable.  We write it in the cipher of our sufferings, and the key
is hidden in our memories."

And turning to the letter Y, she might have read:

"Youth comes to teach.  Age remains to listen," and underneath the
following:

"The ability to learn is the last lesson we acquire."

Mrs. Denton had long ago given up the practice of jotting down her
thoughts, experience having taught her that so often, when one comes to
use them, one finds that one has changed them.  But in the case of Joan
the recollection of these twin "oddments" might have saved her
disappointment.  Joan knew of a new road that avoided Mrs. Denton's
pitfalls.  She grew impatient of being perpetually pulled back.

For the _Nursing Times_ she wrote a series of condensed biographies,
entitled "Ladies of the Lamp," commencing with Elizabeth Fry.  They
formed a record of good women who had battled for the weak and suffering,
winning justice for even the uninteresting.  Miss Lavery was delighted
with them.  But when Joan proposed exposing the neglect and even cruelty
too often inflicted upon the helpless patients of private Nursing Homes,
Miss Lavery shook her head.

"I know," she said.  "One does hear complaints about them.  Unfortunately
it is one of the few businesses managed entirely by women; and just now,
in particular, if we were to say anything, it would be made use of by our
enemies to injure the Cause."

There was a summer years ago--it came back to Joan's mind--when she had
shared lodgings with a girl chum at a crowded sea-side watering-place.
The rooms were shockingly dirty; and tired of dropping hints she
determined one morning to clean them herself.  She climbed a chair and
started on a row of shelves where lay the dust of ages.  It was a jerry-
built house, and the result was that she brought the whole lot down about
her head, together with a quarter of a hundred-weight of plaster.

"Yes, I thought you'd do some mischief," had commented the landlady,
wearily.

It seemed typical.  A jerry-built world, apparently.  With the best
intentions it seemed impossible to move in it without doing more harm
than good to it, bringing things down about one that one had not
intended.

She wanted to abolish steel rabbit-traps.  She had heard the little
beggars cry.  It had struck her as such a harmless reform.  But they told
her there were worthy people in the neighbourhood of Wolverhampton--quite
a number of them--who made their living by the manufacture of steel
rabbit-traps.  If, thinking only of the rabbits, you prohibited steel
rabbit-traps, then you condemned all these worthy people to slow
starvation.  The local Mayor himself wrote in answer to her article.  He
drew a moving picture of the sad results that might follow such an ill-
considered agitation: hundreds of grey-haired men, too old to learn new
jobs, begging from door to door; shoals of little children, white-faced
and pinched; sobbing women.  Her editor was sorry for the rabbits.  Had
often spent a pleasant day with them himself.  But, after all, the Human
Race claimed our first sympathies.

She wanted to abolish sweating.  She had climbed the rotting stairways,
seen the famished creatures in their holes.  But it seemed that if you
interfered with the complicated system based on sweating then you
dislocated the entire structure of the British export clothing trade.  Not
only would these poor creatures lose their admittedly wretched living--but
still a living--but thousands of other innocent victims would also be
involved in the common ruin.  All very sad, but half a loaf--or even let
us frankly say a thin slice--is better than no bread at all.

She wanted board school children's heads examined.  She had examined one
or two herself.  It seemed to her wrong that healthy children should be
compelled to sit for hours within jumping distance of the diseased.  She
thought it better that the dirty should be made fit company for the clean
than the clean should be brought down to the level of the dirty.  It
seemed that in doing this you were destroying the independence of the
poor.  Opposition reformers, in letters scintillating with paradox,
bristling with classical allusion, denounced her attempt to impose middle-
class ideals upon a too long suffering proletariat.  Better far a few
lively little heads than a broken-spirited people robbed of their
parental rights.

Through Miss Lavery she obtained an introduction to the great Sir
William.  He owned a group of popular provincial newspapers, and was most
encouraging.  Sir William had often said to himself:

"What can I do for God who has done so much for me?"  It seemed only
fair.

He asked her down to his "little place in Hampshire," to talk plans over.
The "little place," it turned out, ran to forty bedrooms, and was
surrounded by three hundred acres of park.  God had evidently done his
bit quite handsomely.

It was in a secluded corner of the park that Sir William had gone down
upon one knee and gallantly kissed her hand.  His idea was that if she
could regard herself as his "Dear Lady," and allow him the honour and
privilege of being her "True Knight," that, between them, they might
accomplish something really useful.  There had been some difficulty about
his getting up again, Sir William being an elderly gentleman subject to
rheumatism, and Joan had had to expend no small amount of muscular effort
in assisting him; so that the episode which should have been symbolical
ended by leaving them both red and breathless.

He referred to the matter again the same evening in the library while
Lady William slept peacefully in the blue drawing-room; but as it
appeared necessary that the compact should be sealed by a knightly kiss
Joan had failed to ratify it.

She blamed herself on her way home.  The poor old gentleman could easily
have been kept in his place.  The suffering of an occasional harmless
caress would have purchased for her power and opportunity.  Had it not
been somewhat selfish of her?  Should she write to him--see him again?

She knew that she never would.  It was something apart from her reason.
It would not even listen to her.  It bade or forbade as if one were a
child without any right to a will of one's own.  It was decidedly
exasperating.

There were others.  There were the editors who frankly told her that the
business of a newspaper was to write what its customers wanted to read;
and that the public, so far as they could judge, was just about fed up
with plans for New Jerusalems at their expense.  And the editors who were
prepared to take up any number of reforms, insisting only that they
should be new and original and promise popularity.

And then she met Greyson.

It was at a lunch given by Mrs. Denton.  Greyson was a bachelor and lived
with an unmarried sister, a few years older than himself.  He was editor
and part proprietor of an evening paper.  It had ideals and was, in
consequence, regarded by the general public with suspicion; but by reason
of sincerity and braininess was rapidly becoming a power.  He was a shy,
reserved man with an aristocratic head set upon stooping shoulders.  The
face was that of a dreamer, but about the mouth there was suggestion of
the fighter.  Joan felt at her ease with him in spite of the air of
detachment that seemed part of his character.  Mrs. Denton had paired
them off together; and, during the lunch, one of them--Joan could not
remember which--had introduced the subject of reincarnation.

Greyson was unable to accept the theory because of the fact that, in old
age, the mind in common with the body is subject to decay.

"Perhaps by the time I am forty--or let us say fifty," he argued, "I
shall be a bright, intelligent being.  If I die then, well and good.  I
select a likely baby and go straight on.  But suppose I hang about till
eighty and die a childish old gentleman with a mind all gone to seed.
What am I going to do then?  I shall have to begin all over again:
perhaps worse off than I was before.  That's not going to help us much."

Joan explained it to him: that old age might be likened to an illness.  A
genius lies upon a bed of sickness and babbles childish nonsense.  But
with returning life he regains his power, goes on increasing it.  The
mind, the soul, has not decayed.  It is the lines of communication that
old age has destroyed.

"But surely you don't believe it?" he demanded.

"Why not?" laughed Joan.  "All things are possible.  It was the
possession of a hand that transformed monkeys into men.  We used to take
things up, you know, and look at them, and wonder and wonder and wonder,
till at last there was born a thought and the world became visible.  It
is curiosity that will lead us to the next great discovery.  We must take
things up; and think and think and think till one day there will come
knowledge, and we shall see the universe."

Joan always avoided getting excited when she thought of it.

"I love to make you excited," Flossie had once confessed to her in the
old student days.  "You look so ridiculously young and you are so pleased
with yourself, laying down the law."

She did not know she had given way to it.  He was leaning back in his
chair, looking at her; and the tired look she had noticed in his eyes,
when she had been introduced to him in the drawing-room, had gone out of
them.

During the coffee, Mrs. Denton beckoned him to come to her; and Miss
Greyson crossed over and took his vacant chair.  She had been sitting
opposite to them.

"I've been hearing so much about you," she said.  "I can't help thinking
that you ought to suit my brother's paper.  He has all your ideas.  Have
you anything that you could send him?"

Joan considered a moment.

"Nothing very startling," she answered.  "I was thinking of a series of
articles on the old London Churches--touching upon the people connected
with them and the things they stood for.  I've just finished the first
one."

"It ought to be the very thing," answered Miss Greyson.  She was a thin,
faded woman with a soft, plaintive voice.  "It will enable him to judge
your style.  He's particular about that.  Though I'm confident he'll like
it," she hastened to add.  "Address it to me, will you.  I assist him as
much as I can."

Joan added a few finishing touches that evening, and posted it; and a day
or two later received a note asking her to call at the office.

"My sister is enthusiastic about your article on Chelsea Church and
insists on my taking the whole series," Greyson informed her.  "She says
you have the Stevensonian touch."

Joan flushed with pleasure.

"And you," she asked, "did you think it had the Stevensonian touch?"

"No," he answered, "it seemed to me to have more of your touch."

"What's that like?" she demanded.

"They couldn't suppress you," he explained.  "Sir Thomas More with his
head under his arm, bloody old Bluebeard, grim Queen Bess, snarling old
Swift, Pope, Addison, Carlyle--the whole grisly crowd of them!  I could
see you holding your own against them all, explaining things to them,
getting excited."  He laughed.

His sister joined them, coming in from the next room.  She had a proposal
to make.  It was that Joan should take over the weekly letter from
"Clorinda."  It was supposed to give the views of a--perhaps
unusually--sane and thoughtful woman upon the questions of the day.  Miss
Greyson had hitherto conducted it herself, but was wishful as she
explained to be relieved of it; so that she might have more time for home
affairs.  It would necessitate Joan's frequent attendance at the office;
for there would be letters from the public to be answered, and points to
be discussed with her brother.  She was standing behind his chair with
her hands upon his head.  There was something strangely motherly about
her whole attitude.

Greyson was surprised, for the Letter had been her own conception, and
had grown into a popular feature.  But she was evidently in earnest; and
Joan accepted willingly.  "Clorinda" grew younger, more self-assertive;
on the whole more human.  But still so eminently "sane" and reasonable.

"We must not forget that she is quite a respectable lady,
connected--according to her own account--with the higher political
circles," Joan's editor would insist, with a laugh.

Miss Greyson, working in the adjoining room, would raise her head and
listen.  She loved to hear him laugh.

"It's absurd," Flossie told her one morning, as having met by chance they
were walking home together along the Embankment.  "You're not 'Clorinda';
you ought to be writing letters to her, not from her, waking her up,
telling her to come off her perch, and find out what the earth feels
like.  I'll tell you what I'll do: I'll trot you round to Carleton.  If
you're out for stirring up strife and contention, well, that's his game,
too.  He'll use you for his beastly sordid ends.  He'd have roped in John
the Baptist if he'd been running the 'Jerusalem Star' at the time, and
have given him a daily column for so long as the boom lasted.  What's
that matter, if he's willing to give you a start?"

Joan jibbed at first.  But in the end Flossie's arguments prevailed.  One
afternoon, a week later, she was shown into Carleton's private room, and
the door closed behind her.  The light was dim, and for a moment she
could see no one; until Carleton, who had been standing near one of the
windows, came forward and placed a chair for her.  And they both sat
down.

"I've glanced through some of your things," he said.  "They're all right.
They're alive.  What's your idea?"

Remembering Flossie's counsel, she went straight to the point.  She
wanted to talk to the people.  She wanted to get at them.  If she had
been a man, she would have taken a chair and gone to Hyde Park.  As it
was, she hadn't the nerve for Hyde Park.  At least she was afraid she
hadn't.  It might have to come to that.  There was a trembling in her
voice that annoyed her.  She was so afraid she might cry.  She wasn't out
for anything crazy.  She wanted only those things done that could be done
if the people would but lift their eyes, look into one another's faces,
see the wrong and the injustice that was all around them, and swear that
they would never rest till the pain and the terror had been driven from
the land.  She wanted soldiers--men and women who would forget their own
sweet selves, not counting their own loss, thinking of the greater gain;
as in times of war and revolution, when men gave even their lives gladly
for a dream, for a hope--

Without warning he switched on the electric lamp that stood upon the
desk, causing her to draw back with a start.

"All right," he said.  "Go ahead.  You shall have your tub, and a weekly
audience of a million readers for as long as you can keep them
interested.  Up with anything you like, and down with everything you
don't.  Be careful not to land me in a libel suit.  Call the whole Bench
of Bishops hypocrites, and all the ground landlords thieves, if you will:
but don't mention names.  And don't get me into trouble with the police.
Beyond that, I shan't interfere with you."

She was about to speak.

"One stipulation," he went on, "that every article is headed with your
photograph."

He read the sudden dismay in her eyes.

"How else do you think you are going to attract their attention?" he
asked her.  "By your eloquence!  Hundreds of men and women as eloquent as
you could ever be are shouting to them every day.  Who takes any notice
of them?  Why should they listen any the more to you--another cranky
highbrow: some old maid, most likely, with a bony throat and a beaky
nose.  If Woman is going to come into the fight she will have to use her
own weapons.  If she is prepared to do that she'll make things hum with a
vengeance.  She's the biggest force going, if she only knew it."

He had risen and was pacing the room.

"The advertiser has found that out, and is showing the way."  He snatched
at an illustrated magazine, fresh from the press, that had been placed
upon his desk, and opened it at the first page.  "Johnson's Blacking," he
read out, "advertised by a dainty little minx, showing her ankles.  Who's
going to stop for a moment to read about somebody's blacking?  If a saucy
little minx isn't there to trip him up with her ankles!"

He turned another page.  "Do you suffer from gout?  Classical lady
preparing to take a bath and very nearly ready.  The old Johnny in the
train stops to look at her.  Reads the advertisement because she seems to
want him to.  Rubber heels.  Save your boot leather!  Lady in evening
dress--jolly pretty shoulders--waves them in front of your eyes.
Otherwise you'd never think of them."

He fluttered the pages.  Then flung the thing across to her.

"Look at it," he said.  "Fountain pens--Corn plasters--Charitable
appeals--Motor cars--Soaps--Grand pianos.  It's the girl in tights and
spangles outside the show that brings them trooping in."

"Let them see you," he continued.  "You say you want soldiers.  Throw off
your veil and call for them.  Your namesake of France!  Do you think if
she had contented herself with writing stirring appeals that Orleans
would have fallen?  She put on a becoming suit of armour and got upon a
horse where everyone could see her.  Chivalry isn't dead.  You modern
women are ashamed of yourselves--ashamed of your sex.  You don't give it
a chance.  Revive it.  Stir the young men's blood.  Their souls will
follow."

He reseated himself and leant across towards her.

"I'm not talking business," he said.  "This thing's not going to mean
much to me one way or the other.  I want you to win.  Farm labourers
bringing up families on twelve and six a week.  Shirt hands working half
into the night for three farthings an hour.  Stinking dens for men to
live in.  Degraded women.  Half fed children.  It's damnable.  Tell them
it's got to stop.  That the Eternal Feminine has stepped out of the
poster and commands it."

A dapper young man opened the door and put his head into the room.

"Railway smash in Yorkshire," he announced.

Carleton sat up.  "Much of a one?" he asked.

The dapper gentleman shrugged his shoulders.  "Three killed, eight
injured, so far," he answered.

Carleton's interest appeared to collapse.

"Stop press column?" asked the dapper gentleman.

"Yes, I suppose so," replied Carleton.  "Unless something better turns
up."

The dapper young gentleman disappeared.  Joan had risen.

"May I talk it over with a friend?" she asked.  "Myself, I'm inclined to
accept."

"You will, if you're in earnest," he answered.  "I'll give you twenty-
four hours.  Look in to-morrow afternoon, and see Finch.  It will be for
the _Sunday Post_--the Inset.  We use surfaced paper for that and can do
you justice.  Finch will arrange about the photograph."  He held out his
hand.  "Shall be seeing you again," he said.

It was but a stone's throw to the office of the _Evening Gazette_.  She
caught Greyson just as he was leaving and put the thing before him.  His
sister was with him.

He did not answer at first.  He was walking to and fro; and, catching his
foot in the waste paper basket, he kicked it savagely out of his way, so
that the contents were scattered over the room.

"Yes, he's right," he said.  "It was the Virgin above the altar that
popularized Christianity.  Her face has always been woman's fortune.  If
she's going to become a fighter, it will have to be her weapon."

He had used almost the same words that Carleton had used.

"I so want them to listen to me," she said.  "After all, it's only like
having a very loud voice."

He looked at her and smiled.  "Yes," he said, "it's a voice men will
listen to."

Mary Greyson was standing by the fire.  She had not spoken hitherto.

"You won't give up 'Clorinda'?" she asked.

Joan had intended to do so, but something in Mary's voice caused her,
against her will, to change her mind.

"Of course not," she answered.  "I shall run them both.  It will be like
writing Jekyll and Hyde."

"What will you sign yourself?" he asked.

"My own name, I think," she said.  "Joan Allway."

Miss Greyson suggested her coming home to dinner with them; but Joan
found an excuse.  She wanted to be alone.




CHAPTER V


The twilight was fading as she left the office.  She turned northward,
choosing a broad, ill-lighted road.  It did not matter which way she
took.  She wanted to think; or, rather, to dream.

It would all fall out as she had intended.  She would commence by
becoming a power in journalism.  She was reconciled now to the photograph
idea--was even keen on it herself.  She would be taken full face so that
she would be looking straight into the eyes of her readers as she talked
to them.  It would compel her to be herself; just a hopeful, loving
woman: a little better educated than the majority, having had greater
opportunity: a little further seeing, maybe, having had more leisure for
thought: but otherwise, no whit superior to any other young, eager woman
of the people.  This absurd journalistic pose of omniscience, of
infallibility--this non-existent garment of supreme wisdom that, like the
King's clothes in the fairy story, was donned to hide his nakedness by
every strutting nonentity of Fleet Street!  She would have no use for it.
It should be a friend, a comrade, a fellow-servant of the great Master,
taking counsel with them, asking their help.  Government by the people
for the people!  It must be made real.  These silent, thoughtful-looking
workers, hurrying homewards through the darkening streets; these patient,
shrewd-planning housewives casting their shadows on the drawn-down
blinds: it was they who should be shaping the world, not the journalists
to whom all life was but so much "copy."  This monstrous conspiracy, once
of the Sword, of the Church, now of the Press, that put all Government
into the hands of a few stuffy old gentlemen, politicians, leader
writers, without sympathy or understanding: it was time that it was swept
away.  She would raise a new standard.  It should be, not "Listen to me,
oh ye dumb," but, "Speak to me.  Tell me your hidden hopes, your fears,
your dreams.  Tell me your experience, your thoughts born of knowledge,
of suffering."

She would get into correspondence with them, go among them, talk to them.
The difficulty, at first, would be in getting them to write to her, to
open their minds to her.  These voiceless masses that never spoke, but
were always being spoken for by self-appointed "leaders,"
"representatives," who immediately they had climbed into prominence took
their place among the rulers, and then from press and platform shouted to
them what they were to think and feel.  It was as if the Drill-Sergeant
were to claim to be the "leader," the "representative" of his squad; or
the sheep-dog to pose as the "delegate" of the sheep.  Dealt with always
as if they were mere herds, mere flocks, they had almost lost the power
of individual utterance.  One would have to teach them, encourage them.

She remembered a Sunday class she had once conducted; and how for a long
time she had tried in vain to get the children to "come in," to take a
hand.  That she might get in touch with them, understand their small
problems, she had urged them to ask questions.  And there had fallen such
long silences.  Until, at last, one cheeky ragamuffin had piped out:

"Please, Miss, have you got red hair all over you?  Or only on your
head?"

For answer she had rolled up her sleeve, and let them examine her arm.
And then, in her turn, had insisted on rolling up his sleeve, revealing
the fact that his arms above the wrists had evidently not too recently
been washed; and the episode had ended in laughter and a babel of shrill
voices.  And, at once, they were a party of chums, discussing matters
together.

They were but children, these tired men and women, just released from
their day's toil, hastening homeward to their play, or to their evening
tasks.  A little humour, a little understanding, a recognition of the
wonderful likeness of us all to one another underneath our outward
coverings was all that was needed to break down the barrier, establish
comradeship.  She stood aside a moment to watch them streaming by.  Keen,
strong faces were among them, high, thoughtful brows, kind eyes; they
must learn to think, to speak for themselves.

She would build again the Forum.  The people's business should no longer
be settled for them behind lackey-guarded doors.  The good of the farm
labourer should be determined not exclusively by the squire and his
relations.  The man with the hoe, the man with the bent back and the
patient ox-like eyes: he, too, should be invited to the Council board.
Middle-class domestic problems should be solved not solely by fine
gentlemen from Oxford; the wife of the little clerk should be allowed her
say.  War or peace, it should no longer be regarded as a question
concerning only the aged rich.  The common people--the cannon fodder, the
men who would die, and the women who would weep: they should be given
something more than the privilege of either cheering platform patriots or
being summoned for interrupting public meetings.

From a dismal side street there darted past her a small, shapeless figure
in crumpled cap and apron: evidently a member of that lazy, over-indulged
class, the domestic servant.  Judging from the talk of the drawing-rooms,
the correspondence in the papers, a singularly unsatisfactory body.  They
toiled not, lived in luxury and demanded grand pianos.  Someone had
proposed doing something for them.  They themselves--it seemed that even
they had a sort of conscience--were up in arms against it.  Too much
kindness even they themselves perceived was bad for them.  They were
holding a meeting that night to explain how contented they were.  Six
peeresses had consented to attend, and speak for them.

Likely enough that there were good-for-nothing, cockered menials imposing
upon incompetent mistresses.  There were pampered slaves in Rome.  But
these others.  These poor little helpless sluts.  There were thousands
such in every city, over-worked and under-fed, living lonely,
pleasureless lives.  They must be taught to speak in other voices than
the dulcet tones of peeresses.  By the light of the guttering candles,
from their chill attics, they should write to her their ill-spelt
visions.

She had reached a quiet, tree-bordered road, surrounding a great park.
Lovers, furtively holding hands, passed her by, whispering.

She would write books.  She would choose for her heroine a woman of the
people.  How full of drama, of tragedy must be their stories: their
problems the grim realities of life, not only its mere sentimental
embroideries.  The daily struggle for bare existence, the ever-shadowing
menace of unemployment, of illness, leaving them helpless amid the
grinding forces crushing them down on every side.  The ceaseless need for
courage, for cunning.  For in the kingdom of the poor the tyrant and the
oppressor still sit in the high places, the robber still rides fearless.

In a noisy, flaring street, a thin-clad woman passed her, carrying a
netted bag showing two loaves.  In a flash, it came to her what it must
mean to the poor; this daily bread that in comfortable homes had come to
be regarded as a thing like water; not to be considered, to be used
without stint, wasted, thrown about.  Borne by those feeble, knotted
hands, Joan saw it revealed as something holy: hallowed by labour;
sanctified by suffering, by sacrifice; worshipped with fear and prayer.

In quiet streets of stately houses, she caught glimpses through
uncurtained windows of richly-laid dinner-tables about which servants
moved noiselessly, arranging flowers and silver.  She wondered idly if
she would every marry.  A gracious hostess, gathering around her
brilliant men and women, statesmen, writers, artists, captains of
industry: counselling them, even learning from them: encouraging shy
genius.  Perhaps, in a perfectly harmless way, allowing it the
inspiration derivable from a well-regulated devotion to herself.  A salon
that should be the nucleus of all those forces that influence influences,
over which she would rule with sweet and wise authority.  The idea
appealed to her.

Into the picture, slightly to the background, she unconsciously placed
Greyson.  His tall, thin figure with its air of distinction seemed to fit
in; Greyson would be very restful.  She could see his handsome, ascetic
face flush with pleasure as, after the guests were gone, she would lean
over the back of his chair and caress for a moment his dark, soft hair
tinged here and there with grey.  He would always adore her, in that
distant, undemonstrative way of his that would never be tiresome or
exacting.  They would have children.  But not too many.  That would make
the house noisy and distract her from her work.  They would be beautiful
and clever; unless all the laws of heredity were to be set aside for her
especial injury.  She would train them, shape them to be the heirs of her
labour, bearing her message to the generations that should follow.

At a corner where the trams and buses stopped she lingered for a while,
watching the fierce struggle; the weak and aged being pushed back time
after time, hardly seeming to even resent it, regarding it as in the
natural order of things.  It was so absurd, apart from the injustice, the
brutality of it!  The poor, fighting among themselves!  She felt as once
when watching a crowd of birds to whom she had thrown a handful of crumbs
in winter time.  As if they had not enemies enough: cats, weasels, rats,
hawks, owls, the hunger and the cold.  And added to all, they must needs
make the struggle yet harder for one another: pecking at each other's
eyes, joining with one another to attack the fallen.  These tired men,
these weary women, pale-faced lads and girls, why did they not organize
among themselves some system that would do away with this daily warfare
of each against all.  If only they could be got to grasp the fact that
they were one family, bound together by suffering.  Then, and not till
then, would they be able to make their power felt?  That would have to
come first: the _Esprit de Corps_ of the Poor.

In the end she would go into Parliament.  It would be bound to come soon,
the woman's vote.  And after that the opening of all doors would follow.
She would wear her college robes.  It would be far more fitting than a
succession of flimsy frocks that would have no meaning in them.  What
pity it was that the art of dressing--its relation to life--was not
better understood.  What beauty-hating devil had prompted the workers to
discard their characteristic costumes that had been both beautiful and
serviceable for these hateful slop-shop clothes that made them look like
walking scarecrows.  Why had the coming of Democracy coincided seemingly
with the spread of ugliness: dull towns, mean streets, paper-strewn
parks, corrugated iron roofs, Christian chapels that would be an insult
to a heathen idol; hideous factories (Why need they be hideous!); chimney-
pot hats, baggy trousers, vulgar advertisements, stupid fashions for
women that spoilt every line of their figure: dinginess, drabness,
monotony everywhere.  It was ugliness that was strangling the soul of the
people; stealing from them all dignity, all self-respect, all honour for
one another; robbing them of hope, of reverence, of joy in life.

Beauty.  That was the key to the riddle.  All Nature: its golden sunsets
and its silvery dawns; the glory of piled-up clouds, the mystery of
moonlit glades; its rivers winding through the meadows; the calling of
its restless seas; the tender witchery of Spring; the blazonry of autumn
woods; its purple moors and the wonder of its silent mountains; its
cobwebs glittering with a thousand jewels; the pageantry of starry
nights.  Form, colour, music!  The feathered choristers of bush and brake
raising their matin and their evensong, the whispering of the leaves, the
singing of the waters, the voices of the winds.  Beauty and grace in
every living thing, but man.  The leaping of the hares, the grouping of
cattle, the flight of swallows, the dainty loveliness of insects' wings,
the glossy skin of horses rising and falling to the play of mighty
muscles.  Was it not seeking to make plain to us that God's language was
beauty.  Man must learn beauty that he may understand God.

She saw the London of the future.  Not the vision popular just then: a
soaring whirl of machinery in motion, of moving pavements and flying
omnibuses; of screaming gramophones and standardized "homes": a city
where Electricity was King and man its soulless slave.  But a city of
peace, of restful spaces, of leisured men and women; a city of fine
streets and pleasant houses, where each could live his own life, learning
freedom, individuality; a city of noble schools; of workshops that should
be worthy of labour, filled with light and air; smoke and filth driven
from the land: science, no longer bound to commercialism, having
discovered cleaner forces; a city of gay playgrounds where children
should learn laughter; of leafy walks where the creatures of the wood and
field should be as welcome guests helping to teach sympathy and
kindliness: a city of music, of colour, of gladness.  Beauty worshipped
as religion; ugliness banished as a sin: no ugly slums, no ugly cruelty,
no slatternly women and brutalized men, no ugly, sobbing children; no
ugly vice flaunting in every highway its insult to humanity: a city clad
in beauty as with a living garment where God should walk with man.

She had reached a neighbourhood of narrow, crowded streets.  The women
were mostly without hats; and swarthy men, rolling cigarettes, lounged
against doorways.  The place had a quaint foreign flavour.  Tiny cafes,
filled with smoke and noise, and clean, inviting restaurants abounded.
She was feeling hungry, and, choosing one the door of which stood open,
revealing white tablecloths and a pleasant air of cheerfulness, she
entered.  It was late and the tables were crowded.  Only at one, in a far
corner, could she detect a vacant place, opposite to a slight, pretty-
looking girl very quietly dressed.  She made her way across and the girl,
anticipating her request, welcomed her with a smile.  They ate for a
while in silence, divided only by the narrow table, their heads, when
they leant forward, almost touching.  Joan noticed the short, white
hands, the fragrance of some delicate scent.  There was something odd
about her.  She seemed to be unnecessarily conscious of being alone.
Suddenly she spoke.

"Nice little restaurant, this," she said.  "One of the few places where
you can depend upon not being annoyed."

Joan did not understand.  "In what way?" she asked.

"Oh, you know, men," answered the girl.  "They come and sit down opposite
to you, and won't leave you alone.  At most of the places, you've got to
put up with it or go outside.  Here, old Gustav never permits it."

Joan was troubled.  She was rather looking forward to occasional
restaurant dinners, where she would be able to study London's Bohemia.

"You mean," she asked, "that they force themselves upon you, even if you
make it plain--"

"Oh, the plainer you make it that you don't want them, the more sport
they think it," interrupted the girl with a laugh.

Joan hoped she was exaggerating.  "I must try and select a table where
there is some good-natured girl to keep me in countenance," she said with
a smile.

"Yes, I was glad to see you," answered the girl.  "It's hateful, dining
by oneself.  Are you living alone?"

"Yes," answered Joan.  "I'm a journalist."

"I thought you were something," answered the girl.  "I'm an artist.  Or,
rather, was," she added after a pause.

"Why did you give it up?" asked Joan.

"Oh, I haven't given it up, not entirely," the girl answered.  "I can
always get a couple of sovereigns for a sketch, if I want it, from one or
another of the frame-makers.  And they can generally sell them for a
fiver.  I've seen them marked up.  Have you been long in London?"

"No," answered Joan.  "I'm a Lancashire lass."

"Curious," said the girl, "so am I.  My father's a mill manager near
Bolton.  You weren't educated there?"

"No," Joan admitted.  "I went to Rodean at Brighton when I was ten years
old, and so escaped it.  Nor were you," she added with a smile, "judging
from your accent."

"No," answered the other, "I was at Hastings--Miss Gwyn's.  Funny how we
seem to have always been near to one another.  Dad wanted me to be a
doctor.  But I'd always been mad about art."

Joan had taken a liking to the girl.  It was a spiritual, vivacious face
with frank eyes and a firm mouth; and the voice was low and strong.

"Tell me," she said, "what interfered with it?"  Unconsciously she was
leaning forward, her chin supported by her hands.  Their faces were very
near to one another.

The girl looked up.  She did not answer for a moment.  There came a
hardening of the mouth before she spoke.

"A baby," she said.  "Oh, it was my own fault," she continued.  "I wanted
it.  It was all the talk at the time.  You don't remember.  Our right to
children.  No woman complete without one.  Maternity, woman's kingdom.
All that sort of thing.  As if the storks brought them.  Don't suppose it
made any real difference; but it just helped me to pretend that it was
something pretty and high-class.  'Overmastering passion' used to be the
explanation, before that.  I guess it's all much of a muchness: just
natural instinct."

The restaurant had been steadily emptying.  Monsieur Gustav and his ample-
bosomed wife were seated at a distant table, eating their own dinner.

"Why couldn't you have married?" asked Joan.

The girl shrugged her shoulders.  "Who was there for me to marry?" she
answered.  "The men who wanted me: clerks, young tradesmen, down at
home--I wasn't taking any of that lot.  And the men I might have fancied
were all of them too poor.  There was one student.  He's got on since.
Easy enough for him to talk about waiting.  Meanwhile.  Well, it's like
somebody suggesting dinner to you the day after to-morrow.  All right
enough, if you're not troubled with an appetite."

The waiter came to clear the table.  They were almost the last customers
left.  The man's tone and manner jarred upon Joan.  She had not noticed
it before.  Joan ordered coffee and the girl, exchanging a joke with the
waiter, added a liqueur.

"But why should you give up your art?" persisted Joan.  It was that was
sticking in her mind.  "I should have thought that, if only for the sake
of the child, you would have gone on with it."

"Oh, I told myself all that," answered the girl.  "Was going to devote my
life to it.  Did for nearly two years.  Till I got sick of living like a
nun: never getting a bit of excitement.  You see, I've got the poison in
me.  Or, maybe, it had always been there."

"What's become of it?" asked Joan.  "The child?"

"Mother's got it," answered the girl.  "Seemed best for the poor little
beggar.  I'm supposed to be dead, and my husband gone abroad."  She gave
a short, dry laugh.  "Mother brings him up to see me once a year.  They've
got quite fond of him."

"What are you doing now?" asked Joan, in a low tone.

"Oh, you needn't look so scared," laughed the girl, "I haven't come down
to that."  Her voice had changed.  It had a note of shrillness.  In some
indescribable way she had grown coarse.  "I'm a kept woman," she
explained.  "What else is any woman?"

She reached for her jacket; and the waiter sprang forward and helped her
on with it, prolonging the business needlessly.  She wished him "Good
evening" in a tone of distant hauteur, and led the way to the door.
Outside the street was dim and silent.  Joan held out her hand.

"No hope of happy endings," she said with a forced laugh.  "Couldn't
marry him I suppose?"

"He has asked me," answered the girl with a swagger.  "Not sure that it
would suit me now.  They're not so nice to you when they've got you fixed
up.  So long."

She turned abruptly and walked rapidly away.  Joan moved instinctively in
the opposite direction, and after a few minutes found herself in a broad
well-lighted thoroughfare.  A newsboy was shouting his wares.

"'Orrible murder of a woman.  Shockin' details.  Speshul," repeating it
over and over again in a hoarse, expressionless monotone.

He was selling the papers like hot cakes; the purchasers too eager to
even wait for their change.  She wondered, with a little lump in her
throat, how many would have stopped to buy had he been calling instead:
"Discovery of new sonnet by Shakespeare.  Extra special."

Through swinging doors, she caught glimpses of foul interiors, crowded
with men and women released from their toil, taking their evening
pleasure.  From coloured posters outside the great theatres and music
halls, vulgarity and lewdness leered at her, side by side with
announcements that the house was full.  From every roaring corner,
scintillating lights flared forth the merits of this public benefactor's
whisky, of this other celebrity's beer: it seemed the only message the
people cared to hear.  Even among the sirens of the pavement, she noticed
that the quiet and merely pretty were hardly heeded.  It was everywhere
the painted and the overdressed that drew the roving eyes.

She remembered a pet dog that someone had given her when she was a girl,
and how one afternoon she had walked with the tears streaming down her
face because, in spite of her scoldings and her pleadings, it would keep
stopping to lick up filth from the roadway.  A kindly passer-by had
laughed and told her not to mind.

"Why, that's a sign of breeding, that is, Missie," the man had explained.
"It's the classy ones that are always the worst."

It had come to her afterwards craving with its soft brown, troubled eyes
for forgiveness.  But she had never been able to break it of the habit.

Must man for ever be chained by his appetites to the unclean: ever be
driven back, dragged down again into the dirt by his own instincts: ever
be rendered useless for all finer purposes by the baseness of his own
desires?

The City of her Dreams!  The mingled voices of the crowd shaped itself
into a mocking laugh.

It seemed to her that it was she that they were laughing at, pointing her
out to one another, jeering at her, reviling her, threatening her.

She hurried onward with bent head, trying to escape them.  She felt so
small, so helpless.  Almost she cried out in her despair.

She must have walked mechanically.  Looking up she found herself in her
own street.  And as she reached her doorway the tears came suddenly.

She heard a quick step behind her, and turning, she saw a man with a
latch key in his hand.  He passed her and opened the door; and then,
facing round, stood aside for her to enter.  He was a sturdy, thick-set
man with a strong, massive face.  It would have been ugly but for the
deep, flashing eyes.  There was tenderness and humour in them.

"We are next floor neighbours," he said.  "My name's Phillips."

Joan thanked him.  As he held the door open for her their hands
accidentally touched.  Joan wished him good-night and went up the stairs.
There was no light in her room: only the faint reflection of the street
lamp outside.

She could still see him: the boyish smile.  And his voice that had sent
her tears back again as if at the word of command.

She hoped he had not seen them.  What a little fool she was.

A little laugh escaped her.




CHAPTER VI


One day Joan, lunching at the club, met Madge Singleton.

"I've had such a funny letter from Flossie," said Joan, "begging me
almost with tears in her ink to come to her on Sunday evening to meet a
'gentleman friend' of hers, as she calls him, and give her my opinion of
him.  What on earth is she up to?"

"It's all right," answered Madge.  "She doesn't really want our opinion
of him--or rather she doesn't want our real opinion of him.  She only
wants us to confirm hers.  She's engaged to him."

"Flossie engaged!" Joan seemed surprised.

"Yes," answered Madge.  "It used to be a custom.  Young men used to ask
young women to marry them.  And if they consented it was called 'being
engaged.'  Still prevails, so I am told, in certain classes."

"Thanks," said Joan.  "I have heard of it."

"I thought perhaps you hadn't from your tone," explained Madge.

"But if she's already engaged to him, why risk criticism of him," argued
Joan, ignoring Madge's flippancy.  "It's too late."

"Oh, she's going to break it off unless we all assure her that we find
him brainy," Madge explained with a laugh.  "It seems her father wasn't
brainy and her mother was.  Or else it was the other way about: I'm not
quite sure.  But whichever it was, it led to ructions.  Myself, if he's
at all possible and seems to care for her, I intend to find him
brilliant."

"And suppose she repeats her mother's experience," suggested Joan.

"There were the Norton-Browns," answered Madge.  "Impossible to have
found a more evenly matched pair.  They both write novels--very good
novels, too; and got jealous of one another; and threw press-notices at
one another's head all breakfast-time; until they separated.  Don't know
of any recipe myself for being happy ever after marriage, except not
expecting it."

"Or keeping out of it altogether," added Joan.

"Ever spent a day at the Home for Destitute Gentlewomen at East Sheen?"
demanded Madge.

"Not yet," admitted Joan.  "May have to, later on."

"It ought to be included in every woman's education," Madge continued.
"It is reserved for spinsters of over forty-five.  Susan Fleming wrote an
article upon it for the _Teacher's Friend_; and spent an afternoon and
evening there.  A month later she married a grocer with five children.
The only sound suggestion for avoiding trouble that I ever came across
was in a burlesque of the _Blue Bird_.  You remember the scene where the
spirits of the children are waiting to go down to earth and be made into
babies?  Someone had stuck up a notice at the entrance to the gangway:
'Don't get born.  It only means worry.'"

Flossie had her dwelling-place in a second floor bed-sitting-room of a
lodging house in Queen's Square, Bloomsbury; but the drawing-room floor
being for the moment vacant, Flossie had persuaded her landlady to let
her give her party there; it seemed as if fate approved of the idea.  The
room was fairly full when Joan arrived.  Flossie took her out on the
landing, and closed the door behind them.

"You will be honest with me, won't you?" pleaded Flossie, "because it's
so important, and I don't seem able to think for myself.  As they say, no
man can be his own solicitor, can he?  Of course I like him, and all
that--very much.  And I really believe he loves me.  We were children
together when Mummy was alive; and then he had to go abroad; and has only
just come back.  Of course, I've got to think of him, too, as he says.
But then, on the other hand, I don't want to make a mistake.  That would
be so terrible, for both of us; and of course I am clever; and there was
poor Mummy and Daddy.  I'll tell you all about them one day.  It was so
awfully sad.  Get him into a corner and talk to him.  You'll be able to
judge in a moment, you're so wonderful.  He's quiet on the outside, but I
think there's depth in him.  We must go in now."

She had talked so rapidly Joan felt as if her hat were being blown away.
She had difficulty in recognizing Flossie.  All the cocksure pertness had
departed.  She seemed just a kid.

Joan promised faithfully; and Flossie, standing on tiptoe, suddenly
kissed her and then bustled her in.

Flossie's young man was standing near the fire talking, or rather
listening, to a bird-like little woman in a short white frock and blue
ribbons.  A sombre lady just behind her, whom Joan from the distance took
to be her nurse, turned out to be her secretary, whose duty it was to be
always at hand, prepared to take down any happy idea that might occur to
the bird-like little woman in the course of conversation.  The bird-like
little woman was Miss Rose Tolley, a popular novelist.  She was
explaining to Flossie's young man, whose name was Sam Halliday, the
reason for her having written "Running Waters," her latest novel.

"It is daring," she admitted.  "I must be prepared for opposition.  But
it had to be stated."

"I take myself as typical," she continued.  "When I was twenty I could
have loved you.  You were the type of man I did love."

Mr. Halliday, who had been supporting the weight of his body upon his
right leg, transferred the burden to his left.

"But now I'm thirty-five; and I couldn't love you if I tried."  She shook
her curls at him.  "It isn't your fault.  It is that I have changed.
Suppose I'd married you?"

"Bit of bad luck for both of us," suggested Mr. Halliday.

"A tragedy," Miss Tolley corrected him.  "There are millions of such
tragedies being enacted around us at this moment.  Sensitive women
compelled to suffer the embraces of men that they have come to loathe.
What's to be done?"

Flossie, who had been hovering impatient, broke in.

"Oh, don't you believe her," she advised Mr. Halliday.  "She loves you
still.  She's only teasing you.  This is Joan."

She introduced her.  Miss Tolley bowed; and allowed herself to be drawn
away by a lank-haired young man who had likewise been waiting for an
opening.  He represented the Uplift Film Association of Chicago, and was
wishful to know if Miss Tolley would consent to altering the last chapter
and so providing "Running Waters" with a happy ending.  He pointed out
the hopelessness of it in its present form, for film purposes.

The discussion was brief.  "Then I'll send your agent the contract to-
morrow," Joan overheard him say a minute later.

Mr. Sam Halliday she liked at once.  He was a clean-shaven, square-jawed
young man, with quiet eyes and a pleasant voice.

"Try and find me brainy," he whispered to her, as soon as Flossie was out
of earshot.  "Talk to me about China.  I'm quite intelligent on China."

They both laughed, and then shot a guilty glance in Flossie's direction.

"Do the women really crush their feet?" asked Joan.

"Yes," he answered.  "All those who have no use for them.  About one per
cent. of the population.  To listen to Miss Tolley you would think that
half the women wanted a new husband every ten years.  It's always the one
per cent. that get themselves talked about.  The other ninety-nine are
too busy."

"You are young for a philosopher," said Joan.

He laughed.  "I told you I'd be all right if you started me on China," he
said.

"Why are you marrying.  Flossie?" Joan asked him.  She thought his point
of view would be interesting.

"Not sure I am yet," he answered with a grin.  "It depends upon how I get
through this evening."  He glanced round the room.  "Have I got to pass
all this crowd, I wonder?" he added.

Joan's eyes followed.  It was certainly an odd collection.  Flossie, in
her hunt for brains, had issued her invitations broadcast; and her fate
had been that of the Charity concert.  Not all the stars upon whom she
had most depended had turned up.  On the other hand not a single freak
had failed her.  At the moment, the centre of the room was occupied by a
gentleman and two ladies in classical drapery.  They were holding hands
in an attitude suggestive of a bas-relief.  Joan remembered them, having
seen them on one or two occasions wandering in the King's Road, Chelsea;
still maintaining, as far as the traffic would allow, the bas-relief
suggestion; and generally surrounded by a crowd of children, ever hopeful
that at the next corner they would stop and do something really
interesting.  They belonged to a society whose object was to lure the
London public by the force of example towards the adoption of the early
Greek fashions and the simpler Greek attitudes.  A friend of Flossie's
had thrown in her lot with them, but could never be induced to abandon
her umbrella.  They also, as Joan told herself, were reformers.  Near to
them was a picturesque gentleman with a beard down to his waist whose
"stunt"--as Flossie would have termed it--was hygienic clothing; it
seemed to contain an undue proportion of fresh air.  There were ladies in
coats and stand-up collars, and gentlemen with ringlets.  More than one
of the guests would have been better, though perhaps not happier, for a
bath.

"I fancy that's the idea," said Joan.  "What will you do if you fail?  Go
back to China?"

"Yes," he answered.  "And take her with me.  Poor little girl."

Joan rather resented his tone.

"We are not all alike," she remarked.  "Some of us are quite sane."

He looked straight into her eyes.  "You are," he said.  "I have been
reading your articles.  They are splendid.  I'm going to help."

"How can you?" she said.  "I mean, how will you?"

"Shipping is my business," he said.  "I'm going to help sailor men.  See
that they have somewhere decent to go to, and don't get robbed.  And then
there are the Lascars, poor devils.  Nobody ever takes their part."

"How did you come across them?" she asked.  "The articles, I mean.  Did
Flo give them to you?"

"No," he answered.  "Just chance.  Caught sight of your photo."

"Tell me," she said.  "If it had been the photo of a woman with a bony
throat and a beaky nose would you have read them?"

He thought a moment.  "Guess not," he answered.  "You're just as bad," he
continued.  "Isn't it the pale-faced young clergyman with the wavy hair
and the beautiful voice that you all flock to hear?  No getting away from
nature.  But it wasn't only that."  He hesitated.

"I want to know," she said.

"You looked so young," he answered.  "I had always had the idea that it
was up to the old people to put the world to rights--that all I had to do
was to look after myself.  It came to me suddenly while you were talking
to me--I mean while I was reading you: that if you were worrying yourself
about it, I'd got to come in, too--that it would be mean of me not to.  It
wasn't like being preached to.  It was somebody calling for help."

Instinctively she held out her hand and he grasped it.

Flossie came up at the same instant.  She wanted to introduce him to Miss
Lavery, who had just arrived.

"Hullo!" she said.  "Are you two concluding a bargain?"

"Yes," said Joan.  "We are founding the League of Youth.  You've got to
be in it.  We are going to establish branches all round the world."

Flossie's young man was whisked away.  Joan, who had seated herself in a
small chair, was alone for a few minutes.

Miss Tolley had chanced upon a Human Document, with the help of which she
was hopeful of starting a "Press Controversy" concerning the morality, or
otherwise, of "Running Waters."  The secretary stood just behind her,
taking notes.  They had drifted quite close.  Joan could not help
overhearing.

"It always seemed to me immoral, the marriage ceremony," the Human
Document was explaining.  She was a thin, sallow woman, with an untidy
head and restless eyes that seemed to be always seeking something to look
at and never finding it.  "How can we pledge the future?  To bind oneself
to live with a man when perhaps we have ceased to care for him; it's
hideous."

Miss Tolley murmured agreement.

"Our love was beautiful," continued the Human Document, eager,
apparently, to relate her experience for the common good; "just because
it was a free gift.  We were not fettered to one another.  At any moment
either of us could have walked out of the house.  The idea never occurred
to us; not for years--five, to be exact."

The secretary, at a sign from Miss Tolley, made a memorandum of it.

"And then did your feelings towards him change suddenly?" questioned Miss
Tolley.

"No," explained the Human Document, in the same quick, even tones; "so
far as I was concerned, I was not conscious of any alteration in my own
attitude.  But he felt the need of more solitude--for his development.  We
parted quite good friends."

"Oh," said Miss Tolley.  "And were there any children?"

"Only two," answered the Human Document, "both girls."

"What has become of them?" persisted Miss Tolley.

The Human Document looked offended.  "You do not think I would have
permitted any power on earth to separate them from me, do you?" she
answered.  "I said to him, 'They are mine, mine.  Where I go, they go.
Where I stay, they stay.'  He saw the justice of my argument."

"And they are with you now?" concluded Miss Tolley.

"You must come and see them," the Human Document insisted.  "Such dear,
magnetic creatures.  I superintend their entire education myself.  We
have a cottage in Surrey.  It's rather a tight fit.  You see, there are
seven of us now.  But the three girls can easily turn in together for a
night, Abner will be delighted."

"Abner is your second?" suggested Miss Tolley.

"My third," the Human Document corrected her.  "After Eustace, I married
Ivanoff.  I say 'married' because I regard it as the holiest form of
marriage.  He had to return to his own country.  There was a political
movement on foot.  He felt it his duty to go.  I want you particularly to
meet the boy.  He will interest you."

Miss Tolley appeared to be getting muddled.  "Whose boy?" she demanded.

"Ivanoff's," explained the Human Document.  "He was our only child."

Flossie appeared, towing a white-haired, distinguished-looking man, a Mr.
Folk.  She introduced him and immediately disappeared.  Joan wished she
had been left alone a little longer.  She would like to have heard more.
Especially was she curious concerning Abner, the lady's third.  Would the
higher moral law compel him, likewise, to leave the poor lady saddled
with another couple of children?  Or would she, on this occasion, get
in--or rather, get off, first?  Her own fancy was to back Abner.  She did
catch just one sentence before Miss Tolley, having obtained more food for
reflection than perhaps she wanted, signalled to her secretary that the
note-book might be closed.

"Woman's right to follow the dictates of her own heart, uncontrolled by
any law," the Human Document was insisting: "That is one of the first
things we must fight for."

Mr. Folk was a well-known artist.  He lived in Paris.  "You are
wonderfully like your mother," he told Joan.  "In appearance, I mean," he
added.  "I knew her when she was Miss Caxton.  I acted with her in
America."

Joan made a swift effort to hide her surprise.  She had never heard of
her mother having been upon the stage.

"I did not know that you had been an actor," she answered.

"I wasn't really," explained Mr. Folk.  "I just walked and talked
naturally.  It made rather a sensation at the time.  Your mother was a
genius.  You have never thought of going on the stage yourself?"

"No," said Joan.  "I don't think I've got what you call the artistic
temperament.  I have never felt drawn towards anything of that sort."

"I wonder," he said.  "You could hardly be your mother's daughter without
it."

"Tell me," said Joan.  "What was my mother like?  I can only remember her
as more or less of an invalid."

He did not reply to her question.  "Master or Mistress Eminent Artist,"
he said; "intends to retire from his or her particular stage, whatever it
may be.  That paragraph ought always to be put among the obituary
notices."

"What's your line?" he asked her.  "I take it you have one by your being
here.  Besides, I am sure you have.  I am an old fighter.  I can tell the
young soldier.  What's your regiment?"

Joan laughed.  "I'm a drummer boy," she answered.  "I beat my drum each
week in a Sunday newspaper, hoping the lads will follow."

"You feel you must beat that drum," he suggested.  "Beat it louder and
louder and louder till all the world shall hear it."

"Yes," Joan agreed, "I think that does describe me."

He nodded.  "I thought you were an artist," he said.  "Don't let them
ever take your drum away from you.  You'll go to pieces and get into
mischief without it."

"I know an old actress," he continued.  "She's the mother of four.  They
are all on the stage and they've all made their mark.  The youngest was
born in her dressing-room, just after the curtain had fallen.  She was
playing the Nurse to your mother's Juliet.  She is still the best Nurse
that I know.  'Jack's always worrying me to chuck it and devote myself to
the children,' she confided to me one evening, while she was waiting for
her cue.  'But, as I tell him, I'm more helpful to them being with them
half the day alive than all the day dead.'  That's an anecdote worth
remembering, when your time comes.  If God gives woman a drum he doesn't
mean man to take it away from her.  She hasn't got to be playing it for
twenty-four hours a day.  I'd like you to have seen your mother's
Cordelia."

Flossie was tacking her way towards them.  Joan acted on impulse.  "I
wish you'd give me your address," she said "where I could write to you.
Or perhaps you would not mind my coming and seeing you one day.  I would
like you to tell me more about my mother."

He gave her his address in Paris where he was returning almost
immediately.

"Do come," he said.  "It will take me back thirty-three years.  I
proposed to your mother on La Grande Terrasse at St. Germain.  We will
walk there.  I'm still a bachelor."  He laughed, and, kissing her hand,
allowed himself to be hauled away by Flossie, in exchange for Mrs.
Phillips, for whom Miss Lavery had insisted on an invitation.

Joan had met Mrs. Phillips several times; and once, on the stairs, had
stopped and spoken to her; but had never been introduced to her formally
till now.

"We have been meaning to call on you so often," panted Mrs. Phillips.  The
room was crowded and the exertion of squeezing her way through had winded
the poor lady.  "We take so much interest in your articles.  My husband--"
she paused for a second, before venturing upon the word, and the aitch
came out somewhat over-aspirated--"reads them most religiously.  You must
come and dine with us one evening."

Joan answered that she would be very pleased.

"I will find out when Robert is free and run up and let you know," she
continued.  "Of course, there are so many demands upon him, especially
during this period of national crisis, that I spare him all the social
duties that I can.  But I shall insist on his making an exception in your
case."

Joan murmured her sense of favour, but hoped she would not be allowed to
interfere with more pressing calls upon Mr. Phillips's time.

"It will do him good," answered Mrs. Phillips; "getting away from them
all for an hour or two.  I don't see much of him myself."

She glanced round and lowered her voice.  "They tell me," she said, "that
you're a B.A."

"Yes," answered Joan.  "One goes in for it more out of vanity, I'm
afraid, than for any real purpose that it serves."

"I took one or two prizes myself," said Mrs. Phillips.  "But, of course,
one forgets things.  I was wondering if you would mind if I ran up
occasionally to ask you a question.  Of course, as you know, my 'usband
'as 'ad so few advantages"--the lady's mind was concerned with more
important matters, and the aspirates, on this occasion, got themselves
neglected--"It is wonderful what he 'as done without them.  But if, now
and then, I could 'elp him--"

There was something about the poor, foolish painted face, as it looked up
pleadingly, that gave it a momentary touch of beauty.

"Do," said Joan, speaking earnestly.  "I shall be so very pleased if you
will."

"Thank you," said the woman.  Miss Lavery came up in a hurry to introduce
her to Miss Tolley.  "I am telling all my friends to read your articles,"
she added, resuming the gracious patroness, as she bowed her adieus.

Joan was alone again for a while.  A handsome girl, with her hair cut
short and parted at the side, was discussing diseases of the spine with a
curly-headed young man in a velvet suit.  The gentleman was describing
some of the effects in detail.  Joan felt there was danger of her being
taken ill if she listened any longer; and seeing Madge's brother near the
door, and unoccupied, she made her way across to him.

Niel Singleton, or Keeley, as he called himself upon the stage, was quite
unlike his sister.  He was short and plump, with a preternaturally solemn
face, contradicted by small twinkling eyes.  He motioned Joan to a chair
and told her to keep quiet and not disturb the meeting.

"Is he brainy?" he whispered after a minute.

"I like him," said Joan.

"I didn't ask you if you liked him," he explained to her.  "I asked you
if he was brainy.  I'm not too sure that you like brainy men."

"Yes, I do," said Joan.  "I like you, sometimes."

"Now, none of that," he said severely.  "It's no good your thinking of
me.  I'm wedded to my art.  We are talking about Mr. Halliday."

"What does Madge think of him?" asked Joan.

"Madge has fallen in love with him, and her judgment is not to be relied
upon," he said.  "I suppose you couldn't answer a straight question, if
you tried."

"Don't be so harsh with me," pleaded Joan meekly.  "I'm trying to think.
Yes," she continued, "decidedly he's got brains."

"Enough for the two of them?" demanded Mr. Singleton.  "Because he will
want them.  Now think before you speak."

Joan considered.  "Yes," she answered.  "I should say he's just the man
to manage her."

"Then it's settled," he said.  "We must save her."

"Save her from what?" demanded Joan.

"From his saying to himself: 'This is Flossie's idea of a party.  This is
the sort of thing that, if I marry her, I am letting myself in for.'  If
he hasn't broken off the engagement already, we may be in time."

He led the way to the piano.  "Tell Madge I want her," he whispered.  He
struck a few notes; and then in a voice that drowned every other sound in
the room, struck up a comic song.

The effect was magical.

He followed it up with another.  This one with a chorus, consisting
chiefly of "Umpty Umpty Umpty Umpty Ay," which was vociferously encored.

By the time it was done with, Madge had discovered a girl who could sing
"Three Little Pigs;" and a sad, pale-faced gentleman who told stories.  At
the end of one of them Madge's brother spoke to Joan in a tone more of
sorrow than of anger.

"Hardly the sort of anecdote that a truly noble and high-minded young
woman would have received with laughter," he commented.

"Did I laugh?" said Joan.

"Your having done so unconsciously only makes the matter worse," observed
Mr. Singleton.  "I had hoped it emanated from politeness, not enjoyment."

"Don't tease her," said Madge.  "She's having an evening off."

Joan and the Singletons were the last to go.  They promised to show Mr.
Halliday a short cut to his hotel in Holborn.

"Have you thanked Miss Lessing for a pleasant evening?" asked Mr.
Singleton, turning to Mr. Halliday.

He laughed and put his arm round her.  "Poor little woman," he said.
"You're looking so tired.  It was jolly at the end."  He kissed her.

He had passed through the swing doors; and they were standing on the
pavement waiting for Joan's bus.

"Why did we all like him?" asked Joan.  "Even Miss Lavery.  There's
nothing extraordinary about him."

"Oh yes there is," said Madge.  "Love has lent him gilded armour.  From
his helmet waves her crest," she quoted.  "Most men look fine in that
costume.  Pity they can't always wear it."

The conductor seemed impatient.  Joan sprang upon the step and waved her
hand.




CHAPTER VII


Joan was making herself a cup of tea when there came a tap at the door.
It was Mrs. Phillips.

"I heard you come in," she said.  "You're not busy, are you?"

"No," answered Joan.  "I hope you're not.  I'm generally in about this
time; and it's always nice to gossip over a dish of tea."

"Why do you say 'dish' of tea!" asked Mrs. Phillips, as she lowered
herself with evident satisfaction into the easy chair Joan placed for
her.

"Oh, I don't know," laughed Joan.  "Dr. Johnson always talked of a 'dish'
of tea.  Gives it a literary flavour."

"I've heard of him," said Mrs. Phillips.  "He's worth reading, isn't he?"

"Well, he talked more amusingly than he wrote," explained Joan.  "Get
Boswell's Life of him.  Or I'll lend you mine," she added, "if you'll be
careful of it.  You'll find all the passages marked that are best worth
remembering.  At least, I think so."

"Thanks," said Mrs. Phillips.  "You see, as the wife of a public man, I
get so little time for study."

"Is it settled yet?" asked Joan.  "Are they going to make room for him in
the Cabinet?

"I'm afraid so," answered Mrs. Phillips.  "Oh, of course, I want him to,"
she corrected herself.  "And he must, of course, if the King insists upon
it.  But I wish it hadn't all come with such a whirl.  What shall I have
to do, do you think?"

Joan was pouring out the tea.  "Oh, nothing," she answered, "but just be
agreeable to the right people.  He'll tell you who they are.  And take
care of him."

"I wish I'd taken more interest in politics when I was young," said Mrs.
Phillips.  "Of course, when I was a girl, women weren't supposed to."

"Do you know, I shouldn't worry about them, if I were you," Joan advised
her.  "Let him forget them when he's with you.  A man can have too much
of a good thing," she laughed.

"I wonder if you're right," mused Mrs. Phillips.  "He does often say that
he'd just as soon I didn't talk about them."

Joan shot a glance from over her cup.  The poor puzzled face was staring
into the fire.  Joan could almost hear him saying it.

"I'm sure I am," she said.  "Make home-coming a change to him.  As you
said yourself the other evening.  It's good for him to get away from it
all, now and then."

"I must try," agreed Mrs. Phillips, looking up.  "What sort of things
ought I to talk to him about, do you think?"

Joan gave an inward sigh.  Hadn't the poor lady any friends of her own.
"Oh, almost anything," she answered vaguely: "so long as it's cheerful
and non-political.  What used you to talk about before he became a great
man?"

There came a wistful look into the worried eyes.  "Oh, it was all so
different then," she said.  "'E just liked to--you know.  We didn't seem
to 'ave to talk.  'E was a rare one to tease.  I didn't know 'ow clever
'e was, then."

It seemed a difficult case to advise upon.  "How long have you been
married?" Joan asked.

"Fifteen years," she answered.  "I was a bit older than 'im.  But I've
never looked my age, they tell me.  Lord, what a boy 'e was!  Swept you
off your feet, like.  'E wasn't the only one.  I'd got a way with me, I
suppose.  Anyhow, the men seemed to think so.  There was always a few
'anging about.  Like flies round a 'oney-pot, Mother used to say."  She
giggled.  "But 'e wouldn't take No for an answer.  And I didn't want to
give it 'im, neither.  I was gone on 'im, right enough.  No use saying I
wasn't."

"You must be glad you didn't say No," suggested Joan.

"Yes," she answered, "'E's got on.  I always think of that little poem,
'Lord Burleigh,'" she continued; "whenever I get worrying about myself.
Ever read it?"

"Yes," answered Joan.  "He was a landscape painter, wasn't he?"

"That's the one," said Mrs. Phillips.  "I little thought I was letting
myself in for being the wife of a big pot when Bob Phillips came along in
'is miner's jacket."

"You'll soon get used to it," Joan told her.  "The great thing is not to
be afraid of one's fate, whatever it is; but just to do one's best."  It
was rather like talking to a child.

"You're the right sort to put 'eart into a body.  I'm glad I came up,"
said Mrs. Phillips.  "I get a bit down in the mouth sometimes when 'e
goes off into one of 'is brown studies, and I don't seem to know what
'e's thinking about.  But it don't last long.  I was always one of the
light-'earted ones."

They discussed life on two thousand a year; the problems it would
present; and Mrs. Phillips became more cheerful.  Joan laid herself out
to be friendly.  She hoped to establish an influence over Mrs. Phillips
that should be for the poor lady's good; and, as she felt instinctively,
for poor Phillips's also.  It was not an unpleasing face.  Underneath the
paint, it was kind and womanly.  Joan was sure he would like it better
clean.  A few months' attention to diet would make a decent figure of her
and improve her wind.  Joan watched her spreading the butter a quarter of
an inch thick upon her toast and restrained with difficulty the impulse
to take it away from her.  And her clothes!  Joan had seen guys carried
through the streets on the fifth of November that were less obtrusive.

She remembered, as she was taking her leave, what she had come for: which
was to invite Joan to dinner on the following Friday.

"It's just a homely affair," she explained.  She had recovered her form
and was now quite the lady again.  "Two other guests beside yourself: a
Mr. Airlie--I am sure you will like him.  He's so dilletanty--and Mr.
McKean.  He's the young man upstairs.  Have you met him?"

Joan hadn't: except once on the stairs when, to avoid having to pass her,
he had gone down again and out into the street.  From the doorstep she
had caught sight of his disappearing coat-tails round the corner.
Yielding to impishness, she had run after him, and his expression of
blank horror when, glancing over his shoulder, he found her walking
abstractedly three yards behind him, had gladdened all her evening.

Joan recounted the episode--so far as the doorstep.

"He tried to be shy with me," said Mrs. Phillips, "but I wouldn't let
him.  I chipped him out of it.  If he's going to write plays, as I told
him, he will have to get over his fear of a petticoat."

She offered her cheek, and Joan kissed it, somewhat gingerly.

"You won't mind Robert not wearing evening dress," she said.  "He never
will if he can help it.  I shall just slip on a semi-toilette myself."

Joan had difficulty in deciding on her own frock.  Her four evening
dresses, as she walked round them, spread out upon the bed, all looked
too imposing, for what Mrs. Phillips had warned her would be a "homely
affair."  She had one other, a greyish-fawn, with sleeves to the elbow,
that she had had made expressly for public dinners and political At
Homes.  But that would be going to the opposite extreme, and might seem
discourteous--to her hostess.  Besides, "mousey" colours didn't really
suit her.  They gave her a curious sense of being affected.  In the end
she decided to risk a black crepe-de-chine, square cut, with a girdle of
gold embroidery.  There couldn't be anything quieter than black, and the
gold embroidery was of the simplest.  She would wear it without any
jewellery whatever: except just a star in her hair.  The result, as she
viewed the effect in the long glass, quite satisfied her.  Perhaps the
jewelled star did scintillate rather.  It had belonged to her mother.  But
her hair was so full of shadows: it wanted something to relieve it.  Also
she approved the curved line of her bare arms.  It was certainly very
beautiful, a woman's arm.  She took her gloves in her hand and went down.

Mr. Phillips was not yet in the room.  Mrs. Phillips, in apple-green with
an ostrich feather in her hair, greeted her effusively, and introduced
her to her fellow guests.  Mr. Airlie was a slight, elegant gentleman of
uncertain age, with sandy hair and beard cut Vandyke fashion.  He asked
Joan's permission to continue his cigarette.

"You have chosen the better part," he informed her, on her granting it.
"When I'm not smoking, I'm talking."

Mr. McKean shook her hand vigorously without looking at her.

"And this is Hilda," concluded Mrs. Phillips.  "She ought to be in bed if
she hadn't a naughty Daddy who spoils her."

A lank, black-haired girl, with a pair of burning eyes looking out of a
face that, but for the thin line of the lips, would have been absolutely
colourless, rose suddenly from behind a bowl of artificial flowers.  Joan
could not suppress a slight start; she had not noticed her on entering.
The girl came slowly forward, and Joan felt as if the uncanny eyes were
eating her up.  She made an effort and held out her hand with a smile,
and the girl's long thin fingers closed on it in a pressure that hurt.
She did not speak.

"She only came back yesterday for the half-term," explained Mrs.
Phillips.  "There's no keeping her away from her books.  'Twas her own
wish to be sent to boarding-school.  How would you like to go to Girton
and be a B.A. like Miss Allway?" she asked, turning to the child.

Phillips's entrance saved the need of a reply.  To the evident surprise
of his wife he was in evening clothes.

"Hulloa.  You've got 'em on," she said.

He laughed.  "I shall have to get used to them sooner or later," he said.

Joan felt relieved--she hardly knew why--that he bore the test.  It was a
well-built, athletic frame, and he had gone to a good tailor.  He looked
taller in them; and the strong, clean-shaven face less rugged.

Joan sat next to him at the round dinner-table with the child the other
side of him.  She noticed that he ate as far as possible with his right
hand--his hands were large, but smooth and well shaped--his left
remaining under the cloth, beneath which the child's right hand, when
free, would likewise disappear.  For a while the conversation consisted
chiefly of anecdotes by Mr. Airlie.  There were few public men and women
about whom he did not know something to their disadvantage.  Joan,
listening, found herself repeating the experience of a night or two
previous, when, during a performance of _Hamlet_, Niel Singleton, who was
playing the grave-digger, had taken her behind the scenes.  Hamlet, the
King of Denmark and the Ghost were sharing a bottle of champagne in the
Ghost's dressing-room: it happened to be the Ghost's birthday.  On her
return to the front of the house, her interest in the play was gone.  It
was absurd that it should be so; but the fact remained.

Mr. Airlie had lunched the day before with a leonine old gentleman who
every Sunday morning thundered forth Social Democracy to enthusiastic
multitudes on Tower Hill.  Joan had once listened to him and had almost
been converted: he was so tremendously in earnest.  She now learnt that
he lived in Curzon Street, Mayfair, and filled, in private life, the
perfectly legitimate calling of a company promoter in partnership with a
Dutch Jew.  His latest prospectus dwelt upon the profits to be derived
from an amalgamation of the leading tanning industries: by means of which
the price of leather could be enormously increased.

It was utterly illogical; but her interest in the principles of Social
Democracy was gone.

A very little while ago, Mr. Airlie, in his capacity of second cousin to
one of the ladies concerned, a charming girl but impulsive, had been
called upon to attend a family council of a painful nature.  The
gentleman's name took Joan's breath away: it was the name of one of her
heroes, an eminent writer: one might almost say prophet.  She had
hitherto read his books with grateful reverence.  They pictured for her
the world made perfect; and explained to her just precisely how it was to
be accomplished.  But, as far as his own particular corner of it was
concerned, he seemed to have made a sad mess of it.  Human nature of
quite an old-fashioned pattern had crept in and spoilt all his own
theories.

Of course it was unreasonable.  The sign-post may remain embedded in
weeds: it notwithstanding points the way to the fair city.  She told
herself this, but it left her still short-tempered.  She didn't care
which way it pointed.  She didn't believe there was any fair city.

There was a famous preacher.  He lived the simple life in a small house
in Battersea, and consecrated all his energies to the service of the
poor.  Almost, by his unselfish zeal, he had persuaded Joan of the
usefulness of the church.  Mr. Airlie frequently visited him.  They
interested one another.  What struck Mr. Airlie most was the
self-sacrificing devotion with which the reverend gentleman's wife and
family surrounded him.  It was beautiful to see.  The calls upon his
moderate purse, necessitated by his wide-spread and much paragraphed
activities, left but a narrow margin for domestic expenses: with the
result that often the only fire in the house blazed brightly in the study
where Mr. Airlie and the reverend gentleman sat talking: while mother and
children warmed themselves with sense of duty in the cheerless kitchen.
And often, as Mr. Airlie, who was of an inquiring turn of mind, had
convinced himself, the only evening meal that resources would permit was
the satisfying supper for one brought by the youngest daughter to her
father where he sat alone in the small dining-room.

Mr. Airlie, picking daintily at his food, continued his stories: of
philanthropists who paid starvation wages: of feminists who were a holy
terror to their women folk: of socialists who travelled first-class and
spent their winters in Egypt or Monaco: of stern critics of public morals
who preferred the society of youthful affinities to the continued company
of elderly wives: of poets who wrote divinely about babies' feet and
whose children hated them.

"Do you think it's all true?" Joan whispered to her host.

He shrugged his shoulders.  "No reason why it shouldn't be," he said.
"I've generally found him right."

"I've never been able myself," he continued, "to understand the Lord's
enthusiasm for David.  I suppose it was the Psalms that did it."

Joan was about to offer comment, but was struck dumb with astonishment on
hearing McKean's voice: it seemed he could talk.  He was telling of an
old Scotch peasant farmer.  A mean, cantankerous old cuss whose curious
pride it was that he had never given anything away.  Not a crust, nor a
sixpence, nor a rag; and never would.  Many had been the attempts to make
him break his boast: some for the joke of the thing and some for the
need; but none had ever succeeded.  It was his one claim to distinction
and he guarded it.

One evening it struck him that the milk-pail, standing just inside the
window, had been tampered with.  Next day he marked with a scratch the
inside of the pan and, returning later, found the level of the milk had
sunk half an inch.  So he hid himself and waited; and at twilight the
next day the window was stealthily pushed open, and two small, terror-
haunted eyes peered round the room.  They satisfied themselves that no
one was about and a tiny hand clutching a cracked jug was thrust swiftly
in and dipped into the pan; and the window softly closed.

He knew the thief, the grandchild of an old bedridden dame who lived some
miles away on the edge of the moor.  The old man stood long, watching the
small cloaked figure till it was lost in the darkness.  It was not till
he lay upon his dying bed that he confessed it.  But each evening, from
that day, he would steal into the room and see to it himself that the
window was left ajar.

After the coffee, Mrs. Phillips proposed their adjourning to the "drawing-
room" the other side of the folding doors, which had been left open.
Phillips asked her to leave Joan and himself where they were.  He wanted
to talk to her.  He promised not to bore her for more than ten minutes.

The others rose and moved away.  Hilda came and stood before Joan with
her hands behind her.

"I am going to bed now," she said.  "I wanted to see you from what Papa
told me.  May I kiss you?"

It was spoken so gravely that Joan did not ask her, as in lighter mood
she might have done, what it was that Phillips had said.  She raised her
face quietly, and the child bent forward and kissed her, and went out
without looking back at either of them, leaving Joan more serious than
there seemed any reason for.  Phillips filled his pipe and lighted it.

"I wish I had your pen," he said, suddenly breaking the silence.  "I'm
all right at talking; but I want to get at the others: the men and women
who never come, thinking it has nothing to do with them.  I'm shy and
awkward when I try to write.  There seems a barrier in front of me.  You
break through it.  One hears your voice.  Tell me," he said, "are you
getting your way?  Do they answer you?"

"Yes," said Joan.  "Not any great number of them, not yet.  But enough to
show that I really am interesting them.  It grows every week."

"Tell them that," he said.  "Let them hear each other.  It's the same at
a meeting.  You wait ten minutes sometimes before one man will summon up
courage to put a question; but once one or two have ventured they spring
up all round you.  I was wondering," he added, "if you would help me; let
me use you, now and again."

"It is what I should love," she answered.  "Tell me what to do."  She was
not conscious of the low, vibrating tone in which she spoke.

"I want to talk to them," he said, "about their stomachs.  I want them to
see the need of concentrating upon the food problem: insisting that it
shall be solved.  The other things can follow."

"There was an old Egyptian chap," he said, "a governor of one of their
provinces, thousands of years before the Pharaohs were ever heard of.
They dug up his tomb a little while ago.  It bore this inscription: 'In
my time no man went hungry.'  I'd rather have that carved upon my
gravestone than the boastings of all the robbers and the butchers of
history.  Think what it must have meant in that land of drought and
famine: only a narrow strip of river bank where a grain of corn would
grow; and that only when old Nile was kind.  If not, your nearest
supplies five hundred miles away across the desert, your only means of
transport the slow-moving camel.  Your convoy must be guarded against
attack, provided with provisions and water for a two months' journey.  Yet
he never failed his people.  Fat year and lean year: 'In my time no man
went hungry.'  And here, to-day, with our steamships and our railways,
with the granaries of the world filled to overflowing, one third of our
population lives on the border line of want.  In India they die by the
roadside.  What's the good of it all: your science and your art and your
religion!  How can you help men's souls if their bodies are starving?  A
hungry man's a hungry beast.

"I spent a week at Grimsby, some years ago, organizing a fisherman's
union.  They used to throw the fish back into the sea, tons upon tons of
it, that men had risked their lives to catch, that would have fed half
London's poor.  There was a 'glut' of it, they said.  The 'market' didn't
want it.  Funny, isn't it, a 'glut' of food: and the kiddies can't learn
their lessons for want of it.  I was talking with a farmer down in Kent.
The plums were rotting on his trees.  There were too many of them: that
was the trouble.  The railway carriage alone would cost him more than he
could get for them.  They were too cheap.  So nobody could have them.
It's the muddle of the thing that makes me mad--the ghastly muddle-headed
way the chief business of the world is managed.  There's enough food
could be grown in this country to feed all the people and then of the
fragments each man might gather his ten basketsful.  There's no miracle
needed.  I went into the matter once with Dalroy of the Board of
Agriculture.  He's the best man they've got, if they'd only listen to
him.  It's never been organized: that's all.  It isn't the fault of the
individual.  It ought not to be left to the individual.  The man who
makes a corner in wheat in Chicago and condemns millions to
privation--likely enough, he's a decent sort of fellow in himself: a kind
husband and father--would be upset for the day if he saw a child crying
for bread.  My dog's a decent enough little chap, as dogs go, but I don't
let him run my larder.

"It could be done with a little good will all round," he continued, "and
nine men out of every ten would be the better off.  But they won't even
let you explain.  Their newspapers shout you down.  It's such a damned
fine world for the few: never mind the many.  My father was a farm
labourer: and all his life he never earned more than thirteen and
sixpence a week.  I left when I was twelve and went into the mines.  There
were six of us children; and my mother brought us up healthy and decent.
She fed us and clothed us and sent us to school; and when she died we
buried her with the money she had put by for the purpose; and never a
penny of charity had ever soiled her hands.  I can see them now.  Talk of
your Chancellors of the Exchequer and their problems!  She worked herself
to death, of course.  Well, that's all right.  One doesn't mind that
where one loves.  If they would only let you.  She had no opposition to
contend with--no thwarting and hampering at every turn--the very people
you are working for hounded on against you.  The difficulty of a man like
myself, who wants to do something, who could do something, is that for
the best part of his life he is fighting to be allowed to do it.  By the
time I've lived down their lies and got my chance, my energy will be
gone."

He knocked the ashes from his pipe and relit it.

"I've no quarrel with the rich," he said.  "I don't care how many rich
men there are, so long as there are no poor.  Who does?  I was riding on
a bus the other day, and there was a man beside me with a bandaged head.
He'd been hurt in that railway smash at Morpeth.  He hadn't claimed
damages from the railway company and wasn't going to.  'Oh, it's only a
few scratches,' he said.  'They'll be hit hard enough as it is.'  If he'd
been a poor devil on eighteen shillings a week it would have been
different.  He was an engineer earning good wages; so he wasn't feeling
sore and bitter against half the world.  Suppose you tried to run an army
with your men half starved while your officers had more than they could
eat.  It's been tried and what's been the result?  See that your soldiers
have their proper rations, and the General can sit down to his six-course
dinner, if he will.  They are not begrudging it to him.

"A nation works on its stomach.  Underfeed your rank and file, and what
sort of a fight are you going to put up against your rivals.  I want to
see England going ahead.  I want to see her workers properly fed.  I want
to see the corn upon her unused acres, the cattle grazing on her wasted
pastures.  I object to the food being thrown into the sea--left to rot
upon the ground while men are hungry--side-tracked in Chicago, while the
children grow up stunted.  I want the commissariat properly organized."

He had been staring through her rather than at her, so it had seemed to
Joan.  Suddenly their eyes met, and he broke into a smile.

"I'm so awfully sorry," he said.  "I've been talking to you as if you
were a public meeting.  I'm afraid I'm more used to them than I am to
women.  Please forgive me."

The whole man had changed.  The eyes had a timid pleading in them.

Joan laughed.  "I've been feeling as if I were the King of Bavaria," she
said.

"How did he feel?" he asked her, leaning forward.

"He had his own private theatre," Joan explained, "where Wagner gave his
operas.  And the King was the sole audience."

"I should have hated that," he said, "if I had been Wagner."

He looked at her, and a flush passed over his boyish face.

"All right," he said, "if it had been a queen."

Joan found herself tracing patterns with her spoon upon the tablecloth.
"But you have won now," she said, still absorbed apparently with her
drawing, "you are going to get your chance."

He gave a short laugh.  "A trick," he said, "to weaken me.  They think to
shave my locks; show me to the people bound by their red tape.  To put it
another way, a rat among the terriers."

Joan laughed.  "You don't somehow suggest the rat," she said: "rather
another sort of beast."

"What do you advise me?" he asked.  "I haven't decided yet."

They were speaking in whispered tones.  Through the open doors they could
see into the other room.  Mrs. Phillips, under Airlie's instructions, was
venturing upon a cigarette.

"To accept," she answered.  "They won't influence you--the terriers, as
you call them.  You are too strong.  It is you who will sway them.  It
isn't as if you were a mere agitator.  Take this opportunity of showing
them that you can build, plan, organize; that you were meant to be a
ruler.  You can't succeed without them, as things are.  You've got to win
them over.  Prove to them that they can trust you."

He sat for a minute tattooing with his fingers on the table, before
speaking.

"It's the frills and flummery part of it that frightens me," he said.
"You wouldn't think that sensitiveness was my weak point.  But it is.
I've stood up to a Birmingham mob that was waiting to lynch me and
enjoyed the experience; but I'd run ten miles rather than face a drawing-
room of well-dressed people with their masked faces and ironic
courtesies.  It leaves me for days feeling like a lobster that has lost
its shell."

"I wouldn't say it, if I didn't mean it," answered Joan; "but you haven't
got to trouble yourself about that . . . You're quite passable."  She
smiled.  It seemed to her that most women would find him more than
passable.

He shook his head.  "With you," he said.  "There's something about you
that makes one ashamed of worrying about the little things.  But the
others: the sneering women and the men who wink over their shoulder while
they talk to you, I shall never be able to get away from them, and, of
course, wherever I go--"

He stopped abruptly with a sudden tightening of the lips.  Joan followed
his eyes.  Mrs. Phillips had swallowed the smoke and was giggling and
spluttering by turns.  The yellow ostrich feather had worked itself loose
and was rocking to and fro as if in a fit of laughter of its own.

He pushed back his chair and rose.  "Shall we join the others?" he said.

He moved so that he was between her and the other room, his back to the
open doors.  "You think I ought to?" he said.

"Yes," she answered firmly, as if she were giving a command.  But he read
pity also in her eyes.

"Well, have you two settled the affairs of the kingdom?  Is it all
decided?" asked Airlie.

"Yes," he answered, laughing.  "We are going to say to the people, 'Eat,
drink and be wise.'"

He rearranged his wife's feather and smoothed her tumbled hair.  She
looked up at him and smiled.

Joan set herself to make McKean talk, and after a time succeeded.  They
had a mutual friend, a raw-boned youth she had met at Cambridge.  He was
engaged to McKean's sister.  His eyes lighted up when he spoke of his
sister Jenny.  The Little Mother, he called her.

"She's the most beautiful body in all the world," he said.  "Though
merely seeing her you mightn't know it."

He saw her "home"; and went on up the stairs to his own floor.

Joan stood for a while in front of the glass before undressing; but felt
less satisfied with herself.  She replaced the star in its case, and took
off the regal-looking dress with the golden girdle and laid it carelessly
aside.  She seemed to be growing smaller.

In her white night dress, with her hair in two long plaits, she looked at
herself once more.  She seemed to be no one of any importance at all:
just a long little girl going to bed.  With no one to kiss her good
night.

She blew out the candle and climbed into the big bed, feeling very
lonesome as she used to when a child.  It had not troubled her until to-
night.  Suddenly she sat up again.  She needn't be back in London before
Tuesday evening, and to-day was only Friday.  She would run down home and
burst in upon her father.  He would be so pleased to see her.

She would make him put his arms around her.




CHAPTER VIII


She reached home in the evening.  She thought to find her father in his
study.  But they told her that, now, he usually sat alone in the great
drawing-room.  She opened the door softly.  The room was dark save for a
flicker of firelight; she could see nothing.  Nor was there any sound.

"Dad," she cried, "are you here?"

He rose slowly from a high-backed chair beside the fire.

"It is you," he said.  He seemed a little dazed.

She ran to him and, seizing his listless arms, put them round her.

"Give me a hug, Dad," she commanded.  "A real hug."

He held her to him for what seemed a long while.  There was strength in
his arms, in spite of the bowed shoulders and white hair.

"I was afraid you had forgotten how to do it," she laughed, when at last
he released her.  "Do you know, you haven't hugged me, Dad, since I was
five years old.  That's nineteen years ago.  You do love me, don't you?"

"Yes," he answered.  "I have always loved you."

She would not let him light the gas.  "I have dined--in the train," she
explained.  "Let us talk by the firelight."

She forced him gently back into his chair, and seated herself upon the
floor between his knees.  "What were you thinking of when I came in?" she
asked.  "You weren't asleep, were you?"

"No," he answered.  "Not that sort of sleep."  She could not see his
face.  But she guessed his meaning.

"Am I very like her?" she asked.

"Yes," he answered.  "Marvellously like her as she used to be: except for
just one thing.  Perhaps that will come to you later.  I thought, for the
moment, as you stood there by the door . . . "  He did not finish the
sentence.

"Tell me about her," she said.  "I never knew she had been an actress."

He did not ask her how she had learnt it.  "She gave it up when we were
married," he said.  "The people she would have to live among would have
looked askance at her if they had known.  There seemed no reason why they
should."

"How did it all happen?" she persisted.  "Was it very beautiful, in the
beginning?"  She wished she had not added that last.  The words had
slipped from her before she knew.

"Very beautiful," he answered, "in the beginning."

"It was my fault," he went on, "that it was not beautiful all through.  I
ought to have let her take up her work again, as she wished to, when she
found what giving it up meant to her.  The world was narrower then than
it is now; and I listened to the world.  I thought it another voice."

"It's difficult to tell, isn't it?" she said.  "I wonder how one can?"

He did not answer; and they sat for a time in silence.

"Did you ever see her act?" asked Joan.

"Every evening for about six months," he answered.  A little flame shot
up and showed a smile upon his face.

"I owe to her all the charity and tenderness I know.  She taught it to me
in those months.  I might have learned more if I had let her go on
teaching.  It was the only way she knew."

Joan watched her as gradually she shaped herself out of the shadows: the
poor, thin, fretful lady of the ever restless hands, with her bursts of
jealous passion, her long moods of sullen indifference: all her music
turned to waste.

"How did she come to fall in love with you?" asked Joan.  "I don't mean
to be uncomplimentary, Dad."  She laughed, taking his hand in hers and
stroking it.  "You must have been ridiculously handsome, when you were
young.  And you must always have been strong and brave and clever.  I can
see such a lot of women falling in love with you.  But not the artistic
woman."

"It wasn't so incongruous at the time," he answered.  "My father had sent
me out to America to superintend a contract.  It was the first time I had
ever been away from home, though I was nearly thirty; and all my pent-up
youth rushed out of me at once.  It was a harum-scarum fellow, mad with
the joy of life, that made love to her; not the man who went out, nor the
man who came back.  It was at San Francisco that I met her.  She was
touring the Western States; and I let everything go to the wind and
followed her.  It seemed to me that Heaven had opened up to me.  I fought
a duel in Colorado with a man who had insulted her.  The law didn't run
there in those days; and three of his hired gunmen, as they called them,
held us up that night in the train and gave her the alternative of going
back with them and kissing him or seeing me dead at her feet.  I didn't
give her time to answer, nor for them to finish.  It seemed a fine death
anyhow, that.  And I'd have faced Hell itself for the chance of fighting
for her.  Though she told me afterwards that if I'd died she'd have gone
back with them, and killed him."

Joan did not speak for a time.  She could see him grave--a little
pompous, in his Sunday black, his footsteps creaking down the
stone-flagged aisle, the silver-edged collecting bag held stiffly in his
hand.

"Couldn't you have saved a bit, Daddy?" she asked, "of all that wealth of
youth--just enough to live on?"

"I might," he answered, "if I had known the value of it.  I found a cable
waiting for me in New York.  My father had been dead a month; and I had
to return immediately."

"And so you married her and took her drum away from her," said Joan.  "Oh,
the thing God gives to some of us," she explained, "to make a little
noise with, and set the people marching."

The little flame died out.  She could feel his body trembling.

"But you still loved her, didn't you, Dad?" she asked.  "I was very
little at the time, but I can just remember.  You seemed so happy
together.  Till her illness came."

"It was more than love," he answered.  "It was idolatry.  God punished me
for it.  He was a hard God, my God."

She raised herself, putting her hands upon his shoulders so that her face
was very close to his.  "What has become of Him, Dad?" she said.  She
spoke in a cold voice, as one does of a false friend.

"I do not know," he answered her.  "I don't seem to care."

"He must be somewhere," she said: "the living God of love and hope: the
God that Christ believed in."

"They were His last words, too," he answered: "'My God, my God, why hast
Thou forsaken me?'"

"No, not His last," said Joan: "'Lo, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world.'  Love was Christ's God.  He will help us to find Him."

Their arms were about one another.  Joan felt that a new need had been
born in her: the need of loving and of being loved.  It was good to lay
her head upon his breast and know that he was glad of her coming.

He asked her questions about herself.  But she could see that he was
tired; so she told him it was too important a matter to start upon so
late.  She would talk about herself to-morrow.  It would be Sunday.

"Do you still go to the chapel?" she asked him a little hesitatingly.

"Yes," he answered.  "One lives by habit."

"It is the only Temple I know," he continued after a moment.  "Perhaps
God, one day, will find me there."

He rose and lit the gas, and a letter on the mantelpiece caught his eye.

"Have you heard from Arthur?" he asked, suddenly turning to her.

"No.  Not since about a month," she answered.  "Why?"

"He will be pleased to find you here, waiting for him," he said with a
smile, handing her the letter.  "He will be here some time to-morrow."

Arthur Allway was her cousin, the son of a Nonconformist Minister.  Her
father had taken him into the works and for the last three years he had
been in Egypt, helping in the laying of a tramway line.  He was in love
with her: at least so they all told her; and his letters were certainly
somewhat committal.  Joan replied to them--when she did not forget to do
so--in a studiously sisterly vein; and always reproved him for
unnecessary extravagance whenever he sent her a present.  The letter
announced his arrival at Southampton.  He would stop at Birmingham, where
his parents lived, for a couple of days, and be in Liverpool on Sunday
evening, so as to be able to get straight to business on Monday morning.
Joan handed back the letter.  It contained nothing else.

"It only came an hour or two ago," her father explained.  "If he wrote to
you by the same post, you may have left before it arrived."

"So long as he doesn't think that I came down specially to see him, I
don't mind," said Joan.

They both laughed.  "He's a good lad," said her father.

They kissed good night, and Joan went up to her own room.  She found it
just as she had left it.  A bunch of roses stood upon the dressing-table.
Her father would never let anyone cut his roses but himself.

Young Allway arrived just as Joan and her father had sat down to supper.
A place had been laid for him.  He flushed with pleasure at seeing her;
but was not surprised.

"I called at your diggings," he said.  "I had to go through London.  They
told me you had started.  It is good of you."

"No, it isn't," said Joan.  "I came down to see Dad.  I didn't know you
were back."  She spoke with some asperity; and his face fell.

"How are you?" she added, holding out her hand.  "You've grown quite good-
looking.  I like your moustache."  And he flushed again with pleasure.

He had a sweet, almost girlish face, with delicate skin that the Egyptian
sun had deepened into ruddiness; with soft, dreamy eyes and golden hair.
He looked lithe and agile rather than strong.  He was shy at first, but
once set going, talked freely, and was interesting.

His work had taken him into the Desert, far from the beaten tracks.  He
described the life of the people, very little different from what it must
have been in Noah's time.  For months he had been the only white man
there, and had lived among them.  What had struck him was how little he
had missed all the paraphernalia of civilization, once he had got over
the first shock.  He had learnt their sports and games; wrestled and swum
and hunted with them.  Provided one was a little hungry and tired with
toil, a stew of goat's flesh with sweet cakes and fruits, washed down
with wine out of a sheep's skin, made a feast; and after, there was music
and singing and dancing, or the travelling story-teller would gather
round him his rapt audience.  Paris had only robbed women of their grace
and dignity.  He preferred the young girls in their costume of the
fourteenth dynasty.  Progress, he thought, had tended only to complicate
life and render it less enjoyable.  All the essentials of happiness--love,
courtship, marriage, the home, children, friendship, social intercourse,
and play, were independent of it; had always been there for the asking.

Joan thought his mistake lay in regarding man's happiness as more
important to him than his self-development.  It was not what we got out
of civilization but what we put into it that was our gain.  Its luxuries
and ostentations were, in themselves, perhaps bad for us.  But the
pursuit of them was good.  It called forth thought and effort, sharpened
our wits, strengthened our brains.  Primitive man, content with his
necessities, would never have produced genius.  Art, literature, science
would have been stillborn.

He hesitated before replying, glancing at her furtively while crumbling
his bread.  When he did, it was in the tone that one of her younger
disciples might have ventured into a discussion with Hypatia.  But he
stuck to his guns.

How did she account for David and Solomon, Moses and the Prophets?  They
had sprung from a shepherd race.  Yet surely there was genius,
literature.  Greece owed nothing to progress.  She had preceded it.  Her
thinkers, her poets, her scientists had draws their inspiration from
nature, not civilization.  Her art had sprung full grown out of the soil.
We had never surpassed it.

"But the Greek ideal could not have been the right one, or Greece would
not so utterly have disappeared," suggested Mr. Allway.  "Unless you
reject the law of the survival of the fittest."

He had no qualms about arguing with his uncle.

"So did Archimedes disappear," he answered with a smile.  "The nameless
Roman soldier remained.  That was hardly the survival of the fittest."

He thought it the tragedy of the world that Rome had conquered Greece,
imposing her lower ideals upon the race.  Rome should have been the
servant of Greece: the hands directed by the brain.  She would have made
roads and harbours, conducted the traffic, reared the market place.  She
knew of the steam engine, employed it for pumping water in the age of the
Antonines.  Sooner or later, she would have placed it on rails, and in
ships.  Rome should have been the policeman, keeping the world in order,
making it a fit habitation.  Her mistake was in regarding these things as
an end in themselves, dreaming of nothing beyond.  From her we had
inherited the fallacy that man was made for the world, not the world for
man.  Rome organized only for man's body.  Greece would have legislated
for his soul.

They went into the drawing-room.  Her father asked her to sing and Arthur
opened the piano for her and lit the candles.  She chose some ballads and
a song of Herrick's, playing her own accompaniment while Arthur turned
the leaves.  She had a good voice, a low contralto.  The room was high
and dimly lighted.  It looked larger than it really was.  Her father sat
in his usual chair beside the fire and listened with half-closed eyes.
Glancing now and then across at him, she was reminded of Orchardson's
picture.  She was feeling sentimental, a novel sensation to her.  She
rather enjoyed it.

She finished with one of Burns's lyrics; and then told Arthur that it was
now his turn, and that she would play for him.  He shook his head,
pleading that he was out of practice.

"I wish it," she said, speaking low.  And it pleased her that he made no
answer but to ask her what he should sing.  He had a light tenor voice.
It was wobbly at first, but improved as he went on.  They ended with a
duet.

The next morning she went into town with them.  She never seemed to have
any time in London, and wanted to do some shopping.  They joined her
again for lunch and afterwards, at her father's suggestion, she and
Arthur went for a walk.  They took the tram out of the city and struck
into the country.  The leaves still lingered brown and red upon the
trees.  He carried her cloak and opened gates for her and held back
brambles while she passed.  She had always been indifferent to these
small gallantries; but to-day she welcomed them.  She wished to feel her
power to attract and command.  They avoided all subjects on which they
could differ, even in words.  They talked of people and places they had
known together.  They remembered their common love of animals and told of
the comedies and tragedies that had befallen their pets.  Joan's regret
was that she had not now even a dog, thinking it cruel to keep them in
London.  She hated the women she met, dragging the poor little depressed
beasts about at the end of a string: savage with them, if they dared to
stop for a moment to exchange a passing wag of the tail with some other
little lonely sufferer.  It was as bad as keeping a lark in a cage.  She
had tried a cat: but so often she did not get home till late and that was
just the time when the cat wanted to be out; so that they seldom met.  He
suggested a parrot.  His experience of them was that they had no regular
hours and would willingly sit up all night, if encouraged, and talk all
the time.  Joan's objection to running a parrot was that it stamped you
as an old maid; and she wasn't that, at least, not yet.  She wondered if
she could make an owl really happy.  Minerva had an owl.

He told her how one spring, walking across a common, after a fire, he had
found a mother thrush burnt to death upon her nest, her charred wings
spread out in a vain endeavour to protect her brood.  He had buried her
there among the blackened thorn and furze, and placed a little cross of
stones above her.

"I hope nobody saw me," he said with a laugh.  "But I couldn't bear to
leave her there, unhonoured."

"It's one of the things that make me less certain than I want to be of a
future existence," said Joan: "the thought that animals can have no part
in it; that all their courage and love and faithfulness dies with them
and is wasted."

"Are you sure it is?" he answered.  "It would be so unreasonable."

They had tea at an old-fashioned inn beside a stream.  It was a favourite
resort in summer time, but now they had it to themselves.  The wind had
played pranks with her hair and he found a mirror and knelt before her,
holding it.

She stood erect, looking down at him while seeming to be absorbed in the
rearrangement of her hair, feeling a little ashamed of herself.  She was
"encouraging" him.  There was no other word for it.  She seemed to have
developed a sudden penchant for this sort of thing.  It would end in his
proposing to her; and then she would have to tell him that she cared for
him only in a cousinly sort of way--whatever that might mean--and that
she could never marry him.  She dared not ask herself why.  She must
manoeuvre to put it off as long as possible; and meanwhile some opening
might occur to enlighten him.  She would talk to him about her work; and
explain to him how she had determined to devote her life to it to the
exclusion of all other distractions.  If, then, he chose to go on loving
her--or if he couldn't help it--that would not be her fault.  After all,
it did him no harm.  She could always be gracious and kind to him.  It
was not as if she had tricked him.  He had always loved her.  Kneeling
before her, serving her: it was evident it made him supremely happy.  It
would be cruel of her to end it.

The landlady entered unexpectedly with the tea; but he did not rise till
Joan turned away, nor did he seem disconcerted.  Neither did the
landlady.  She was an elderly, quiet-eyed woman, and had served more than
one generation of young people with their teas.

They returned home by train.  Joan insisted on travelling third class,
and selected a compartment containing a stout woman and two children.
Arthur had to be at the works.  An important contract had got behindhand
and they were working overtime.  She and her father dined alone.  He made
her fulfil her promise to talk about herself, and she told him all she
thought would interest him.  She passed lightly over her acquaintanceship
with Phillips.  He would regard it as highly undesirable, she told
herself, and it would trouble him.  He was reading her articles in the
_Sunday Post_, as also her Letters from Clorinda: and of the two
preferred the latter as being less subversive of law and order.  Also he
did not like seeing her photograph each week, displayed across two
columns with her name beneath in one inch type.  He supposed he was old-
fashioned.  She was getting rather tired of it herself.

"The Editor insisted upon it," she explained.  "It was worth it for the
opportunity it gives me.  I preach every Sunday to a congregation of over
a million souls.  It's better than being a Bishop.  Besides," she added,
"the men are just as bad.  You see their silly faces everywhere."

"That's like you women," he answered with a smile.  "You pretend to be
superior; and then you copy us."

She laughed.  But the next moment she was serious.

"No, we don't," she said, "not those of us who think.  We know we shall
never oust man from his place.  He will always be the greater.  We want
to help him; that's all."

"But wasn't that the Lord's idea," he said; "when He gave Eve to Adam to
be his helpmeet?"

"Yes, that was all right," she answered.  "He fashioned Eve for Adam and
saw that Adam got her.  The ideal marriage might have been the ideal
solution.  If the Lord had intended that, he should have kept the match-
making in His own hands: not have left it to man.  Somewhere in Athens
there must have been the helpmeet God had made for Socrates.  When they
met, it was Xanthippe that she kissed."

A servant brought the coffee and went out again.  Her father lighted a
cigar and handed her the cigarettes.

"Will it shock you, Dad?" she asked.

"Rather late in the day for you to worry yourself about that, isn't it?"
he answered with a smile.

He struck a match and held it for her.  Joan sat with her elbows on the
table and smoked in silence.  She was thinking.

Why had he never "brought her up," never exacted obedience from her,
never even tried to influence her?  It could not have been mere weakness.
She stole a sidelong glance at the tired, lined face with its steel-blue
eyes.  She had never seen them other than calm, but they must have been
able to flash.  Why had he always been so just and kind and patient with
her?  Why had he never scolded her and bullied her and teased her?  Why
had he let her go away, leaving him lonely in his empty, voiceless house?
Why had he never made any claim upon her?  The idea came to her as an
inspiration.  At least, it would ease her conscience.  "Why don't you let
Arthur live here," she said, "instead of going back to his lodgings?  It
would be company for you."

He did not answer for some time.  She had begun to wonder if he had
heard.

"What do you think of him?" he said, without looking at her.

"Oh, he's quite a nice lad," she answered.

It was some while again before he spoke.  "He will be the last of the
Allways," he said.  "I should like to think of the name being continued;
and he's a good business man, in spite of his dreaminess.  Perhaps he
would get on better with the men."

She seized at the chance of changing the subject.

"It was a foolish notion," she said, "that of the Manchester school: that
men and women could be treated as mere figures in a sum."

To her surprise, he agreed with her.  "The feudal system had a fine idea
in it," he said, "if it had been honestly carried out.  A master should
be the friend, the helper of his men.  They should be one family."

She looked at him a little incredulously, remembering the bitter periods
of strikes and lock-outs.

"Did you ever try, Dad?" she asked.

"Oh, yes," he answered.  "But I tried the wrong way."  "The right way
might be found," he added, "by the right man, and woman."

She felt that he was watching her through his half-closed eyes.  "There
are those cottages," he continued, "just before you come to the bridge.
They might be repaired and a club house added.  The idea is catching on,
they tell me.  Garden villages, they call them now.  It gets the men and
women away from the dirty streets; and gives the children a chance."

She knew the place.  A sad group of dilapidated little houses forming
three sides of a paved quadrangle, with a shattered fountain and withered
trees in the centre.  Ever since she could remember, they had stood there
empty, ghostly, with creaking doors and broken windows, their gardens
overgrown with weeds.

"Are they yours?" she asked.  She had never connected them with the
works, some half a mile away.  Though had she been curious, she might
have learnt that they were known as "Allway's Folly."

"Your mother's," he answered.  "I built them the year I came back from
America and gave them to her.  I thought it would interest her.  Perhaps
it would, if I had left her to her own ways."

"Why didn't they want them?" she asked.

"They did, at first," he answered.  "The time-servers and the hypocrites
among them.  I made it a condition that they should be teetotallers, and
chapel goers, and everything else that I thought good for them.  I
thought that I could save their souls by bribing them with cheap rents
and share of profits.  And then the Union came, and that of course
finished it."

So he, too, had thought to build Jerusalem.

"Yes," he said.  "I'll sound him about giving up his lodgings."

Joan lay awake for a long while that night.  The moon looked in at the
window.  It seemed to have got itself entangled in the tops of the tall
pines.  Would it not be her duty to come back--make her father happy, to
say nothing of the other.  He was a dear, sweet, lovable lad.  Together,
they might realize her father's dream: repair the blunders, plant gardens
where the weeds now grew, drive out the old sad ghosts with living
voices.  It had been a fine thought, a "King's thought."  Others had
followed, profiting by his mistakes.  But might it not be carried further
than even they had gone, shaped into some noble venture that should serve
the future.

Was not her America here?  Why seek it further?  What was this unknown
Force, that, against all sense and reason, seemed driving her out into
the wilderness to preach.  Might it not be mere vanity, mere egoism.
Almost she had convinced herself.

And then there flashed remembrance of her mother.  She, too, had laid
aside herself; had thought that love and duty could teach one to be other
than one was.  The Ego was the all important thing, entrusted to us as
the talents of silver to the faithful servant: to be developed, not for
our own purposes, but for the service of the Master.

One did no good by suppressing one's nature.  In the end it proved too
strong.  Marriage with Arthur would be only repeating the mistake.  To be
worshipped, to be served.  It would be very pleasant, when one was in the
mood.  But it would not satisfy her.  There was something strong and
fierce and primitive in her nature--something that had come down to her
through the generations from some harness-girded ancestress--something
impelling her instinctively to choose the fighter; to share with him the
joy of battle, healing his wounds, giving him of her courage, exulting
with him in the victory.

The moon had risen clear of the entangling pines.  It rode serene and
free.

Her father came to the station with her in the morning.  The train was
not in: and they walked up and down and talked.  Suddenly she remembered:
it had slipped her mind.

"Could I, as a child, have known an old clergyman?" she asked him.  "At
least he wouldn't have been old then.  I dropped into Chelsea Church one
evening and heard him preach; and on the way home I passed him again in
the street.  It seemed to me that I had seen his face before.  But not
for many years.  I meant to write you about it, but forgot."

He had to turn aside for a moment to speak to an acquaintance about
business.

"Oh, it's possible," he answered on rejoining her.  "What was his name?"

"I do not know," she answered.  "He was not the regular Incumbent.  But
it was someone that I seemed to know quite well--that I must have been
familiar with."

"It may have been," he answered carelessly, "though the gulf was wider
then than it is now.  I'll try and think.  Perhaps it is only your
fancy."

The train drew in, and he found her a corner seat, and stood talking by
the window, about common things.

"What did he preach about?" he asked her unexpectedly.

She was puzzled for the moment.  "Oh, the old clergyman," she answered,
recollecting.  "Oh, Calvary.  All roads lead to Calvary, he thought.  It
was rather interesting."

She looked back at the end of the platform.  He had not moved.




CHAPTER IX


A pile of correspondence was awaiting her and, standing by the desk, she
began to open and read it.  Suddenly she paused, conscious that someone
had entered the room and, turning, she saw Hilda.  She must have left the
door ajar, for she had heard no sound.  The child closed the door
noiselessly and came across, holding out a letter.

"Papa told me to give you this the moment you came in," she said.  Joan
had not yet taken off her things.  The child must have been keeping a
close watch.  Save for the signature it contained but one line: "I have
accepted."

Joan replaced the letter in its envelope, and laid it down upon the desk.
Unconsciously a smile played about her lips.

The child was watching her.  "I'm glad you persuaded him," she said.

Joan felt a flush mount to her face.  She had forgotten Hilda for the
instant.

She forced a laugh.  "Oh, I only persuaded him to do what he had made up
his mind to do," she explained.  "It was all settled."

"No, it wasn't," answered the child.  "Most of them were against it.  And
then there was Mama," she added in a lower tone.

"What do you mean," asked Joan.  "Didn't she wish it?"

The child raised her eyes.  There was a dull anger in them.  "Oh, what's
the good of pretending," she said.  "He's so great.  He could be the
Prime Minister of England if he chose.  But then he would have to visit
kings and nobles, and receive them at his house, and Mama--"  She broke
off with a passionate gesture of the small thin hands.

Joan was puzzled what to say.  She knew exactly what she ought to say:
what she would have said to any ordinary child.  But to say it to this
uncannily knowing little creature did not promise much good.

"Who told you I persuaded him?" she asked.

"Nobody," answered the child.  "I knew."

Joan seated herself, and drew the child towards her.

"It isn't as terrible as you think," she said.  "Many men who have risen
and taken a high place in the world were married to kind, good women
unable to share their greatness.  There was Shakespeare, you know, who
married Anne Hathaway and had a clever daughter.  She was just a nice,
homely body a few years older than himself.  And he seems to have been
very fond of her; and was always running down to Stratford to be with
her."

"Yes, but he didn't bring her up to London," answered the child.  "Mama
would have wanted to come; and Papa would have let her, and wouldn't have
gone to see Queen Elizabeth unless she had been invited too."

Joan wished she had not mentioned Shakespeare.  There had surely been
others; men who had climbed up and carried their impossible wives with
them.  But she couldn't think of one, just then.

"We must help her," she answered somewhat lamely.  "She's anxious to
learn, I know."

The child shook her head.  "She doesn't understand," she said.  "And Papa
won't tell her.  He says it would only hurt her and do no good."  The
small hands were clenched.  "I shall hate her if she spoils his life."

The atmosphere was becoming tragic.  Joan felt the need of escaping from
it.  She sprang up.

"Oh, don't be nonsensical," she said.  "Your father isn't the only man
married to a woman not as clever as himself.  He isn't going to let that
stop him.  And your mother's going to learn to be the wife of a great man
and do the best she can.  And if they don't like her they've got to put
up with her.  I shall talk to the both of them."  A wave of motherliness
towards the entire Phillips family passed over her.  It included Hilda.
She caught the child to her and gave her a hug.  "You go back to school,"
she said, "and get on as fast as you can, so that you'll be able to be
useful to him."

The child flung her arms about her.  "You're so beautiful and wonderful,"
she said.  "You can do anything.  I'm so glad you came."

Joan laughed.  It was surprising how easily the problem had been solved.
She would take Mrs. Phillips in hand at once.  At all events she should
be wholesome and unobtrusive.  It would be a delicate mission, but Joan
felt sure of her own tact.  She could see his boyish eyes turned upon her
with wonder and gratitude.

"I was so afraid you would not be back before I went," said the child.  "I
ought to have gone this afternoon, but Papa let me stay till the
evening."

"You will help?" she added, fixing on Joan her great, grave eyes.

Joan promised, and the child went out.  She looked pretty when she
smiled.  She closed the door behind her noiselessly.

It occurred to Joan that she would like to talk matters over with
Greyson.  There was "Clorinda's" attitude to be decided upon; and she was
interested to know what view he himself would take.  Of course he would
be on P---'s side.  The _Evening Gazette_ had always supported the "gas
and water school" of socialism; and to include the people's food was
surely only an extension of the principle.  She rang him up and Miss
Greyson answered, asking her to come round to dinner: they would be
alone.  And she agreed.

The Greysons lived in a small house squeezed into an angle of the Outer
Circle, overlooking Regent's Park.  It was charmingly furnished, chiefly
with old Chippendale.  The drawing-room made quite a picture.  It was
home-like and restful with its faded colouring, and absence of all show
and overcrowding.  They sat there after dinner and discussed Joan's news.
Miss Greyson was repairing a piece of old embroidery she had brought back
with her from Italy; and Greyson sat smoking, with his hands behind his
head, and his long legs stretched out towards the fire.

"Carleton will want him to make his food policy include Tariff Reform,"
he said.  "If he prove pliable, and is willing to throw over his free
trade principles, all well and good."

"What's Carleton got to do with it?" demanded Joan with a note of
indignation.

He turned his head towards her with an amused raising of the eyebrows.
"Carleton owns two London dailies," he answered, "and is in treaty for a
third: together with a dozen others scattered about the provinces.  Most
politicians find themselves, sooner or later, convinced by his arguments.
Phillips may prove the exception."

"It would be rather interesting, a fight between them," said Joan.
"Myself I should back Phillips."

"He might win through," mused Greyson.  "He's the man to do it, if
anybody could.  But the odds will be against him."

"I don't see it," said Joan, with decision.

"I'm afraid you haven't yet grasped the power of the Press," he answered
with a smile.  "Phillips speaks occasionally to five thousand people.
Carleton addresses every day a circle of five million readers."

"Yes, but when Phillips does speak, he speaks to the whole country,"
retorted Joan.

"Through the medium of Carleton and his like; and just so far as they
allow his influence to permeate beyond the platform," answered Greyson.

"But they report his speeches.  They are bound to," explained Joan.

"It doesn't read quite the same," he answered.  "Phillips goes home under
the impression that he has made a great success and has roused the
country.  He and millions of other readers learn from the next morning's
headlines that it was 'A Tame Speech' that he made.  What sounded to him
'Loud Cheers' have sunk to mild 'Hear, Hears.'  That five minutes'
hurricane of applause, during which wildly excited men and women leapt
upon the benches and roared themselves hoarse, and which he felt had
settled the whole question, he searches for in vain.  A few silly
interjections, probably pre-arranged by Carleton's young lions, become
'renewed interruptions.'  The report is strictly truthful; but the
impression produced is that Robert Phillips has failed to carry even his
own people with him.  And then follow leaders in fourteen
widely-circulated Dailies, stretching from the Clyde to the Severn,
foretelling how Mr. Robert Phillips could regain his waning popularity by
the simple process of adopting Tariff Reform: or whatever the pet panacea
of Carleton and Co. may, at the moment, happen to be."

"Don't make us out all alike," pleaded his sister with a laugh.  "There
are still a few old-fashioned papers that do give their opponents fair
play."

"They are not increasing in numbers," he answered, "and the Carleton
group is.  There is no reason why in another ten years he should not
control the entire popular press of the country.  He's got the genius and
he's got the means."

"The cleverest thing he has done," he continued, turning to Joan, "is
your _Sunday Post_.  Up till then, the working classes had escaped him.
With the _Sunday Post_, he has solved the problem.  They open their
mouths; and he gives them their politics wrapped up in pictures and
gossipy pars."

Miss Greyson rose and put away her embroidery.  "But what's his object?"
she said.  "He must have more money than he can spend; and he works like
a horse.  I could understand it, if he had any beliefs."

"Oh, we can all persuade ourselves that we are the Heaven-ordained
dictator of the human race," he answered.  "Love of power is at the
bottom of it.  Why do our Rockefellers and our Carnegies condemn
themselves to the existence of galley slaves, ruining their digestions so
that they never can enjoy a square meal.  It isn't the money; it's the
trouble of their lives how to get rid of that.  It is the notoriety, the
power that they are out for.  In Carleton's case, it is to feel himself
the power behind the throne; to know that he can make and unmake
statesmen; has the keys of peace and war in his pocket; is able to
exclaim: Public opinion?  It is I."

"It can be a respectable ambition," suggested Joan.

"It has been responsible for most of man's miseries," he answered.  "Every
world's conqueror meant to make it happy after he had finished knocking
it about.  We are all born with it, thanks to the devil."  He shifted his
position and regarded her with critical eyes.  "You've got it badly," he
said.  "I can see it in the tilt of your chin and the quivering of your
nostrils.  You beware of it."

Miss Greyson left them.  She had to finish an article.  They debated
"Clorinda's" views; and agreed that, as a practical housekeeper, she
would welcome attention being given to the question of the nation's food.
The _Evening Gazette_ would support Phillips in principle, while
reserving to itself the right of criticism when it came to details.

"What's he like in himself?" he asked her.  "You've been seeing something
of him, haven't you?"

"Oh, a little," she answered.  "He's absolutely sincere; and he means
business.  He won't stop at the bottom of the ladder now he's once got
his foot upon it."

"But he's quite common, isn't he?" he asked again.  "I've only met him in
public."

"No, that's precisely what he isn't," answered Joan.  "You feel that he
belongs to no class, but his own.  The class of the Abraham Lincolns, and
the Dantons."

"England's a different proposition," he mused.  "Society counts for so
much with us.  I doubt if we should accept even an Abraham Lincoln:
unless in some supreme crisis.  His wife rather handicaps him, too,
doesn't she?"

"She wasn't born to be the chatelaine of Downing Street," Joan admitted.
"But it's not an official position."

"I'm not so sure that it isn't," he laughed.  "It's the dinner-table that
rules in England.  We settle everything round a dinner-table."

She was sitting in front of the fire in a high-backed chair.  She never
cared to loll, and the shaded light from the electric sconces upon the
mantelpiece illumined her.

"If the world were properly stage-managed, that's what you ought to be,"
he said, "the wife of a Prime Minister.  I can see you giving such an
excellent performance."

"I must talk to Mary," he added, "see if we can't get you off on some
promising young Under Secretary."

"Don't give me ideas above my station," laughed Joan.  "I'm a
journalist."

"That's the pity of it," he said.  "You're wasting the most important
thing about you, your personality.  You would do more good in a drawing-
room, influencing the rulers, than you will ever do hiding behind a pen.
It was the drawing-room that made the French Revolution."

The firelight played about her hair.  "I suppose every woman dreams of
reviving the old French Salon," she answered.  "They must have been
gloriously interesting."  He was leaning forward with clasped hands.  "Why
shouldn't she?" he said.  "The reason that our drawing-rooms have ceased
to lead is that our beautiful women are generally frivolous and our
clever women unfeminine.  What we are waiting for is an English Madame
Roland."

Joan laughed.  "Perhaps I shall some day," she answered.

He insisted on seeing her as far as the bus.  It was a soft, mild night;
and they walked round the Circle to Gloucester Gate.  He thought there
would be more room in the buses at that point.

"I wish you would come oftener," he said.  "Mary has taken such a liking
to you.  If you care to meet people, we can always whip up somebody of
interest."

She promised that she would.  She always felt curiously at home with the
Greysons.

They were passing the long sweep of Chester Terrace.  "I like this
neighbourhood with its early Victorian atmosphere," she said.  "It always
makes me feel quiet and good.  I don't know why."

"I like the houses, too," he said.  "There's a character about them.  You
don't often find such fine drawing-rooms in London."

"Don't forget your promise," he reminded her, when they parted.  "I shall
tell Mary she may write to you."

She met Carleton by chance a day or two later, as she was entering the
office.  "I want to see you," he said; and took her up with him into his
room.

"We must stir the people up about this food business," he said, plunging
at once into his subject.  "Phillips is quite right.  It overshadows
everything.  We must make the country self-supporting.  It can be done
and must.  If a war were to be sprung upon us we could be starved out in
a month.  Our navy, in face of these new submarines, is no longer able to
secure us.  France is working day and night upon them.  It may be a
bogey, or it may not.  If it isn't, she would have us at her mercy; and
it's too big a risk to run.  You live in the same house with him, don't
you?  Do you often see him?"

"Not often," she answered.

He was reading a letter.  "You were dining there on Friday night, weren't
you?" he asked her, without looking up.

Joan flushed.  What did he mean by cross-examining her in this way?  She
was not at all used to impertinence from the opposite sex.

"Your information is quite correct," she answered.

Her anger betrayed itself in her tone; and he shot a swift glance at her.

"I didn't mean to offend you," he said.  "A mutual friend, a Mr. Airlie,
happened to be of the party, and he mentioned you."

He threw aside the letter.  "I'll tell you what I want you to do," he
said.  "It's nothing to object to.  Tell him that you've seen me and had
a talk.  I understand his scheme to be that the country should grow more
and more food until it eventually becomes self-supporting; and that the
Government should control the distribution.  Tell him that with that I'm
heart and soul in sympathy; and would like to help him."  He pushed aside
a pile of papers and, leaning across the desk, spoke with studied
deliberation.  "If he can see his way to making his policy dependent upon
Protection, we can work together."

"And if he can't?" suggested Joan.

He fixed his large, colourless eyes upon her.  "That's where you can help
him," he answered.  "If he and I combine forces, we can pull this through
in spite of the furious opposition that it is going to arouse.  Without a
good Press he is helpless; and where is he going to get his Press backing
if he turns me down?  From half a dozen Socialist papers whose support
will do him more harm than good.  If he will bring the working class over
to Protection I will undertake that the Tariff Reformers and the
Agricultural Interest shall accept his Socialism.  It will be a victory
for both of us.

"If he gain his end, what do the means matter?" he continued, as Joan did
not answer.  "Food may be dearer; the Unions can square that by putting
up wages; while the poor devil of a farm labourer will at last get fair
treatment.  We can easily insist upon that.  What do you think,
yourself?"

"About Protection," she answered.  "It's one of the few subjects I
haven't made up my mind about."

He laughed.  "You will find all your pet reforms depend upon it, when you
come to work them out," he said.  "You can't have a minimum wage without
a minimum price."

They had risen.

"I'll give him your message," said Joan.  "But I don't see him exchanging
his principles even for your support.  I admit it's important."

"Talk it over with him," he said.  "And bear this in mind for your own
guidance."  He took a step forward, which brought his face quite close to
hers: "If he fails, and all his life's work goes for nothing, I shall be
sorry; but I shan't break my heart.  He will."

Joan dropped a note into Phillips's letter-box on her return home, saying
briefly that she wished to see him; and he sent up answer asking her if
she would come to the gallery that evening, and meet him after his
speech, which would be immediately following the dinner hour.

It was the first time he had risen since his appointment, and he was
received with general cheers.  He stood out curiously youthful against
the background of grey-haired and bald-headed men behind him; and there
was youth also in his clear, ringing voice that not even the vault-like
atmosphere of that shadowless chamber could altogether rob of its
vitality.  He spoke simply and good-humouredly, without any attempt at
rhetoric, relying chiefly upon a crescendo of telling facts that
gradually, as he proceeded, roused the House to that tense stillness that
comes to it when it begins to think.

"A distinctly dangerous man," Joan overheard a little old lady behind her
comment to a friend.  "If I didn't hate him, I should like him."

He met her in the corridor, and they walked up and down and talked, too
absorbed to be aware of the curious eyes that were turned upon them.  Joan
gave him Carleton's message.

"It was clever of him to make use of you," he said.  "If he'd sent it
through anybody else, I'd have published it."

"You don't think it even worth considering?" suggested Joan.

"Protection?" he flashed out scornfully.  "Yes, I've heard of that.  I've
listened, as a boy, while the old men told of it to one another, in thin,
piping voices, round the fireside; how the labourers were flung eight-and-
sixpence a week to die on, and the men starved in the towns; while the
farmers kept their hunters, and got drunk each night on fine old crusted
port.  Do you know what their toast was in the big hotels on market day,
with the windows open to the street: 'To a long war and a bloody one.'  It
would be their toast to-morrow, if they had their way.  Does he think I
am going to be a party to the putting of the people's neck again under
their pitiless yoke?"

"But the people are more powerful now," argued Joan.  "If the farmer
demanded higher prices, they could demand higher wages."

"They would never overtake the farmer," he answered, with a laugh.  "And
the last word would always be with him.  I am out to get rid of the
landlords," he continued, "not to establish them as the permanent rulers
of the country, as they are in Germany.  The people are more
powerful--just a little, because they are no longer dependent on the
land.  They can say to the farmer, 'All right, my son, if that's your
figure, I'm going to the shop next door--to South America, to Canada, to
Russia.'  It isn't a satisfactory solution.  I want to see England happy
and healthy before I bother about the Argentine.  It drives our men into
the slums when they might be living fine lives in God's fresh air.  In
the case of war it might be disastrous.  There, I agree with him.  We
must be able to shut our door without fear of having to open it ourselves
to ask for bread.  How would Protection accomplish that?  Did he tell
you?"

"Don't eat me," laughed Joan.  "I haven't been sent to you as a
missionary.  I'm only a humble messenger.  I suppose the argument is
that, good profits assured to him, the farmer would bustle up and produce
more."

"Can you see him bustling up?" he answered with a laugh; "organizing
himself into a body, and working the thing out from the point of view of
the public weal?  I'll tell you what nine-tenths of him would do: grow
just as much or little as suited his own purposes; and then go to sleep.
And Protection would be his security against ever being awakened."

"I'm afraid you don't like him," Joan commented.

"He will be all right in his proper place," he answered: "as the servant
of the public: told what to do, and turned out of his job if he doesn't
do it.  My scheme does depend upon Protection.  You can tell him that.
But this time, it's going to be Protection for the people."

They were at the far end of the corridor; and the few others still
promenading were some distance away.  She had not delivered the whole of
her message.  She crossed to a seat, and he followed her.  She spoke with
her face turned away from him.

"You have got to consider the cost of refusal," she said.  "His offer
wasn't help or neutrality: it was help or opposition by every means in
his power.  He left me in no kind of doubt as to that.  He's not used to
being challenged and he won't be squeamish.  You will have the whole of
his Press against you, and every other journalistic and political
influence that he possesses.  He's getting a hold upon the working
classes.  The _Sunday Post_ has an enormous sale in the manufacturing
towns; and he's talking of starting another.  Are you strong enough to
fight him?"

She very much wanted to look at him, but she would not.  It seemed to her
quite a time before he replied.

"Yes," he answered, "I'm strong enough to fight him.  Shall rather enjoy
doing it.  And it's time that somebody did.  Whether I'm strong enough to
win has got to be seen."

She turned and looked at him then.  She wondered why she had ever thought
him ugly.

"You can face it," she said: "the possibility of all your life's work
being wasted?"

"It won't be wasted," he answered.  "The land is there.  I've seen it
from afar and it's a good land, a land where no man shall go hungry.  If
not I, another shall lead the people into it.  I shall have prepared the
way."

She liked him for that touch of exaggeration.  She was so tired of the
men who make out all things little, including themselves and their own
work.  After all, was it exaggeration?  Might he not have been chosen to
lead the people out of bondage to a land where there should be no more
fear.

"You're not angry with me?" he asked.  "I haven't been rude, have I?"

"Abominably rude," she answered, "you've defied my warnings, and treated
my embassy with contempt."  She turned to him and their eyes met.  "I
should have despised you, if you hadn't," she added.

There was a note of exultation in her voice; and, as if in answer,
something leapt into his eyes that seemed to claim her.  Perhaps it was
well that just then the bell rang for a division; and the moment passed.

He rose and held out his hand.  "We will fight him," he said.  "And you
can tell him this, if he asks, that I'm going straight for him.
Parliament may as well close down if a few men between them are to be
allowed to own the entire Press of the country, and stifle every voice
that does not shout their bidding.  We haven't dethroned kings to put up
a newspaper Boss.  He shall have all the fighting he wants."

They met more often from that day, for Joan was frankly using her two
columns in the _Sunday Post_ to propagate his aims.  Carleton, to her
surprise, made no objection.  Nor did he seek to learn the result of his
ultimatum.  It looked, they thought, as if he had assumed acceptance; and
was willing for Phillips to choose his own occasion.  Meanwhile replies
to her articles reached Joan in weekly increasing numbers.  There seemed
to be a wind arising, blowing towards Protection.  Farm labourers,
especially, appeared to be enthusiastic for its coming.  From their ill-
spelt, smeared epistles, one gathered that, after years of doubt and
hesitation, they had--however reluctantly--arrived at the conclusion that
without it there could be no hope for them.  Factory workers, miners,
engineers--more fluent, less apologetic--wrote as strong supporters of
Phillips's scheme; but saw clearly how upon Protection its success
depended.  Shopmen, clerks--only occasionally ungrammatical--felt sure
that Robert Phillips, the tried friend of the poor, would insist upon the
boon of Protection being no longer held back from the people.  Wives and
mothers claimed it as their children's birthright.  Similar views got
themselves at the same time, into the correspondence columns of
Carleton's other numerous papers.  Evidently Democracy had been throbbing
with a passion for Protection hitherto unknown, even to itself.

"He means it kindly," laughed Phillips.  "He is offering me an excuse to
surrender gracefully.  We must have a public meeting or two after
Christmas, and clear the ground."  They had got into the habit of
speaking in the plural.

Mrs. Phillips's conversion Joan found more difficult than she had
anticipated.  She had persuaded Phillips to take a small house and let
her furnish it upon the hire system.  Joan went with her to the widely
advertised "Emporium" in the City Road, meaning to advise her.  But, in
the end, she gave it up out of sheer pity.  Nor would her advice have
served much purpose, confronted by the "rich and varied choice" provided
for his patrons by Mr. Krebs, the "Furnisher for Connoisseurs."

"We've never had a home exactly," explained Mrs. Phillips, during their
journey in the tram.  "It's always been lodgings, up to now.  Nice
enough, some of them; but you know what I mean; everybody else's taste
but your own.  I've always fancied a little house with one's own things
in it.  You know, things that you can get fond of."

Oh, the things she was going to get fond of!  The things that her poor,
round foolish eyes gloated upon the moment that she saw them!  Joan tried
to enlist the shopman on her side, descending even to flirtation.
Unfortunately he was a young man with a high sense of duty, convinced
that his employer's interests lay in his support of Mrs. Phillips.  The
sight of the furniture that, between them, they selected for the dining-
room gave Joan a quite distinct internal pain.  They ascended to the
floor above, devoted to the exhibition of "_Recherche_ drawing-room
suites."  Mrs. Phillips's eye instinctively fastened with passionate
desire upon the most atrocious.  Joan grew vehement.  It was impossible.

"I always was a one for cheerful colours," explained Mrs. Phillips.

Even the shopman wavered.  Joan pressed her advantage; directed Mrs.
Phillips's attention to something a little less awful.  Mrs. Phillips
yielded.

"Of course you know best, dear," she admitted.  "Perhaps I am a bit too
fond of bright things."

The victory was won.  Mrs. Phillips had turned away.  The shopman was
altering the order.  Joan moved towards the door, and accidentally caught
sight of Mrs. Phillips's face.  The flabby mouth was trembling.  A tear
was running down the painted cheek.

Joan slipped her hand through the other's arm.

"I'm not so sure you're not right after all," she said, fixing a critical
eye upon the rival suites.  "It is a bit mousey, that other."

The order was once more corrected.  Joan had the consolation of
witnessing the childish delight that came again into the foolish face;
but felt angry with herself at her own weakness.

It was the woman's feebleness that irritated her.  If only she had shown
a spark of fight, Joan could have been firm.  Poor feckless creature,
what could have ever been her attraction for Phillips!

She followed, inwardly fuming, while Mrs. Phillips continued to pile
monstrosity upon monstrosity.  What would Phillips think?  And what would
Hilda's eyes say when they looked upon that _recherche_ drawing-room
suite?  Hilda, who would have had no sentimental compunctions!  The woman
would be sure to tell them both that she, Joan, had accompanied her and
helped in the choosing.  The whole ghastly house would be exhibited to
every visitor as the result of their joint taste.  She could hear Mr.
Airlie's purring voice congratulating her.

She ought to have insisted on their going to a decent shop.  The mere
advertisement ought to have forewarned her.  It was the posters that had
captured Mrs. Phillips: those dazzling apartments where bejewelled
society reposed upon the "high-class but inexpensive designs" of Mr.
Krebs.  Artists ought to have more self-respect than to sell their
talents for such purposes.

The contract was concluded in Mr. Krebs' private office: a very stout
gentleman with a very thin voice, whose dream had always been to one day
be of service to the renowned Mr. Robert Phillips.  He was clearly under
the impression that he had now accomplished it.  Even as Mrs. Phillips
took up the pen to sign, the wild idea occurred to Joan of snatching the
paper away from her, hustling her into a cab, and in some quiet street or
square making the woman see for herself that she was a useless fool; that
the glowing dreams and fancies she had cherished in her silly head for
fifteen years must all be given up; that she must stand aside, knowing
herself of no account.

It could be done.  She felt it.  If only one could summon up the needful
brutality.  If only one could stifle that still, small voice of Pity.

Mrs. Phillips signed amid splutterings and blots.  Joan added her
signature as witness.

She did effect an improvement in the poor lady's dress.  On Madge's
advice she took her to a voluble little woman in the Earl's Court Road
who was struck at once by Madame Phillips's remarkable resemblance to the
Baroness von Stein.  Had not Joan noticed it?  Whatever suited the
Baroness von Stein--allowed by common consent to be one of the
best-dressed women in London--was bound to show up Madame Phillips to
equal advantage.  By curious coincidence a costume for the Baroness had
been put in hand only the day before.  It was sent for and pinned upon
the delighted Madame Phillips.  Perfection!  As the Baroness herself
would always say: "My frock must be a framework for my personality.  It
must never obtrude."  The supremely well-dressed woman!  One never
notices what she has on: that is the test.  It seemed it was what Mrs.
Phillips had always felt herself.  Joan could have kissed the voluble,
emphatic little woman.

But the dyed hair and the paint put up a fight for themselves.

"I want you to do something very brave," said Joan.  She had invited
herself to tea with Mrs. Phillips, and they were alone in the small white-
panelled room that they were soon to say good-bye to.  The new house
would be ready at Christmas.  "It will be a little hard at first,"
continued Joan, "but afterwards you will be glad that you have done it.
It is a duty you owe to your position as the wife of a great leader of
the people."

The firelight showed to Joan a comically frightened face, with round,
staring eyes and an open mouth.

"What is it you want me to do?" she faltered

"I want you to be just yourself," said Joan; "a kind, good woman of the
people, who will win their respect, and set them an example."  She moved
across and seating herself on the arm of Mrs. Phillips's chair, touched
lightly with her hand the flaxen hair and the rouged cheek.  "I want you
to get rid of all this," she whispered.  "It isn't worthy of you.  Leave
it to the silly dolls and the bad women."

There was a long silence.  Joan felt the tears trickling between her
fingers.

"You haven't seen me," came at last in a thin, broken voice.

Joan bent down and kissed her.  "Let's try it," she whispered.

A little choking sound was the only answer.  But the woman rose and, Joan
following, they stole upstairs into the bedroom and Mrs. Phillips turned
the key.

It took a long time, and Joan, seated on the bed, remembered a night when
she had taken a trapped mouse (if only he had been a quiet mouse!) into
the bathroom and had waited while it drowned.  It was finished at last,
and Mrs Phillips stood revealed with her hair down, showing streaks of
dingy brown.

Joan tried to enthuse; but the words came haltingly.  She suggested to
Joan a candle that some wind had suddenly blown out.  The paint and
powder had been obvious, but at least it had given her the mask of youth.
She looked old and withered.  The life seemed to have gone out of her.

"You see, dear, I began when I was young," she explained; "and he has
always seen me the same.  I don't think I could live like this."

The painted doll that the child fancied! the paint washed off and the
golden hair all turned to drab?  Could one be sure of "getting used to
it," of "liking it better?"  And the poor bewildered doll itself!  How
could one expect to make of it a statue: "The Woman of the People."  One
could only bruise it.

It ended in Joan's promising to introduce her to discreet theatrical
friends who would tell her of cosmetics less injurious to the skin, and
advise her generally in the ancient and proper art of "making up."

It was not the end she had looked for.  Joan sighed as she closed her
door behind her.  What was the meaning of it?  On the one hand that
unimpeachable law, the greatest happiness of the greatest number; the
sacred cause of Democracy; the moral Uplift of the people; Sanity,
Wisdom, Truth, the higher Justice; all the forces on which she was
relying for the regeneration of the world--all arrayed in stern demand
that the flabby, useless Mrs. Phillips should be sacrificed for the
general good.  Only one voice had pleaded for foolish, helpless Mrs.
Phillips--and had conquered.  The still, small voice of Pity.




CHAPTER X


Arthur sprang himself upon her a little before Christmas.  He was full of
a great project.  It was that she and her father should spend Christmas
with his people at Birmingham.  Her father thought he would like to see
his brother; they had not often met of late, and Birmingham would be
nearer for her than Liverpool.

Joan had no intention of being lured into the Birmingham parlour.  She
thought she could see in it a scheme for her gradual entanglement.
Besides, she was highly displeased.  She had intended asking her father
to come to Brighton with her.  As a matter of fact, she had forgotten all
about Christmas; and the idea only came into her head while explaining to
Arthur how his impulsiveness had interfered with it.  Arthur,
crestfallen, suggested telegrams.  It would be quite easy to alter
everything; and of course her father would rather be with her, wherever
it was.  But it seemed it was too late.  She ought to have been
consulted.  A sudden sense of proprietorship in her father came to her
assistance and added pathos to her indignation.  Of course, now, she
would have to spend Christmas alone.  She was far too busy to think of
Birmingham.  She could have managed Brighton.  Argument founded on the
length of journey to Birmingham as compared with the journey to Brighton
she refused to be drawn into.  Her feelings had been too deeply wounded
to permit of descent into detail.

But the sinner, confessing his fault, is entitled to forgiveness, and,
having put him back into his proper place, she let him kiss her hand.  She
even went further and let him ask her out to dinner.  As the result of
her failure to reform Mrs. Phillips she was feeling dissatisfied with
herself.  It was an unpleasant sensation and somewhat new to her
experience.  An evening spent in Arthur's company might do her good.  The
experiment proved successful.  He really was quite a dear boy.  Eyeing
him thoughtfully through the smoke of her cigarette, it occurred to her
how like he was to Guido's painting of St. Sebastian; those soft, dreamy
eyes and that beautiful, almost feminine, face!  There always had been a
suspicion of the saint about him even as a boy: nothing one could lay
hold of: just that odd suggestion of a shadow intervening between him and
the world.

It seemed a favourable opportunity to inform him of that fixed
determination of hers: never--in all probability--to marry: but to devote
her life to her work.  She was feeling very kindly towards him; and was
able to soften her decision with touches of gentle regret.  He did not
appear in the least upset.  But 'thought' that her duty might demand,
later on, that she should change her mind: that was if fate should offer
her some noble marriage, giving her wider opportunity.

She was a little piqued at his unexpected attitude of aloofness.  What
did he mean by a "noble marriage"--to a Duke, or something of that sort?

He did not think the candidature need be confined to Dukes, though he had
no objection to a worthy Duke.  He meant any really great man who would
help her and whom she could help.

She promised, somewhat shortly, to consider the matter, whenever the
Duke, or other class of nobleman, should propose to her.  At present no
sign of him had appeared above the horizon.  Her own idea was that, if
she lived long enough, she would become a spinster.  Unless someone took
pity on her when she was old and decrepit and past her work.

There was a little humorous smile about his mouth.  But his eyes were
serious and pleading.

"When shall I know that you are old and decrepit?" he asked.

She was not quite sure.  She thought it would be when her hair was
grey--or rather white.  She had been informed by experts that her
peculiar shade of hair went white, not grey.

"I shall ask you to marry me when your hair is white," he said.  "May I?"

It did not suggest any overwhelming impatience.  "Yes," she answered.  "In
case you haven't married yourself, and forgotten all about me."

"I shall keep you to your promise," he said quite gravely.

She felt the time had come to speak seriously.  "I want you to marry,"
she said, "and be happy.  I shall be troubled if you don't."

He was looking at her with those shy, worshipping eyes of his that always
made her marvel at her own wonderfulness.

"It need not do that," he answered.  "It would be beautiful to be with
you always so that I might serve you.  But I am quite happy, loving you.
Let me see you now and then: touch you and hear your voice."

Behind her drawn-down lids, she offered up a little prayer that she might
always be worthy of his homage.  She didn't know it would make no
difference to him.

She walked with him to Euston and saw him into the train.  He had given
up his lodgings and was living with her father at The Pines.  They were
busy on a plan for securing the co-operation of the workmen, and she
promised to run down and hear all about it.  She would not change her
mind about Birmingham, but sent everyone her love.

She wished she had gone when it came to Christmas Day.  This feeling of
loneliness was growing upon her.  The Phillips had gone up north; and the
Greysons to some relations of theirs: swell country people in Hampshire.
Flossie was on a sea voyage with Sam and his mother, and even Madge had
been struck homesick.  It happened to be a Sunday, too, of all days in
the week, and London in a drizzling rain was just about the limit.  She
worked till late in the afternoon, but, sitting down to her solitary cup
of tea, she felt she wanted to howl.  From the basement came faint sounds
of laughter.  Her landlord and lady were entertaining guests.  If they
had not been, she would have found some excuse for running down and
talking to them, if only for a few minutes.

Suddenly the vision of old Chelsea Church rose up before her with its
little motherly old pew-opener.  She had so often been meaning to go and
see her again, but something had always interfered.  She hunted through
her drawers and found a comparatively sober-coloured shawl, and tucked it
under her cloak.  The service was just commencing when she reached the
church.  Mary Stopperton showed her into a seat and evidently remembered
her.  "I want to see you afterwards," she whispered; and Mary Stopperton
had smiled and nodded.  The service, with its need for being continually
upon the move, bored her; she was not in the mood for it.  And the
sermon, preached by a young curate who had not yet got over his Oxford
drawl, was uninteresting.  She had half hoped that the wheezy old
clergyman, who had preached about Calvary on the evening she had first
visited the church, would be there again.  She wondered what had become
of him, and if it were really a fact that she had known him when she was
a child, or only her fancy.  It was strange how vividly her memory of him
seemed to pervade the little church.  She had the feeling he was watching
her from the shadows.  She waited for Mary in the vestibule, and gave her
the shawl, making her swear on the big key of the church door that she
would wear it herself and not give it away.  The little old pew-opener's
pink and white face flushed with delight as she took it, and the thin,
work-worn hands fingered it admiringly.  "But I may lend it?" she
pleaded.

They turned up Church Street.  Joan confided to Mary what a rotten
Christmas she had had, all by herself, without a soul to speak to except
her landlady, who had brought her meals and had been in such haste to get
away.

"I don't know what made me think of you," she said.  "I'm so glad I did."
She gave the little old lady a hug.  Mary laughed.  "Where are you going
now, dearie?" she asked.

"Oh, I don't mind so much now," answered Joan.  "Now that I've seen a
friendly face, I shall go home and go to bed early."

They walked a little way in silence.  Mary slipped her hand into Joan's.
"You wouldn't care to come home and have a bit of supper with me, would
you, dearie?" she asked.

"Oh, may I?" answered Joan.

Mary's hand gave Joan's a little squeeze.  "You won't mind if anybody
drops in?" she said.  "They do sometimes of a Sunday evening."

"You don't mean a party?" asked Joan.

"No, dear," answered Mary.  "It's only one or two who have nowhere else
to go."

Joan laughed.  She thought she would be a fit candidate.

"You see, it makes company for me," explained Mary.

Mary lived in a tiny house behind a strip of garden.  It stood in a
narrow side street between two public-houses, and was covered with ivy.
It had two windows above and a window and a door below.  The upstairs
rooms belonged to the churchwardens and were used as a storehouse for old
parish registers, deemed of little value.  Mary Stopperton and her
bedridden husband lived in the two rooms below.  Mary unlocked the door,
and Joan passed in and waited.  Mary lit a candle that was standing on a
bracket and turned to lead the way.

"Shall I shut the door?" suggested Joan.

Mary blushed like a child that has been found out just as it was hoping
that it had not been noticed.

"It doesn't matter, dearie," she explained.  "They know, if they find it
open, that I'm in."

The little room looked very cosy when Mary had made up the fire and
lighted the lamp.  She seated Joan in the worn horsehair easy-chair; out
of which one had to be careful one did not slip on to the floor; and
spread her handsome shawl over the back of the dilapidated sofa.

"You won't mind my running away for a minute," she said.  "I shall only
be in the next room."

Through the thin partition, Joan heard a constant shrill, complaining
voice.  At times, it rose into an angry growl.  Mary looked in at the
door.

"I'm just running round to the doctor's," she whispered.  "His medicine
hasn't come.  I shan't be long."

Joan offered to go in and sit with the invalid.  But Mary feared the
exertion of talking might be too much for him.  "He gets so excited," she
explained.  She slipped out noiselessly.

It seemed, in spite of its open door, a very silent little house behind
its strip of garden.  Joan had the feeling that it was listening.

Suddenly she heard a light step in the passage, and the room door opened.
A girl entered.  She was wearing a large black hat and a black boa round
her neck.  Between them her face shone unnaturally white.  She carried a
small cloth bag.  She started, on seeing Joan, and seemed about to
retreat.

"Oh, please don't go," cried Joan.  "Mrs. Stopperton has just gone round
to the doctor's.  She won't be long.  I'm a friend of hers."

The girl took stock of her and, apparently reassured, closed the door
behind her.

"What's he like to-night?" she asked, with a jerk of her head in the
direction of the next room.  She placed her bag carefully upon the sofa,
and examined the new shawl as she did so.

"Well, I gather he's a little fretful," answered Joan with a smile.

"That's a bad sign," said the girl.  "Means he's feeling better."  She
seated herself on the sofa and fingered the shawl.  "Did you give it
her?" she asked.

"Yes," admitted Joan.  "I rather fancied her in it."

"She'll only pawn it," said the girl, "to buy him grapes and port wine."

"I felt a bit afraid of her," laughed Joan, "so I made her promise not to
part with it.  Is he really very ill, her husband?"

"Oh, yes, there's no make-believe this time," answered the girl.  "A bad
thing for her if he wasn't."

"Oh, it's only what's known all over the neighbourhood," continued the
girl.  "She's had a pretty rough time with him.  Twice I've found her
getting ready to go to sleep for the night by sitting on the bare floor
with her back against the wall.  Had sold every stick in the place and
gone off.  But she'd always some excuse for him.  It was sure to be half
her fault and the other half he couldn't help.  Now she's got her
'reward' according to her own account.  Heard he was dying in a
doss-house, and must fetch him home and nurse him back to life.  Seems
he's getting fonder of her every day.  Now that he can't do anything
else."

"It doesn't seem to depress her spirits," mused Joan.

"Oh, she!  She's all right," agreed the girl.  "Having the time of her
life: someone to look after for twenty-four hours a day that can't help
themselves."

She examined Joan awhile in silence.  "Are you on the stage?" she asked.

"No," answered Joan.  "But my mother was.  Are you?"

"Thought you looked a bit like it," said the girl.  "I'm in the chorus.
It's better than being in service or in a shop: that's all you can say
for it."

"But you'll get out of that," suggested Joan.  "You've got the actress
face."

The girl flushed with pleasure.  It was a striking face, with intelligent
eyes and a mobile, sensitive mouth.  "Oh, yes," she said, "I could act
all right.  I feel it.  But you don't get out of the chorus.  Except at a
price."

Joan looked at her.  "I thought that sort of thing was dying out," she
said.

The girl shrugged her shoulders.  "Not in my shop," she answered.
"Anyhow, it was the only chance I ever had.  Wish sometimes I'd taken it.
It was quite a good part."

"They must have felt sure you could act," said Joan.  "Next time it will
be a clean offer."

The girl shook her head.  "There's no next time," she said; "once you're
put down as one of the stand-offs.  Plenty of others to take your place."

"Oh, I don't blame them," she added.  "It isn't a thing to be dismissed
with a toss of your head.  I thought it all out.  Don't know now what
decided me.  Something inside me, I suppose."

Joan found herself poking the fire.  "Have you known Mary Stopperton
long?" she asked.

"Oh, yes," answered the girl.  "Ever since I've been on my own."

"Did you talk it over with her?" asked Joan.

"No," answered the girl.  "I may have just told her.  She isn't the sort
that gives advice."

"I'm glad you didn't do it," said Joan: "that you put up a fight for all
women."

The girl gave a short laugh.  "Afraid I wasn't thinking much about that,"
she said.

"No," said Joan.  "But perhaps that's the way the best fights are
fought--without thinking."

Mary peeped round the door.  She had been lucky enough to find the doctor
in.  She disappeared again, and they talked about themselves.  The girl
was a Miss Ensor.  She lived by herself in a room in Lawrence Street.

"I'm not good at getting on with people," she explained.

Mary joined them, and went straight to Miss Ensor's bag and opened it.
She shook her head at the contents, which consisted of a small, flabby-
looking meat pie in a tin dish, and two pale, flat mince tarts.

"It doesn't nourish you, dearie," complained Mary.  "You could have
bought yourself a nice bit of meat with the same money."

"And you would have had all the trouble of cooking it," answered the
girl.  "That only wants warming up."

"But I like cooking, you know, dearie," grumbled Mary.  "There's no
interest in warming things up."

The girl laughed.  "You don't have to go far for your fun," she said.
"I'll bring a sole next time; and you shall do it _au gratin_."

Mary put the indigestible-looking pasties into the oven, and almost
banged the door.  Miss Ensor proceeded to lay the table.  "How many, do
you think?" she asked.  Mary was doubtful.  She hoped that, it being
Christmas Day, they would have somewhere better to go.

"I passed old 'Bubble and Squeak,' just now, spouting away to three men
and a dog outside the World's End.  I expect he'll turn up," thought Miss
Ensor.  She laid for four, leaving space for more if need be.  "I call it
the 'Cadger's Arms,'" she explained, turning to Joan.  "We bring our own
victuals, and Mary cooks them for us and waits on us; and the more of us
the merrier.  You look forward to your Sunday evening parties, don't
you?" she asked of Mary.

Mary laughed.  She was busy in a corner with basins and a saucepan.  "Of
course I do, dearie," she answered.  "I've always been fond of company."

There came another opening of the door.  A little hairy man entered.  He
wore spectacles and was dressed in black.  He carried a paper parcel
which he laid upon the table.  He looked a little doubtful at Joan.  Mary
introduced them.  His name was Julius Simson.  He shook hands as if under
protest.

"As friends of Mary Stopperton," he said, "we meet on neutral ground.  But
in all matters of moment I expect we are as far asunder as the poles.  I
stand for the People."

"We ought to be comrades," answered Joan, with a smile.  "I, too, am
trying to help the People."

"You and your class," said Mr. Simson, "are friends enough to the People,
so long as they remember that they are the People, and keep their proper
place--at the bottom.  I am for putting the People at the top."

"Then they will be the Upper Classes," suggested Joan.  "And I may still
have to go on fighting for the rights of the lower orders."

"In this world," explained Mr. Simson, "someone has got to be Master.  The
only question is who."

Mary had unwrapped the paper parcel.  It contained half a sheep's head.
"How would you like it done?" she whispered.

Mr. Simson considered.  There came a softer look into his eyes.  "How did
you do it last time?" he asked.  "It came up brown, I remember, with
thick gravy."

"Braised," suggested Mary.

"That's the word," agreed Mr. Simson.  "Braised."  He watched while Mary
took things needful from the cupboard, and commenced to peel an onion.

"That's the sort that makes me despair of the People," said Mr. Simson.
Joan could not be sure whether he was addressing her individually or
imaginary thousands.  "Likes working for nothing.  Thinks she was born to
be everybody's servant."  He seated himself beside Miss Ensor on the
antiquated sofa.  It gave a complaining groan but held out.

"Did you have a good house?" the girl asked him.  "Saw you from the
distance, waving your arms about.  Hadn't time to stop."

"Not many," admitted Mr. Simson.  "A Christmassy lot.  You know.  Sort of
crowd that interrupts you and tries to be funny.  Dead to their own
interests.  It's slow work."

"Why do you do it?" asked Miss Ensor.

"Damned if I know," answered Mr. Simson, with a burst of candour.  "Can't
help it, I suppose.  Lost me job again."

"The old story?" suggested Miss Ensor.

"The old story," sighed Mr. Simson.  "One of the customers happened to be
passing last Wednesday when I was speaking on the Embankment.  Heard my
opinion of the middle classes?"

"Well, you can't expect 'em to like it, can you?" submitted Miss Ensor.

"No," admitted Mr. Simson with generosity.  "It's only natural.  It's a
fight to the finish between me and the Bourgeois.  I cover them with
ridicule and contempt and they hit back at me in the only way they know."

"Take care they don't get the best of you," Miss Ensor advised him.

"Oh, I'm not afraid," he answered.  "I'll get another place all right:
give me time.  The only thing I'm worried about is my young woman."

"Doesn't agree with you?" inquired Miss Ensor.

"Oh, it isn't that," he answered.  "But she's frightened.  You know.  Says
life with me is going to be a bit too uncertain for her.  Perhaps she's
right."

"Oh, why don't you chuck it," advised Miss Ensor, "give the Bourgeois a
rest."

Mr. Simson shook his head.  "Somebody's got to tackle them," he said.
"Tell them the truth about themselves, to their faces."

"Yes, but it needn't be you," suggested Miss Ensor.

Mary was leaning over the table.  Miss Ensor's four-penny veal and ham
pie was ready.  Mary arranged it in front of her.  "Eat it while it's
hot, dearie," she counselled.  "It won't be so indigestible."

Miss Ensor turned to her.  "Oh, you talk to him," she urged.  "Here, he's
lost his job again, and is losing his girl: all because of his silly
politics.  Tell him he's got to have sense and stop it."

Mary seemed troubled.  Evidently, as Miss Ensor had stated, advice was
not her line.  "Perhaps he's got to do it, dearie," she suggested.

"What do you mean by got to do it?" exclaimed Miss Ensor.  "Who's making
him do it, except himself?"

Mary flushed.  She seemed to want to get back to her cooking.  "It's
something inside us, dearie," she thought: "that nobody hears but
ourselves."

"That tells him to talk all that twaddle?" demanded Miss Ensor.  "Have
you heard him?"

"No, dearie," Mary admitted.  "But I expect it's got its purpose.  Or he
wouldn't have to do it."

Miss Ensor gave a gesture of despair and applied herself to her pie.  The
hirsute face of Mr. Simson had lost the foolish aggressiveness that had
irritated Joan.  He seemed to be pondering matters.

Mary hoped that Joan was hungry.  Joan laughed and admitted that she was.
"It's the smell of all the nice things," she explained.  Mary promised it
should soon be ready, and went back to her corner.

A short, dark, thick-set man entered and stood looking round the room.
The frame must once have been powerful, but now it was shrunken and
emaciated.  The shabby, threadbare clothes hung loosely from the stooping
shoulders.  Only the head seemed to have retained its vigour.  The face,
from which the long black hair was brushed straight back, was ghastly
white.  Out of it, deep set beneath great shaggy, overhanging brows,
blazed the fierce, restless eyes of a fanatic.  The huge, thin-lipped
mouth seemed to have petrified itself into a savage snarl.  He gave Joan
the idea, as he stood there glaring round him, of a hunted beast at bay.

Miss Ensor, whose bump of reverence was undeveloped, greeted him
cheerfully as Boanerges.  Mr. Simson, more respectful, rose and offered
his small, grimy hand.  Mary took his hat and cloak away from him and
closed the door behind him.  She felt his hands, and put him into a chair
close to the fire.  And then she introduced him to Joan.

Joan started on hearing his name.  It was one well known.

"The Cyril Baptiste?" she asked.  She had often wondered what he might be
like.

"The Cyril Baptiste," he answered, in a low, even, passionate voice, that
he flung at her almost like a blow.  "The atheist, the gaol bird, the
pariah, the blasphemer, the anti-Christ.  I've hoofs instead of feet.
Shall I take off my boots and show them to you?  I tuck my tail inside my
coat.  You can't see my horns.  I've cut them off close to my head.
That's why I wear my hair long: to hide the stumps."

Mary had been searching in the pockets of his cloak.  She had found a
paper bag.  "You mustn't get excited," she said, laying her little work-
worn hand upon his shoulder; "or you'll bring on the bleeding."

"Aye," he answered, "I must be careful I don't die on Christmas Day.  It
would make a fine text, that, for their sermons."

He lapsed into silence: his almost transparent hands stretched out
towards the fire.

Mr. Simson fidgeted.  The quiet of the room, broken only by Mary's
ministering activities, evidently oppressed him.

"Paper going well, sir?" he asked.  "I often read it myself."

"It still sells," answered the proprietor, and editor and publisher, and
entire staff of _The Rationalist_.

"I like the articles you are writing on the History of Superstition.
Quite illuminating," remarked Mr. Simson.

"It's many a year, I am afraid, to the final chapter," thought their
author.

"They afford much food for reflection," thought Mr. Simson, "though I
cannot myself go as far as you do in including Christianity under that
heading."

Mary frowned at him; but Mr. Simson, eager for argument or not noticing,
blundered on:--

"Whether we accept the miraculous explanation of Christ's birth,"
continued Mr. Simson, in his best street-corner voice, "or whether, with
the great French writer whose name for the moment escapes me, we regard
Him merely as a man inspired, we must, I think, admit that His teaching
has been of help: especially to the poor."

The fanatic turned upon him so fiercely that Mr. Simson's arm
involuntarily assumed the posture of defence.

"To the poor?" the old man almost shrieked.  "To the poor that he has
robbed of all power of resistance to oppression by his vile, submissive
creed! that he has drugged into passive acceptance of every evil done to
them by his false promises that their sufferings here shall win for them
some wonderful reward when they are dead.  What has been his teaching to
the poor?  Bow your backs to the lash, kiss the rod that scars your
flesh.  Be ye humble, oh, my people.  Be ye poor in spirit.  Let Wrong
rule triumphant through the world.  Raise no hand against it, lest ye
suffer my eternal punishments.  Learn from me to be meek and lowly.  Learn
to be good slaves and give no trouble to your taskmasters.  Let them turn
the world into a hell for you.  The grave--the grave shall be your gate
to happiness.

"Helpful to the poor?  Helpful to their rulers, to their owners.  They
take good care that Christ shall be well taught.  Their fat priests shall
bear his message to the poor.  The rod may be broken, the prison door be
forced.  It is Christ that shall bind the people in eternal fetters.
Christ, the lackey, the jackal of the rich."

Mr. Simson was visibly shocked.  Evidently he was less familiar with the
opinions of _The Rationalist_ than he had thought.

"I really must protest," exclaimed Mr. Simson.  "To whatever wrong uses
His words may have been twisted, Christ Himself I regard as divine, and
entitled to be spoken of with reverence.  His whole life, His
sufferings--"

But the old fanatic's vigour had not yet exhausted itself.

"His sufferings!" he interrupted.  "Does suffering entitle a man to be
regarded as divine?  If so, so also am I a God.  Look at me!"  He
stretched out his long, thin arms with their claw-like hands, thrusting
forward his great savage head that the bony, wizened throat seemed hardly
strong enough to bear.  "Wealth, honour, happiness: I had them once.  I
had wife, children and a home.  Now I creep an outcast, keeping to the
shadows, and the children in the street throw stones at me.  Thirty years
I have starved that I might preach.  They shut me in their prisons, they
hound me into garrets.  They jibe at me and mock me, but they cannot
silence me.  What of my life?  Am I divine?"

Miss Ensor, having finished her supper, sat smoking.

"Why must you preach?" she asked.  "It doesn't seem to pay you."  There
was a curious smile about the girl's lips as she caught Joan's eye.

He turned to her with his last flicker of passion.

"Because to this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth," he answered.

He sank back a huddled heap upon the chair.  There was foam about his
mouth, great beads of sweat upon his forehead.  Mary wiped them away with
a corner of her apron, and felt again his trembling hands.  "Oh, please
don't talk to him any more," she pleaded, "not till he's had his supper."
She fetched her fine shawl, and pinned it round him.  His eyes followed
her as she hovered about him.  For the first time, since he had entered
the room, they looked human.

They gathered round the table.  Mr. Baptiste was still pinned up in
Mary's bright shawl.  It lent him a curious dignity.  He might have been
some ancient prophet stepped from the pages of the Talmud.  Miss Ensor
completed her supper with a cup of tea and some little cakes: "just to
keep us all company," as Mary had insisted.

The old fanatic's eyes passed from face to face.  There was almost the
suggestion of a smile about the savage mouth.

"A strange supper-party," he said.  "Cyril the Apostate; and Julius who
strove against the High Priests and the Pharisees; and Inez a dancer
before the people; and Joanna a daughter of the rulers, gathered together
in the house of one Mary a servant of the Lord."

"Are you, too, a Christian?" he asked of Joan.

"Not yet," answered Joan.  "But I hope to be, one day."  She spoke
without thinking, not quite knowing what she meant.  But it came back to
her in after years.

The talk grew lighter under the influence of Mary's cooking.  Mr.
Baptiste could be interesting when he got away from his fanaticism; and
even the apostolic Mr. Simson had sometimes noticed humour when it had
chanced his way.

A message came for Mary about ten o'clock, brought by a scared little
girl, who whispered it to her at the door.  Mary apologized.  She had to
go out.  The party broke up.  Mary disappeared into the next room and
returned in a shawl and bonnet, carrying a small brown paper parcel.  Joan
walked with her as far as the King's Road.

"A little child is coming," she confided to Joan.  She was quite excited
about it.

Joan thought.  "It's curious," she said, "one so seldom hears of anybody
being born on Christmas Day."

They were passing a lamp.  Joan had never seen a face look quite so happy
as Mary's looked, just then.

"It always seems to me Christ's birthday," she said, "whenever a child is
born."

They had reached the corner.  Joan could see her bus in the distance.

She stooped and kissed the little withered face.

"Don't stop," she whispered.

Mary gave her a hug, and almost ran away.  Joan watched the little child-
like figure growing smaller.  It glided in and out among the people.




CHAPTER XI


In the spring, Joan, at Mrs. Denton's request, undertook a mission.  It
was to go to Paris.  Mrs. Denton had meant to go herself, but was laid up
with sciatica; and the matter, she considered, would not brook of any
delay.

"It's rather a delicate business," she told Joan.  She was lying on a
couch in her great library, and Joan was seated by her side.  "I want
someone who can go into private houses and mix with educated people on
their own level; and especially I want you to see one or two women: they
count in France.  You know French pretty well, don't you?"

"Oh, sufficiently," Joan answered.  The one thing her mother had done for
her had been to talk French with her when she was a child; and at Girton
she had chummed on with a French girl, and made herself tolerably
perfect.

"You will not go as a journalist," continued Mrs. Denton; "but as a
personal friend of mine, whose discretion I shall vouch for.  I want you
to find out what the people I am sending you among are thinking
themselves, and what they consider ought to be done.  If we are not very
careful on both sides we shall have the newspapers whipping us into war."

The perpetual Egyptian trouble had cropped up again and the Carleton
papers, in particular, were already sounding the tocsin.  Carleton's
argument was that we ought to fall upon France and crush her, before she
could develop her supposed submarine menace.  His flaming posters were at
every corner.  Every obscure French newspaper was being ransacked for
"Insults and Pinpricks."

"A section of the Paris Press is doing all it can to help him, of
course," explained Mrs. Denton.  "It doesn't seem to matter to them that
Germany is only waiting her opportunity, and that, if Russia comes in, it
is bound to bring Austria.  Europe will pay dearly one day for the luxury
of a free Press."

"But you're surely not suggesting any other kind of Press, at this period
of the world's history?" exclaimed Joan.

"Oh, but I am," answered the old lady with a grim tightening of the lips.
"Not even Carleton would be allowed to incite to murder or arson.  I
would have him prosecuted for inciting a nation to war."

"Why is the Press always so eager for war?" mused Joan.  "According to
their own account, war doesn't pay them."

"I don't suppose it does: not directly," answered Mrs. Denton.  "But it
helps them to establish their position and get a tighter hold upon the
public.  War does pay the newspaper in the long run.  The daily newspaper
lives on commotion, crime, lawlessness in general.  If people no longer
enjoyed reading about violence and bloodshed half their occupation, and
that the most profitable half would be gone.  It is the interest of the
newspaper to keep alive the savage in human nature; and war affords the
readiest means of doing this.  You can't do much to increase the number
of gruesome murders and loathsome assaults, beyond giving all possible
advertisement to them when they do occur.  But you can preach war, and
cover yourself with glory, as a patriot, at the same time."

"I wonder how many of my ideals will be left to me," sighed Joan.  "I
always used to regard the Press as the modern pulpit."

"The old pulpit became an evil, the moment it obtained unlimited power,"
answered Mrs. Denton.  "It originated persecution and inflamed men's
passions against one another.  It, too, preached war for its own ends,
taught superstition, and punished thought as a crime.  The Press of to-
day is stepping into the shoes of the medieval priest.  It aims at
establishing the worst kind of tyranny: the tyranny over men's minds.
They pretend to fight among themselves, but it's rapidly becoming a close
corporation.  The Institute of Journalists will soon be followed by the
Union of Newspaper Proprietors and the few independent journals will be
squeezed out.  Already we have German shareholders on English papers; and
English capital is interested in the St. Petersburg Press.  It will one
day have its International Pope and its school of cosmopolitan
cardinals."

Joan laughed.  "I can see Carleton rather fancying himself in a tiara,"
she said.  "I must tell Phillips what you say.  He's out for a fight with
him.  Government by Parliament or Government by Press is going to be his
war cry."

"Good man," said Mrs. Denton.  "I'm quite serious.  You tell him from me
that the next revolution has got to be against the Press.  And it will be
the stiffest fight Democracy has ever had."

The old lady had tired herself.  Joan undertook the mission.  She thought
she would rather enjoy it, and Mrs. Denton promised to let her have full
instructions.  She would write to her friends in Paris and prepare them
for Joan's coming.

Joan remembered Folk, the artist she had met at Flossie's party, who had
promised to walk with her on the terrace at St. Germain, and tell her
more about her mother.  She looked up his address on her return home, and
wrote to him, giving him the name of the hotel in the Rue de Grenelle
where Mrs. Denton had arranged that she should stay.  She found a note
from him awaiting her when she arrived there.  He thought she would like
to be quiet after her journey.  He would call round in the morning.  He
had presumed on the privilege of age to send her some lilies.  They had
been her mother's favourite flower.  "Monsieur Folk, the great artist,"
had brought them himself, and placed them in her dressing-room, so Madame
informed her.

It was one of the half-dozen old hotels still left in Paris, and was
built round a garden famous for its mighty mulberry tree.  She
breakfasted underneath it, and was reading there when Folk appeared
before her, smiling and with his hat in his hand.  He excused himself for
intruding upon her so soon, thinking from what she had written him that
her first morning might be his only chance.  He evidently considered her
remembrance of him a feather in his cap.

"We old fellows feel a little sadly, at times, how unimportant we are,"
he explained.  "We are grateful when Youth throws us a smile."

"You told me my coming would take you back thirty-three years," Joan
reminded him.  "It makes us about the same age.  I shall treat you as
just a young man."

He laughed.  "Don't be surprised," he said, "if I make a mistake
occasionally and call you Lena."

Joan had no appointment till the afternoon.  They drove out to St.
Germain, and had _dejeuner_ at a small restaurant opposite the Chateau;
and afterwards they strolled on to the terrace.

"What was my mother doing in Paris?" asked Joan,

"She was studying for the stage," he answered.  "Paris was the only
school in those days.  I was at Julien's studio.  We acted together for
some charity.  I had always been fond of it.  An American manager who was
present offered us both an engagement, and I thought it would be a change
and that I could combine the two arts."

"And it was here that you proposed to her," said Joan.

"Just by that tree that leans forward," he answered, pointing with his
cane a little way ahead.  "I thought that in America I'd get another
chance.  I might have if your father hadn't come along.  I wonder if he
remembers me."

"Did you ever see her again, after her marriage?" asked Joan.

"No," he answered.  "We used to write to one another until she gave it
up.  She had got into the habit of looking upon me as a harmless sort of
thing to confide in and ask advice of--which she never took."

"Forgive me," he said.  "You must remember that I am still her lover."
They had reached the tree that leant a little forward beyond its fellows,
and he had halted and turned so that he was facing her.  "Did she and
your father get on together.  Was she happy?"

"I don't think she was happy," answered Joan.  "She was at first.  As a
child, I can remember her singing and laughing about the house, and she
liked always to have people about her.  Until her illness came.  It
changed her very much.  But my father was gentleness itself, to the end."

They had resumed their stroll.  It seemed to her that he looked at her
once or twice a little oddly without speaking.  "What caused your
mother's illness?" he asked, abruptly.

The question troubled her.  It struck her with a pang of self-reproach
that she had always been indifferent to her mother's illness, regarding
it as more or less imaginary.  "It was mental rather than physical, I
think," she answered.  "I never knew what brought it about."

Again he looked at her with that odd, inquisitive expression.  "She never
got over it?" he asked.

"Oh, there were times," answered Joan, "when she was more like her old
self again.  But I don't think she ever quite got over it.  Unless it was
towards the end," she added.  "They told me she seemed much better for a
little while before she died.  I was away at Cambridge at the time."

"Poor dear lady," he said, "all those years!  And poor Jack Allway."  He
seemed to be talking to himself.  Suddenly he turned to her.  "How is the
dear fellow?" he asked.

Again the question troubled her.  She had not seen her father since that
week-end, nearly six months ago, when she had ran down to see him because
she wanted something from him.  "He felt my mother's death very deeply,"
she answered.  "But he's well enough in health."

"Remember me to him," he said.  "And tell him I thank him for all those
years of love and gentleness.  I don't think he will be offended."

He drove her back to Paris, and she promised to come and see him in his
studio and let him introduce her to his artist friends.

"I shall try to win you over, I warn you," he said.  "Politics will never
reform the world.  They appeal only to men's passions and hatreds.  They
divide us.  It is Art that is going to civilize mankind; broaden his
sympathies.  Art speaks to him the common language of his loves, his
dreams, reveals to him the universal kinship."

Mrs. Denton's friends called upon her, and most of them invited her to
their houses.  A few were politicians, senators or ministers.  Others
were bankers, heads of business houses, literary men and women.  There
were also a few quiet folk with names that were historical.  They all
thought that war between France and England would be a world disaster,
but were not very hopeful of averting it.  She learnt that Carleton was
in Berlin trying to secure possession of a well-known German daily that
happened at the moment to be in low water.  He was working for an
alliance between Germany and England.  In France, the Royalists had come
to an understanding with the Clericals, and both were evidently making
ready to throw in their lot with the war-mongers, hoping that out of the
troubled waters the fish would come their way.  Of course everything
depended on the people.  If the people only knew it!  But they didn't.
They stood about in puzzled flocks, like sheep, wondering which way the
newspaper dog was going to hound them.  They took her to the great music
halls.  Every allusion to war was greeted with rapturous applause.  The
Marseillaise was demanded and encored till the orchestra rebelled from
sheer exhaustion.  Joan's patience was sorely tested.  She had to listen
with impassive face to coarse jests and brutal gibes directed against
England and everything English; to sit unmoved while the vast audience
rocked with laughter at senseless caricatures of supposed English
soldiers whose knees always gave way at the sight of a French uniform.
Even in the eyes of her courteous hosts, Joan's quick glance would
occasionally detect a curious glint.  The fools!  Had they never heard of
Waterloo and Trafalgar?  Even if their memories might be excused for
forgetting Crecy and Poictiers and the campaigns of Marlborough.  One
evening--it had been a particularly trying one for Joan--there stepped
upon the stage a wooden-looking man in a kilt with bagpipes under his
arm.  How he had got himself into the programme Joan could not
understand.  Managerial watchfulness must have gone to sleep for once.  He
played Scotch melodies, and the Parisians liked them, and when he had
finished they called him back.  Joan and her friends occupied a box close
to the stage.  The wooden-looking Scot glanced up at her, and their eyes
met.  And as the applause died down there rose the first low warning
strains of the Pibroch.  Joan sat up in her chair and her lips parted.
The savage music quickened.  It shrilled and skrealed.  The blood came
surging through her veins.

And suddenly something lying hidden there leaped to life within her
brain.  A mad desire surged hold of her to rise and shout defiance at
those three thousand pairs of hostile eyes confronting her.  She clutched
at the arms of her chair and so kept her seat.  The pibroch ended with
its wild sad notes of wailing, and slowly the mist cleared from her eyes,
and the stage was empty.  A strange hush had fallen on the house.

She was not aware that her hostess had been watching her.  She was a
sweet-faced, white-haired lady.  She touched Joan lightly on the hand.
"That's the trouble," she whispered.  "It's in our blood."

Could we ever hope to eradicate it?  Was not the survival of this
fighting instinct proof that war was still needful to us?  In the
sculpture-room of an exhibition she came upon a painted statue of
Bellona.  Its grotesqueness shocked her at first sight, the red streaming
hair, the wild eyes filled with fury, the wide open mouth--one could
almost hear it screaming--the white uplifted arms with outstretched
hands!  Appalling!  Terrible!  And yet, as she gazed at it, gradually the
thing grew curiously real to her.  She seemed to hear the gathering of
the chariots, the neighing of the horses, the hurrying of many feet, the
sound of an armouring multitude, the shouting, and the braying of the
trumpets.

These cold, thin-lipped calculators, arguing that "War doesn't pay";
those lank-haired cosmopolitans, preaching their "International," as if
the only business of mankind were wages!  War still was the stern school
where men learnt virtue, duty, forgetfulness of self, faithfulness unto
death.

This particular war, of course, must be stopped: if it were not already
too late.  It would be a war for markets; for spheres of commercial
influence; a sordid war that would degrade the people.  War, the supreme
test of a nation's worth, must be reserved for great ideals.  Besides,
she wanted to down Carleton.

One of the women on her list, and the one to whom Mrs. Denton appeared to
attach chief importance, a Madame de Barante, disappointed Joan.  She
seemed to have so few opinions of her own.  She had buried her young
husband during the Franco-Prussian war.  He had been a soldier.  And she
had remained unmarried.  She was still beautiful.

"I do not think we women have the right to discuss war," she confided to
Joan in her gentle, high-bred voice.  "I suppose you think that out of
date.  I should have thought so myself forty years ago.  We talk of
'giving' our sons and lovers, as if they were ours to give.  It makes me
a little angry when I hear pampered women speak like that.  It is the men
who have to suffer and die.  It is for them to decide."

"But perhaps I can arrange a meeting for you with a friend," she added,
"who will be better able to help you, if he is in Paris.  I will let you
know."

She told Joan what she remembered herself of 1870.  She had turned her
country house into a hospital and had seen a good deal of the fighting.

"It would not do to tell the truth, or we should have our children
growing up to hate war," she concluded.

She was as good as her word, and sent Joan round a message the next
morning to come and see her in the afternoon.  Joan was introduced to a
Monsieur de Chaumont.  He was a soldierly-looking gentleman, with a grey
moustache, and a deep scar across his face.

"Hanged if I can see how we are going to get out of it," he answered Joan
cheerfully.  "The moment there is any threat of war, it becomes a point
of honour with every nation to do nothing to avoid it.  I remember my old
duelling days.  The quarrel may have been about the silliest trifle
imaginable.  A single word would have explained the whole thing away.  But
to utter it would have stamped one as a coward.  This Egyptian Tra-la-la!
It isn't worth the bones of a single grenadier, as our friends across the
Rhine would say.  But I expect, before it's settled, there will be men's
bones sufficient, bleaching on the desert, to build another Pyramid.  It's
so easily started: that's the devil of it.  A mischievous boy can throw a
lighted match into a powder magazine, and then it becomes every patriot's
business to see that it isn't put out.  I hate war.  It accomplishes
nothing, and leaves everything in a greater muddle than it was before.
But if the idea ever catches fire, I shall have to do all I can to fan
the conflagration.  Unless I am prepared to be branded as a poltroon.
Every professional soldier is supposed to welcome war.  Most of us do:
it's our opportunity.  There's some excuse for us.  But these
men--Carleton and their lot: I regard them as nothing better than the
Menades of the Commune.  They care nothing if the whole of Europe blazes.
They cannot personally get harmed whatever happens.  It's fun to them."

"But the people who can get harmed," argued Joan.  "The men who will be
dragged away from their work, from their business, used as 'cannon
fodder.'"

He shrugged his shoulders.  "Oh, they are always eager enough for it, at
first," he answered.  "There is the excitement.  The curiosity.  You must
remember that life is a monotonous affair to the great mass of the
people.  There's the natural craving to escape from it; to court
adventure.  They are not so enthusiastic about it after they have tasted
it.  Modern warfare, they soon find, is about as dull a business as
science ever invented."

There was only one hope that he could see: and that was to switch the
people's mind on to some other excitement.  His advices from London told
him that a parliamentary crisis was pending.  Could not Mrs. Denton and
her party do something to hasten it?  He, on his side, would consult with
the Socialist leaders, who might have something to suggest.

He met Joan, radiant, a morning or two later.  The English Government had
resigned and preparations for a general election were already on foot.

"And God has been good to us, also," he explained.

A well-known artist had been found murdered in his bed and grave
suspicion attached to his beautiful young wife.

"She deserves the Croix de Guerre, if it is proved that she did it," he
thought.  "She will have saved many thousands of lives--for the present."

Folk had fixed up a party at his studio to meet her.  She had been there
once or twice; but this was a final affair.  She had finished her
business in Paris and would be leaving the next morning.  To her
surprise, she found Phillips there.  He had come over hurriedly to attend
a Socialist conference, and Leblanc, the editor of _Le Nouveau Monde_,
had brought him along.

"I took Smedley's place at the last moment," he whispered to her.  "I've
never been abroad before.  You don't mind, do you?"

It didn't strike her as at all odd that a leader of a political party
should ask her "if she minded" his being in Paris to attend a political
conference.  He was wearing a light grey suit and a blue tie.  There was
nothing about him, at that moment, suggesting that he was a leader of any
sort.  He might have been just any man, but for his eyes.

"No," she whispered.  "Of course not.  I don't like your tie."  It seemed
to depress him, that.

She felt elated at the thought that he would see her for the first time
amid surroundings where she would shine.  Folk came forward to meet her
with that charming air of protective deference that he had adopted
towards her.  He might have been some favoured minister of state kissing
the hand of a youthful Queen.  She glanced down the long studio, ending
in its fine window overlooking the park.  Some of the most distinguished
men in Paris were there, and the immediate stir of admiration that her
entrance had created was unmistakable.  Even the women turned pleased
glances at her; as if willing to recognize in her their representative.  A
sense of power came to her that made her feel kind to all the world.
There was no need for her to be clever: to make any effort to attract.
Her presence, her sympathy, her approval seemed to be all that was needed
of her.  She had the consciousness that by the mere exercise of her will
she could sway the thoughts and actions of these men: that sovereignty
had been given to her.  It reflected itself in her slightly heightened
colour, in the increased brilliance of her eyes, in the confident case of
all her movements.  It added a compelling softness to her voice.

She never quite remembered what the talk was about.  Men were brought up
and presented to her, and hung about her words, and sought to please her.
She had spoken her own thoughts, indifferent whether they expressed
agreement or not; and the argument had invariably taken another plane.  It
seemed so important that she should be convinced.  Some had succeeded,
and had been strengthened.  Others had failed, and had departed
sorrowful, conscious of the necessity of "thinking it out again."

Guests with other engagements were taking their leave.  A piquante little
woman, outrageously but effectively dressed--she looked like a drawing by
Beardsley--drew her aside.  "I've always wished I were a man," she said.
"It seemed to me that they had all the power.  From this afternoon, I
shall be proud of belonging to the governing sex."

She laughed and slipped away.

Phillips was waiting for her in the vestibule.  She had forgotten him;
but now she felt glad of his humble request to be allowed to see her
home.  It would have been such a big drop from her crowded hour of
triumph to the long lonely cab ride and the solitude of the hotel.  She
resolved to be gracious, feeling a little sorry for her neglect of
him--but reflecting with satisfaction that he had probably been watching
her the whole time.

"What's the matter with my tie?" he asked.  "Wrong colour?"

She laughed.  "Yes," she answered.  "It ought to be grey to match your
suit.  And so ought your socks."

"I didn't know it was going to be such a swell affair, or I shouldn't
have come," he said.

She touched his hand lightly.

"I want you to get used to it," she said.  "It's part of your work.  Put
your brain into it, and don't be afraid."

"I'll try," he said.

He was sitting on the front seat, facing her.  "I'm glad I went," he said
with sudden vehemence.  "I loved watching you, moving about among all
those people.  I never knew before how beautiful you are."

Something in his eyes sent a slight thrill of fear through her.  It was
not an unpleasant sensation--rather exhilarating.  She watched the
passing street till she felt that his eyes were no longer devouring her.

"You're not offended?" he asked.  "At my thinking you beautiful?" he
added, in case she hadn't understood.

She laughed.  Her confidence had returned to her.  "It doesn't generally
offend a woman," she answered.

He seemed relieved.  "That's what's so wonderful about you," he said.
"I've met plenty of clever, brilliant women, but one could forget that
they were women.  You're everything."

He pleaded, standing below her on the steps of the hotel, that she would
dine with him.  But she shook her head.  She had her packing to do.  She
could have managed it; but something prudent and absurd had suddenly got
hold of her; and he went away with much the same look in his eyes that
comes to a dog when he finds that his master cannot be persuaded into an
excursion.

She went up to her room.  There really was not much to do.  She could
quite well finish her packing in the morning.  She sat down at the desk
and set to work to arrange her papers.  It was a warm spring evening, and
the window was open.  A crowd of noisy sparrows seemed to be delighted
about something.  From somewhere, unseen, a blackbird was singing.  She
read over her report for Mrs. Denton.  The blackbird seemed never to have
heard of war.  He sang as if the whole world were a garden of languor and
love.  Joan looked at her watch.  The first gong would sound in a few
minutes.  She pictured the dreary, silent dining-room with its few
scattered occupants, and her heart sank at the prospect.  To her relief
came remembrance of a cheerful but entirely respectable restaurant near
to the Louvre to which she had been taken a few nights before.  She had
noticed quite a number of women dining there alone.  She closed her
dispatch case with a snap and gave a glance at herself in the great
mirror.  The blackbird was still singing.

She walked up the Rue des Sts. Peres, enjoying the delicious air.  Half
way across the bridge she overtook a man, strolling listlessly in front
of her.  There was something familiar about him.  He was wearing a grey
suit and had his hands in his pockets.  Suddenly the truth flashed upon
her.  She stopped.  If he strolled on, she would be able to slip back.
Instead of which he abruptly turned to look down at a passing steamer,
and they were face to face.

It made her mad, the look of delight that came into his eyes.  She could
have boxed his ears.  Hadn't he anything else to do but hang about the
streets.

He explained that he had been listening to the band in the gardens,
returning by the Quai d'Orsay.

"Do let me come with you," he said.  "I kept myself free this evening,
hoping.  And I'm feeling so lonesome."

Poor fellow!  She had come to understand that feeling.  After all, it
wasn't altogether his fault that they had met.  And she had been so cross
to him!

He was reading every expression on her face.

"It's such a lovely evening," he said.  "Couldn't we go somewhere and
dine under a tree?"

It would be rather pleasant.  There was a little place at Meudon, she
remembered.  The plane trees would just be in full leaf.

A passing cab had drawn up close to them.  The chauffeur was lighting his
pipe.

Even Mrs. Grundy herself couldn't object to a journalist dining with a
politician!

The stars came out before they had ended dinner.  She had made him talk
about himself.  It was marvellous what he had accomplished with his
opportunities.  Ten hours a day in the mines had earned for him his
living, and the night had given him his leisure.  An attic, lighted by a
tallow candle, with a shelf of books that left him hardly enough for
bread, had been his Alma Mater.  History was his chief study.  There was
hardly an authority Joan could think of with which he was not familiar.
_Julius Caesar_ was his favourite play.  He seemed to know it by heart.
At twenty-three he had been elected a delegate, and had entered
Parliament at twenty-eight.  It had been a life of hardship, of
privation, of constant strain; but she found herself unable to pity him.
It was a tale of strength, of struggle, of victory, that he told her.

Strength!  The shaded lamplight fell upon his fearless kindly face with
its flashing eyes and its humorous mouth.  He ought to have been drinking
out of a horn, not a wine glass that his well-shaped hand could have
crushed by a careless pressure.  In a winged helmet and a coat of mail he
would have looked so much more fitly dressed than in that soft felt hat
and ridiculous blue tie.

She led him to talk on about the future.  She loved to hear his clear,
confident voice with its touch of boyish boastfulness.  What was there to
stop him?  Why should he not climb from power to power till he had
reached the end!

And as he talked and dreamed there grew up in her heart a fierce anger.
What would her own future be?  She would marry probably some man of her
own class, settle down to the average woman's "life"; be allowed, like a
spoilt child, to still "take an interest" in public affairs: hold
"drawing-rooms" attended by cranks and political nonentities: be
President, perhaps, of the local Woman's Liberal League.  The
alternative: to spend her days glued to a desk, penning exhortations to
the people that Carleton and his like might or might not allow them to
read; while youth and beauty slipped away from her, leaving her one of
the ten thousand other lonely, faded women, forcing themselves unwelcome
into men's jobs.  There came to her a sense of having been robbed of what
was hers by primitive eternal law.  Greyson had been right.  She did love
power--power to serve and shape the world.  She would have earned it and
used it well.  She could have helped him, inspired him.  They would have
worked together: he the force and she the guidance.  She would have
supplied the things he lacked.  It was to her he came for counsel, as it
was.  But for her he would never have taken the first step.  What right
had this poor brainless lump of painted flesh to share his wounds, his
triumphs?  What help could she give him when the time should come that he
should need it?

Suddenly he broke off.  "What a fool I'm making of myself," he said.  "I
always was a dreamer."

She forced a laugh.  "Why shouldn't it come true?" she asked.

They had the little garden to themselves.  The million lights of Paris
shone below them.

"Because you won't be there," he answered, "and without you I can't do
it.  You think I'm always like I am to-night, bragging, confident.  So I
am when you are with me.  You give me back my strength.  The plans and
hopes and dreams that were slipping from me come crowding round me,
laughing and holding out their hands.  They are like the children.  They
need two to care for them.  I want to talk about them to someone who
understands them and loves them, as I do.  I want to feel they are dear
to someone else, as well as to myself: that I must work for them for her
sake, as well as for my own.  I want someone to help me to bring them
up."

There were tears in his eyes.  He brushed them angrily away.  "Oh, I know
I ought to be ashamed of myself," he said.  "It wasn't her fault.  She
wasn't to know that a hot-blooded young chap of twenty hasn't all his
wits about him, any more than I was.  If I had never met you, it wouldn't
have mattered.  I'd have done my bit of good, and have stopped there,
content.  With you beside me"--he looked away from her to where the
silent city peeped through its veil of night--"I might have left the
world better than I found it."

The blood had mounted to her face.  She drew back into the shadow, beyond
the tiny sphere of light made by the little lamp.

"Men have accomplished great things without a woman's help," she said.

"Some men," he answered.  "Artists and poets.  They have the woman within
them.  Men like myself--the mere fighter: we are incomplete in ourselves.
Male and female created He them.  We are lost without our mate."

He was thinking only of himself.  Had he no pity for her.  So was she,
also, useless without her mate.  Neither was she of those, here and
there, who can stand alone.  Her task was that of the eternal woman: to
make a home: to cleanse the world of sin and sorrow, make it a kinder
dwelling-place for the children that should come.  This man was her true
helpmeet.  He would have been her weapon, her dear servant; and she could
have rewarded him as none other ever could.  The lamplight fell upon his
ruddy face, his strong white hands resting on the flimsy table.  He
belonged to an older order than her own.  That suggestion about him of
something primitive, of something not yet altogether tamed.  She felt
again that slight thrill of fear that so strangely excited her.  A mist
seemed to be obscuring all things.  He seemed to be coming towards her.
Only by keeping her eyes fixed on his moveless hands, still resting on
the table, could she convince herself that his arms were not closing
about her, that she was not being drawn nearer and nearer to him,
powerless to resist.

Suddenly, out of the mist, she heard voices.  The waiter was standing
beside him with the bill.  She reached out her hand and took it.  The
usual few mistakes had occurred.  She explained them, good temperedly,
and the waiter, with profuse apologies, went back to have it corrected.

He turned to her as the man went.  "Try and forgive me," he said in a low
voice.  "It all came tumbling out before I thought what I was saying."

The blood was flowing back into her veins.  "Oh, it wasn't your fault,"
she answered.  "We must make the best we can of it."

He bent forward so that he could see into her eyes.

"Tell me," he said.  There was a note of fierce exultation in his voice.
"I'll promise never to speak of it again.  If I had been a free man,
could I have won you?"

She had risen while he was speaking.  She moved to him and laid her hands
upon his shoulders.

"Will you serve me and fight for me against all my enemies?" she asked.

"So long as I live," he answered.

She glanced round.  There was no sign of the returning waiter.  She bent
over him and kissed him.

"Don't come with me," she said.  "There's a cab stand in the Avenue.  I
shall walk to Sevres and take the train."

She did not look back.




CHAPTER XII


She reached home in the evening.  The Phillips's old rooms had been twice
let since Christmas, but were now again empty.  The McKean with his
silent ways and his everlasting pipe had gone to America to superintend
the production of one of his plays.  The house gave her the feeling of
being haunted.  She had her dinner brought up to her and prepared for a
long evening's work; but found herself unable to think--except on the one
subject that she wanted to put off thinking about.  To her relief the
last post brought her a letter from Arthur.  He had been called to Lisbon
to look after a contract, and would be away for a fortnight.  Her father
was not as well as he had been.

It seemed to just fit in.  She would run down and spend a few quiet days
at Liverpool.  In her old familiar room where the moon peeped in over the
tops of the tall pines she would be able to reason things out.  Perhaps
her father would be able to help her.  She had lost her childish
conception of him as of someone prim and proper, with cut and dried
formulas for all occasions.  That glimpse he had shown her of himself had
established a fellowship between them.  He, too, had wrestled with life's
riddles, not sure of his own answers.  She found him suffering from his
old heart trouble, but more cheerful than she had known him for years.
Arthur seemed to be doing wonders with the men.  They were coming to
trust him.

"The difficulty I have always been up against," explained her father,
"has been their suspicion.  'What's the cunning old rascal up to now?
What's his little game?'  That is always what I have felt they were
thinking to themselves whenever I have wanted to do anything for them.  It
isn't anything he says to them.  It seems to be just he, himself."

He sketched out their plans to her.  It seemed to be all going in at one
ear and out at the other.  What was the matter with her?  Perhaps she was
tired without knowing it.  She would get him to tell her all about it to-
morrow.  Also, to-morrow, she would tell him about Phillips, and ask his
advice.  It was really quite late.  If he talked any more now, it would
give her a headache.  She felt it coming on.

She made her "good-night" extra affectionate, hoping to disguise her
impatience.  She wanted to get up to her own room.

But even that did not help her.  It seemed in some mysterious way to be
no longer her room, but the room of someone she had known and half
forgotten: who would never come back.  It gave her the same feeling she
had experienced on returning to the house in London: that the place was
haunted.  The high cheval glass from her mother's dressing-room had been
brought there for her use.  The picture of an absurdly small child--the
child to whom this room had once belonged--standing before it naked, rose
before her eyes.  She had wanted to see herself.  She had thought that
only her clothes stood in the way.  If we could but see ourselves, as in
some magic mirror?  All the garments usage and education has dressed us
up in laid aside.  What was she underneath her artificial niceties, her
prim moralities, her laboriously acquired restraints, her unconscious
pretences and hypocrisies?  She changed her clothes for a loose robe, and
putting out the light drew back the curtains.  The moon peeped in over
the top of the tall pines, but it only stared at her, indifferent.  It
seemed to be looking for somebody else.

Suddenly, and intensely to her own surprise, she fell into a passionate
fit of weeping.  There was no reason for it, and it was altogether so
unlike her.  But for quite a while she was unable to control it.
Gradually, and of their own accord, her sobs lessened, and she was able
to wipe her eyes and take stock of herself in the long glass.  She
wondered for the moment whether it was really her own reflection that she
saw there or that of some ghostly image of her mother.  She had so often
seen the same look in her mother's eyes.  Evidently the likeness between
them was more extensive than she had imagined.  For the first time she
became conscious of an emotional, hysterical side to her nature of which
she had been unaware.  Perhaps it was just as well that she had
discovered it.  She would have to keep a stricter watch upon herself.
This question of her future relationship with Phillips: it would have to
be thought out coldly, dispassionately.  Nothing unexpected must be
allowed to enter into it.

It was some time before she fell asleep.  The high glass faced her as she
lay in bed.  She could not get away from the idea that it was her
mother's face that every now and then she saw reflected there.

She woke late the next morning.  Her father had already left for the
works.  She was rather glad to have no need of talking.  She would take a
long walk into the country, and face the thing squarely with the help of
the cheerful sun and the free west wind that was blowing from the sea.
She took the train up north and struck across the hills.  Her spirits
rose as she walked.

It was only the intellectual part of him she wanted--the spirit, not the
man.  She would be taking nothing away from the woman, nothing that had
ever belonged to her.  All the rest of him: his home life, the benefits
that would come to her from his improved means, from his social position:
all that the woman had ever known or cared for in him would still be
hers.  He would still remain to her the kind husband and father.  What
more was the woman capable of understanding?  What more had she any right
to demand?

It was not of herself she was thinking.  It was for his work's sake that
she wanted to be near to him always: that she might counsel him,
encourage him.  For this she was prepared to sacrifice herself, give up
her woman's claim on life.  They would be friends, comrades--nothing
more.  That little lurking curiosity of hers, concerning what it would be
like to feel his strong arms round her, pressing her closer and closer to
him: it was only a foolish fancy.  She could easily laugh that out of
herself.  Only bad women had need to be afraid of themselves.  She would
keep guard for both of them.  Their purity of motive, their high purpose,
would save them from the danger of anything vulgar or ridiculous.

Of course they would have to be careful.  There must be no breath of
gossip, no food for evil tongues.  About that she was determined even
more for his sake than her own.  It would be fatal to his career.  She
was quite in agreement with the popular demand, supposed to be peculiarly
English, that a public man's life should be above reproach.  Of what use
these prophets without self-control; these social reformers who could not
shake the ape out of themselves?  Only the brave could give courage to
others.  Only through the pure could God's light shine upon men.

It was vexing his having moved round the corner, into North Street.  Why
couldn't the silly woman have been content where she was.  Living under
one roof, they could have seen one another as often as was needful
without attracting attention.  Now, she supposed, she would have to be
more than ever the bosom friend of Mrs. Phillips--spend hours amid that
hideous furniture, surrounded by those bilious wallpapers.  Of course he
could not come to her.  She hoped he would appreciate the sacrifice she
would be making for him.  Fortunately Mrs. Phillips would give no
trouble.  She would not even understand.

What about Hilda?  No hope of hiding their secret from those sharp eyes.
But Hilda would approve.  They could trust Hilda.  The child might prove
helpful.

It cast a passing shadow upon her spirits, this necessary descent into
details.  It brought with it the suggestion of intrigue, of deceit:
robbing the thing, to a certain extent, of its fineness.  Still, what was
to be done?  If women were coming into public life these sort of
relationships with men would have to be faced and worked out.  Sex must
no longer be allowed to interfere with the working together of men and
women for common ends.  It was that had kept the world back.  They would
be the pioneers of the new order.  Casting aside their earthly passions,
humbly with pure hearts they would kneel before God's altar.  He should
bless their union.

A lark was singing.  She stood listening.  Higher and higher he rose,
pouring out his song of worship; till the tiny, fragile body disappeared
as if fallen from him, leaving his sweet soul still singing.  The happy
tears came to her eyes, and she passed on.  She did not hear that little
last faint sob with which he sank exhausted back to earth beside a hidden
nest among the furrows.

She had forgotten the time.  It was already late afternoon.  Her long
walk and the keen air had made her hungry.  She had a couple of eggs with
her tea at a village inn, and was fortunate enough to catch a train that
brought her back in time for dinner.  A little ashamed of her
unresponsiveness the night before, she laid herself out to be sympathetic
to her father's talk.  She insisted on hearing again all that he and
Arthur were doing, opposing him here and there with criticism just
sufficient to stimulate him; careful in the end to let him convince her.

These small hypocrisies were new to her.  She hoped she was not damaging
her character.  But it was good, watching him slyly from under drawn-down
lids, to see the flash of triumph that would come into his tired eyes in
answer to her half-protesting: "Yes, I see your point, I hadn't thought
of that," her half reluctant admission that "perhaps" he was right,
there; that "perhaps" she was wrong.  It was delightful to see him young
again, eager, boyishly pleased with himself.  It seemed there was a joy
she had not dreamed of in yielding victory as well as in gaining it.  A
new tenderness was growing up in her.  How considerate, how patient, how
self-forgetful he had always been.  She wanted to mother him.  To take
him in her arms and croon over him, hushing away remembrance of the old
sad days.

Folk's words came back to her: "And poor Jack Allway.  Tell him I thank
him for all those years of love and gentleness."  She gave him the
message.

Folk had been right.  He was not offended.  "Dear old chap," he said.
"That was kind of him.  He was always generous."

He was silent for a while, with a quiet look on his face.

"Give him our love," he said.  "Tell him we came together, at the end."

It was on her tongue to ask him, as so often she had meant to do of late,
what had been the cause of her mother's illness--if illness it was: what
it was that had happened to change both their lives.  But always
something had stopped her--something ever present, ever watchful, that
seemed to shape itself out of the air, bending towards her with its
finger on its lips.

She stayed over the week-end; and on the Saturday, at her suggestion,
they took a long excursion into the country.  It was the first time she
had ever asked him to take her out.  He came down to breakfast in a new
suit, and was quite excited.  In the car his hand had sought hers shyly,
and, feeling her responsive pressure, he had continued to hold it; and
they had sat for a long time in silence.  She decided not to tell him
about Phillips, just yet.  He knew of him only from the Tory newspapers
and would form a wrong idea.  She would bring them together and leave
Phillips to make his own way.  He would like Phillips when he knew him,
she felt sure.  He, too, was a people's man.  The torch passed down to
him from his old Ironside ancestors, it still glowed.  More than once she
had seen it leap to flame.  In congenial atmosphere, it would burn clear
and steadfast.  It occurred to her what a delightful solution of her
problem, if later on her father could be persuaded to leave Arthur in
charge of the works, and come to live with her in London.  There was a
fine block of flats near Chelsea Church with long views up and down the
river.  How happy they could be there; the drawing-room in the Adams
style with wine-coloured curtains!  He was a father any young woman could
be proud to take about.  Unconsciously she gave his hand an impulsive
squeeze.  They lunched at an old inn upon the moors; and the landlady,
judging from his shy, attentive ways, had begun by addressing her as
Madame.

"You grow wonderfully like your mother," he told her that evening at
dinner.  "There used to be something missing.  But I don't feel that,
now."

She wrote to Phillips to meet her, if possible, at Euston.  There were
things she wanted to talk to him about.  There was the question whether
she should go on writing for Carleton, or break with him at once.  Also
one or two points that were worrying her in connection with tariff
reform.  He was waiting for her on the platform.  It appeared he, too,
had much to say.  He wanted her advice concerning his next speech.  He
had not dined and suggested supper.  They could not walk about the
streets.  Likely enough, it was only her imagination, but it seemed to
her that people in the restaurant had recognized him, and were whispering
to one another: he was bound to be well known.  Likewise her own
appearance, she felt, was against them as regarded their desire to avoid
observation.  She would have to take to those mousey colours that did not
suit her, and wear a veil.  She hated the idea of a veil.  It came from
the East and belonged there.  Besides, what would be the use?  Unless he
wore one too.  "Who is the veiled woman that Phillips goes about with?"
That is what they would ask.  It was going to be very awkward, the whole
thing.  Viewed from the distance, it had looked quite fine.  "Dedicating
herself to the service of Humanity" was how it had presented itself to
her in the garden at Meudon, the twinkling labyrinth of Paris at her
feet, its sordid by-ways hidden beneath its myriad lights.  She had not
bargained for the dedication involving the loss of her self-respect.

They did not talk as much as they had thought they would.  He was not
very helpful on the Carleton question.  There was so much to be said both
for and against.  It might be better to wait and see how circumstances
shaped themselves.  She thought his speech excellent.  It was difficult
to discover any argument against it.

He seemed to be more interested in looking at her when he thought she was
not noticing.  That little faint vague fear came back to her and stayed
with her, but brought no quickening of her pulse.  It was a fear of
something ugly.  She had the feeling they were both acting, that
everything depended upon their not forgetting their parts.  In handing
things to one another, they were both of them so careful that their hands
should not meet and touch.

They walked together back to Westminster and wished each other a short
good-night upon what once had been their common doorstep.  With her
latchkey in her hand, she turned and watched his retreating figure, and
suddenly a wave of longing seized her to run after him and call him
back--to see his eyes light up and feel the pressure of his hands.  It
was only by clinging to the railings and counting till she was sure he
had entered his own house round the corner and closed the door behind
him, that she restrained herself.

It was a frightened face that looked at her out of the glass, as she
stood before it taking off her hat.

She decided that their future meetings should be at his own house.  Mrs.
Phillips's only complaint was that she knocked at the door too seldom.

"I don't know what I should do without you, I really don't," confessed
the grateful lady.  "If ever I become a Prime Minister's wife, it's you I
shall have to thank.  You've got so much courage yourself, you can put
the heart into him.  I never had any pluck to spare myself."

She concluded by giving Joan a hug, accompanied by a sloppy but heartfelt
kiss.

She would stand behind Phillips's chair with her fat arms round his neck,
nodding her approval and encouragement; while Joan, seated opposite,
would strain every nerve to keep her brain fixed upon the argument, never
daring to look at poor Phillips's wretched face, with its pleading,
apologetic eyes, lest she should burst into hysterical laughter.  She
hoped she was being helpful and inspiring!  Mrs. Phillips would assure
her afterwards that she had been wonderful.  As for herself, there were
periods when she hadn't the faintest idea about what she was talking.

Sometimes Mrs. Phillips, called away by domestic duty, would leave them;
returning full of excuses just as they had succeeded in forgetting her.
It was evident she was under the impression that her presence was useful
to them, making it easier for them to open up their minds to one another.

"Don't you be put off by his seeming a bit unresponsive," Mrs. Phillips
would explain.  "He's shy with women.  What I'm trying to do is to make
him feel you are one of the family."

"And don't you take any notice of me," further explained the good woman,
"when I seem to be in opposition, like.  I chip in now and then on
purpose, just to keep the ball rolling.  It stirs him up, a bit of
contradictoriness.  You have to live with a man before you understand
him."

One morning Joan received a letter from Phillips, marked immediate.  He
informed her that his brain was becoming addled.  He intended that
afternoon to give it a draught of fresh air.  He would be at the Robin
Hood gate in Richmond Park at three o'clock.  Perhaps the gods would be
good to him.  He would wait there for half an hour to give them a chance,
anyway.

She slipped the letter unconsciously into the bosom of her dress, and sat
looking out of the window.  It promised to be a glorious day, and London
was stifling and gritty.  Surely no one but an unwholesome-minded prude
could jib at a walk across a park.  Mrs. Phillips would be delighted to
hear that she had gone.  For the matter of that, she would tell her--when
next they met.

Phillips must have seen her getting off the bus, for he came forward at
once from the other side of the gate, his face radiant with boyish
delight.  A young man and woman, entering the park at the same time,
looked at them and smiled sympathetically.

Joan had no idea the park contained such pleasant by-ways.  But for an
occasional perambulator they might have been in the heart of the country.
The fallow deer stole near to them with noiseless feet, regarding them
out of their large gentle eyes with looks of comradeship.  They paused
and listened while a missal thrush from a branch close to them poured out
his song of hope and courage.  From quite a long way off they could still
hear his clear voice singing, telling to the young and brave his gallant
message.  It seemed too beautiful a day for politics.  After all,
politics--one has them always with one; but the spring passes.

He saw her on to a bus at Kingston, and himself went back by train.  They
agreed they would not mention it to Mrs. Phillips.  Not that she would
have minded.  The danger was that she would want to come, too; honestly
thinking thereby to complete their happiness.  It seemed to be tacitly
understood there would be other such excursions.

The summer was propitious.  Phillips knew his London well, and how to get
away from it.  There were winding lanes in Hertfordshire, Surrey hills
and commons, deep, cool, bird-haunted woods in Buckingham.  Each week
there was something to look forward to, something to plan for and
manoeuvre.  The sense of adventure, a spice of danger, added zest.  She
still knocked frequently, as before, at the door of the
hideously-furnished little house in North Street; but Mrs. Phillips no
longer oppressed her as some old man of the sea she could never hope to
shake off from her shoulders.  The flabby, foolish face, robbed of its
terrors, became merely pitiful.  She found herself able to be quite
gentle and patient with Mrs. Phillips.  Even the sloppy kisses she came
to bear without a shudder down her spine.

"I know you are only doing it because you sympathize with his aims and
want him to win," acknowledged the good lady.  "But I can't help feeling
grateful to you.  I don't feel how useless I am while I've got you to run
to."

They still discussed their various plans for the amelioration and
improvement of humanity; but there seemed less need for haste than they
had thought.  The world, Joan discovered, was not so sad a place as she
had judged it.  There were chubby, rogue-eyed children; whistling lads
and smiling maidens; kindly men with ruddy faces; happy mothers crooning
over gurgling babies.  There was no call to be fretful and vehement.  They
would work together in patience and in confidence.  God's sun was
everywhere.  It needed only that dark places should be opened up and it
would enter.

Sometimes, seated on a lichened log, or on the short grass of some
sloping hillside, looking down upon some quiet valley, they would find
they had been holding hands while talking.  It was but as two happy,
thoughtless children might have done.  They would look at one another
with frank, clear eyes and smile.

Once, when their pathway led through a littered farm-yard, he had taken
her up in his arms and carried her and she had felt a glad pride in him
that he had borne her lightly as if she had been a child, looking up at
her and laughing.

An old bent man paused from his work and watched them.  "Lean more over
him, missie," he advised her.  "That's the way.  Many a mile I've carried
my lass like that, in flood time; and never felt her weight."

Often on returning home, not knowing why, she would look into the glass.
It seemed to her that the girlhood she had somehow missed was awakening
in her, taking possession of her, changing her.  The lips she had always
seen pressed close and firm were growing curved, leaving a little
parting, as though they were not quite so satisfied with one another.  The
level brows were becoming slightly raised.  It gave her a questioning
look that was new to her.  The eyes beneath were less confident.  They
seemed to be seeking something.

One evening, on her way home from a theatre, she met Flossie.  "Can't
stop now," said Flossie, who was hurrying.  "But I want to see you: most
particular.  Was going to look you up.  Will you be at home to-morrow
afternoon at tea-time?"

There was a distinct challenge in Flossie's eye as she asked the
question.  Joan felt herself flush, and thought a moment.

"Yes," she answered.  "Will you be coming alone?"

"That's the idea," answered Flossie; "a heart to heart talk between you
and me, and nobody else.  Half-past four.  Don't forget."

Joan walked on slowly.  She had the worried feeling with which, once or
twice, when a schoolgirl, she had crawled up the stairs to bed after the
head mistress had informed her that she would see her in her private room
at eleven o'clock the next morning, leaving her to guess what about.  It
occurred to her, in Trafalgar Square, that she had promised to take tea
with the Greysons the next afternoon, to meet some big pot from America.
She would have to get out of that.  She felt it wouldn't do to put off
Flossie.

She went to bed wakeful.  It was marvellously like being at school again.
What could Flossie want to see her about that was so important?  She
tried to pretend to herself that she didn't know.  After all, perhaps it
wasn't that.

But she knew that it was the instant Flossie put up her hands in order to
take off her hat.  Flossie always took off her hat when she meant to be
unpleasant.  It was her way of pulling up her sleeves.  They had their
tea first.  They seemed both agreed that that would be best.  And then
Flossie pushed back her chair and sat up.

She had just the head mistress expression.  Joan wasn't quite sure she
oughtn't to stand.  But, controlling the instinct, leant back in her
chair, and tried to look defiant without feeling it.

"How far are you going?" demanded Flossie.

Joan was not in a comprehending mood.

"If you're going the whole hog, that's something I can understand,"
continued Flossie.  "If not, you'd better pull up."

"What do you mean by the whole hog?" requested Joan, assuming dignity.

"Oh, don't come the kid," advised Flossie.  "If you don't mind being
talked about yourself, you might think of him.  If Carleton gets hold of
it, he's done for."

"'A little bird whispers to me that Robert Phillips was seen walking
across Richmond Park the other afternoon in company with Miss Joan
Allway, formerly one of our contributors.'  Is that going to end his
political career?" retorted Joan with fine sarcasm.

Flossie fixed a relentless eye upon her.  "He'll wait till the bird has
got a bit more than that to whisper to him," she suggested.

"There'll be nothing more," explained Joan.  "So long as my friendship is
of any assistance to Robert Phillips in his work, he's going to have it.
What use are we going to be in politics--what's all the fuss about, if
men and women mustn't work together for their common aims and help one
another?"

"Why can't you help him in his own house, instead of wandering all about
the country?" Flossie wanted to know.

"So I do," Joan defended herself.  "I'm in and out there till I'm sick of
the hideous place.  You haven't seen the inside.  And his wife knows all
about it, and is only too glad."

"Does she know about Richmond Park--and the other places?" asked Flossie.

"She wouldn't mind if she did," explained Joan.  "And you know what she's
like!  How can one think what one's saying with that silly, goggle-eyed
face in front of one always."

Flossie, since she had become engaged, had acquired quite a matronly
train of thought.  She spoke kindly, with a little grave shake of her
head.  "My dear," she said, "the wife is always in the way.  You'd feel
just the same whatever her face was like."

Joan grew angry.  "If you choose to suspect evil, of course you can," she
answered with hauteur.  "But you might have known me better.  I admire
the man and sympathize with him.  All the things I dream of are the
things he is working for.  I can do more good by helping and inspiring
him"--she wished she had not let slip that word "inspire."  She knew that
Flossie would fasten upon it--"than I can ever accomplish by myself.  And
I mean to do it."  She really did feel defiant, now.

"I know, dear," agreed Flossie, "you've both of you made up your minds it
shall always remain a beautiful union of twin spirits.  Unfortunately
you've both got bodies--rather attractive bodies."

"We'll keep it off that plane, if you don't mind," answered Joan with a
touch of severity.

"I'm willing enough," answered Flossie.  "But what about Old Mother
Nature?  She's going to be in this, you know."

"Take off your glasses, and look at it straight," she went on, without
giving Joan time to reply.  "What is it in us that 'inspires' men?  If
it's only advice and sympathy he's after, what's wrong with dear old Mrs.
Denton?  She's a good walker, except now and then, when she's got the
lumbago.  Why doesn't he get her to 'inspire' him?"

"It isn't only that," explained Joan.  "I give him courage.  I always did
have more of that than is any use to a woman.  He wants to be worthy of
my belief in him.  What is the harm if he does admire me--if a smile from
me or a touch of the hand can urge him to fresh effort?  Suppose he does
love me--"

Flossie interrupted.  "How about being quite frank?" she suggested.
"Suppose we do love one another.  How about putting it that way?"

"And suppose we do?" agreed Joan, her courage rising.  "Why should we
shun one another, as if we were both of us incapable of decency or self-
control?  Why must love be always assumed to make us weak and
contemptible, as if it were some subtle poison?  Why shouldn't it
strengthen and ennoble us?"

"Why did the apple fall?" answered Flossie.  "Why, when it escapes from
its bonds, doesn't it soar upward?  If it wasn't for the irritating law
of gravity, we could skip about on the brink of precipices without
danger.  Things being what they are, sensible people keep as far away
from the edge as possible."

"I'm sorry," she continued; "awfully sorry, old girl.  It's a bit of
rotten bad luck for both of you.  You were just made for one another.  And
Fate, knowing what was coming, bustles round and gets hold of poor, silly
Mrs. Phillips so as to be able to say 'Yah.'"

"Unless it all comes right in the end," she added musingly; "and the poor
old soul pegs out.  I wouldn't give much for her liver."

"That's not bringing me up well," suggested Joan: "putting those ideas
into my head."

"Oh, well, one can't help one's thoughts," explained Flossie.  "It would
be a blessing all round."

They had risen.  Joan folded her hands.  "Thank you for your scolding,
ma'am," she said.  "Shall I write out a hundred lines of Greek?  Or do
you think it will be sufficient if I promise never to do it again?"

"You mean it?" said Flossie.  "Of course you will go on seeing
him--visiting them, and all that.  But you won't go gadding about, so
that people can talk?"

"Only through the bars, in future," she promised.  "With the gaoler
between us."  She put her arms round Flossie and bent her head, so that
her face was hidden.

Flossie still seemed troubled.  She held on to Joan.

"You are sure of yourself?" she asked.  "We're only the female of the
species.  We get hungry and thirsty, too.  You know that, kiddy, don't
you?"

Joan laughed without raising her face.  "Yes, ma'am, I know that," she
answered.  "I'll be good."

She sat in the dusk after Flossie had gone; and the laboured breathing of
the tired city came to her through the open window.  She had rather
fancied that martyr's crown.  It had not looked so very heavy, the thorns
not so very alarming--as seen through the window.  She would wear it
bravely.  It would rather become her.

Facing the mirror of the days to come, she tried it on.  It was going to
hurt.  There was no doubt of that.  She saw the fatuous, approving face
of the eternal Mrs. Phillips, thrust ever between them, against the
background of that hideous furniture, of those bilious wall papers--the
loneliness that would ever walk with her, sit down beside her in the
crowded restaurant, steal up the staircase with her, creep step by step
with her from room to room--the ever unsatisfied yearning for a tender
word, a kindly touch.  Yes, it was going to hurt.

Poor Robert!  It would be hard on him, too.  She could not help feeling
consolation in the thought that he also would be wearing that invisible
crown.

She must write to him.  The sooner it was done, the better.  Half a dozen
contradictory moods passed over her during the composing of that letter;
but to her they seemed but the unfolding of a single thought.  On one
page it might have been his mother writing to him; an experienced,
sagacious lady; quite aware, in spite of her affection for him, of his
faults and weaknesses; solicitous that he should avoid the dangers of an
embarrassing entanglement; his happiness being the only consideration of
importance.  On others it might have been a queen laying her immutable
commands upon some loyal subject, sworn to her service.  Part of it might
have been written by a laughing philosopher who had learnt the folly of
taking life too seriously, knowing that all things pass: that the tears
of to-day will be remembered with a smile.  And a part of it was the
unconsidered language of a loving woman.  And those were the pages that
he kissed.

His letter in answer was much shorter.  Of course he would obey her
wishes.  He had been selfish, thinking only of himself.  As for his
political career, he did not see how that was going to suffer by his
being occasionally seen in company with one of the most brilliantly
intellectual women in London, known to share his views.  And he didn't
care if it did.  But inasmuch as she valued it, all things should be
sacrificed to it.  It was hers to do what she would with.  It was the
only thing he had to offer her.

Their meetings became confined, as before, to the little house in North
Street.  But it really seemed as if the gods, appeased by their
submission, had decided to be kind.  Hilda was home for the holidays; and
her piercing eyes took in the situation at a flash.  She appeared to have
returned with a new-born and exacting affection for her mother, that
astonished almost as much as it delighted the poor lady.  Feeling sudden
desire for a walk or a bus ride, or to be taken to an entertainment, no
one was of any use to Hilda but her mother.  Daddy had his silly politics
to think and talk about.  He must worry them out alone; or with the
assistance of Miss Allway.  That was what she was there for.  Mrs.
Phillips, torn between her sense of duty and fear of losing this new
happiness, would yield to the child's coaxing.  Often they would be left
alone to discuss the nation's needs uninterrupted.  Conscientiously they
would apply themselves to the task.  Always to find that, sooner or
later, they were looking at one another, in silence.

One day Phillips burst into a curious laugh.  They had been discussing
the problem of the smallholder.  Joan had put a question to him, and with
a slight start he had asked her to repeat it.  But it seemed she had
forgotten it.

"I had to see our solicitor one morning," he explained, "when I was
secretary to a miners' union up north.  A point had arisen concerning the
legality of certain payments.  It was a matter of vast importance to us;
but he didn't seem to be taking any interest, and suddenly he jumped up.
'I'm sorry, Phillips,' he said, 'but I've got a big trouble of my own on
at home--I guess you know what--and I don't seem to care a damn about
yours.  You'd better see Delauny, if you're in a hurry.'  And I did."

He turned and leant over his desk.  "I guess they'll have to find another
leader if they're in a hurry," he added.  "I don't seem able to think
about turnips and cows."

"Don't make me feel I've interfered with your work only to spoil it,"
said Joan.

"I guess I'm spoiling yours, too," he answered.  "I'm not worth it.  I
might have done something to win you and keep you.  I'm not going to do
much without you."

"You mean my friendship is going to be of no use to you?" asked Joan.

He raised his eyes and fixed them on her with a pleading, dog-like look.

"For God's sake don't take even that away from me," he said.  "Unless you
want me to go to pieces altogether.  A crust does just keep one alive.
One can't help thinking what a fine, strong chap one might be if one
wasn't always hungry."

She felt so sorry for him.  He looked such a boy, with the angry tears in
his clear blue eyes, and that little childish quivering of the kind,
strong, sulky mouth.

She rose and took his head between her hands and turned his face towards
her.  She had meant to scold him, but changed her mind and laid his head
against her breast and held it there.

He clung to her, as a troubled child might, with his arms clasped round
her, and his head against her breast.  And a mist rose up before her, and
strange, commanding voices seemed calling to her.

He could not see her face.  She watched it herself with dim half
consciousness as it changed before her in the tawdry mirror above the
mantelpiece, half longing that he might look up and see it, half
terrified lest he should.

With an effort that seemed to turn her into stone, she regained command
over herself.

"I must go now," she said in a harsh voice, and he released her.

"I'm afraid I'm an awful nuisance to you," he said.  "I get these moods
at times.  You're not angry with me?"

"No," she answered with a smile.  "But it will hurt me if you fail.
Remember that."

She turned down the Embankment after leaving the house.  She always found
the river strong and restful.  So it was not only bad women that needed
to be afraid of themselves--even to the most high-class young woman, with
letters after her name, and altruistic interests: even to her, also, the
longing for the lover's clasp.  Flossie had been right.  Mother Nature
was not to be flouted of her children--not even of her new daughters; to
them, likewise, the family trait.

She would have run away if she could, leaving him to guess at her real
reason--if he were smart enough.  But that would have meant excuses and
explanations all round.  She was writing a daily column of notes for
Greyson now, in addition to the weekly letter from Clorinda; and Mrs.
Denton, having compromised with her first dreams, was delegating to Joan
more and more of her work.  She wrote to Mrs. Phillips that she was
feeling unwell and would be unable to lunch with them on the Sunday, as
had been arranged.  Mrs. Phillips, much disappointed, suggested
Wednesday; but it seemed on Wednesday she was no better.  And so it
drifted on for about a fortnight, without her finding the courage to come
to any decision; and then one morning, turning the corner into Abingdon
Street, she felt a slight pull at her sleeve; and Hilda was beside her.
The child had shown an uncanny intuition in not knocking at the door.
Joan had been fearing that, and would have sent down word that she was
out.  But it had to be faced.

"Are you never coming again?" asked the child.

"Of course," answered Joan, "when I'm better.  I'm not very well just
now.  It's the weather, I suppose."

The child turned her head as they walked and looked at her.  Joan felt
herself smarting under that look, but persisted.

"I'm very much run down," she said.  "I may have to go away."

"You promised to help him," said the child.

"I can't if I'm ill," retorted Joan.  "Besides, I am helping him.  There
are other ways of helping people than by wasting their time talking to
them."

"He wants you," said the child.  "It's your being there that helps him."

Joan stopped and turned.  "Did he send you?" she asked.

"No," the child answered.  "Mama had a headache this morning, and I
slipped out.  You're not keeping your promise."

Palace Yard, save for a statuesque policeman, was empty.

"How do you know that my being with him helps him?" asked Joan.

"You know things when you love anybody," explained the child.  "You feel
them.  You will come again, soon?"

Joan did not answer.

"You're frightened," the child continued in a passionate, low voice.  "You
think that people will talk about you and look down upon you.  You
oughtn't to think about yourself.  You ought to think only about him and
his work.  Nothing else matters."

"I am thinking about him and his work," Joan answered.  Her hand sought
Hilda's and held it.  "There are things you don't understand.  Men and
women can't help each other in the way you think.  They may try to, and
mean no harm in the beginning, but the harm comes, and then not only the
woman but the man also suffers, and his work is spoilt and his life
ruined."

The small, hot hand clasped Joan's convulsively.

"But he won't be able to do his work if you keep away and never come back
to him," she persisted.  "Oh, I know it.  It all depends upon you.  He
wants you."

"And I want him, if that's any consolation to you," Joan answered with a
short laugh.  It wasn't much of a confession.  The child was cute enough
to have found that out for herself.  "Only you see I can't have him.  And
there's an end of it."

They had reached the Abbey.  Joan turned and they retraced their steps
slowly.

"I shall be going away soon, for a little while," she said.  The talk had
helped her to decision.  "When I come back I will come and see you all.
And you must all come and see me, now and then.  I expect I shall have a
flat of my own.  My father may be coming to live with me.  Good-bye.  Do
all you can to help him."

She stooped and kissed the child, straining her to her almost fiercely.
But the child's lips were cold.  She did not look back.

Miss Greyson was sympathetic towards her desire for a longish holiday and
wonderfully helpful; and Mrs. Denton also approved, and, to Joan's
surprise, kissed her; Mrs. Denton was not given to kissing.  She wired to
her father, and got his reply the same evening.  He would be at her rooms
on the day she had fixed with his travelling bag, and at her Ladyship's
orders.  "With love and many thanks," he had added.  She waited till the
day before starting to run round and say good-bye to the Phillipses.  She
felt it would be unwise to try and get out of doing that.  Both Phillips
and Hilda, she was thankful, were out; and she and Mrs. Phillips had tea
alone together.  The talk was difficult, so far as Joan was concerned.  If
the woman had been possessed of ordinary intuition, she might have
arrived at the truth.  Joan almost wished she would.  It would make her
own future task the easier.  But Mrs. Phillips, it was clear, was going
to be no help to her.

For her father's sake, she made pretence of eagerness, but as the sea
widened between her and the harbour lights it seemed as if a part of
herself were being torn away from her.

They travelled leisurely through Holland and the Rhine land, and that
helped a little: the new scenes and interests; and in Switzerland they
discovered a delightful little village in an upland valley with just one
small hotel, and decided to stay there for a while, so as to give
themselves time to get their letters.  They took long walks and climbs,
returning tired and hungry, looking forward to their dinner and the
evening talk with the few other guests on the veranda.  The days passed
restfully in that hidden valley.  The great white mountains closed her
in.  They seemed so strong and clean.

It was on the morning they were leaving that a telegram was put into her
hands.  Mrs. Phillips was ill at lodgings in Folkestone.  She hoped that
Joan, on her way back, would come to see her.

She showed the telegram to her father.  "Do you mind, Dad, if we go
straight back?" she asked.

"No, dear," he answered, "if you wish it."

"I would like to go back," she said.




CHAPTER XIII


Mrs. Phillips was sitting up in an easy chair near the heavily-curtained
windows when Joan arrived.  It was a pleasant little house in the old
part of the town, and looked out upon the harbour.  She was startlingly
thin by comparison with what she had been; but her face was still
painted.  Phillips would run down by the afternoon train whenever he
could get away.  She never knew when he was coming, so she explained; and
she could not bear the idea of his finding her "old and ugly."  She had
fought against his wish that she should go into a nursing home; and Joan,
who in the course of her work upon the _Nursing Times_ had acquired some
knowledge of them as a whole, was inclined to agree with her.  She was
quite comfortable where she was.  The landlady, according to her account,
was a dear.  She had sent the nurse out for a walk on getting Joan's
wire, so that they could have a cosy chat.  She didn't really want much
attendance.  It was her heart.  It got feeble now and then, and she had
to keep very still; that was all.  Joan told how her father had suffered
for years from much the same complaint.  So long as you were careful
there was no danger.  She must take things easily and not excite herself.

Mrs. Phillips acquiesced.  "It's turning me into a lazy-bones," she said
with a smile.  "I can sit here by the hour, just watching the bustle.  I
was always one for a bit of life."

The landlady entered with Joan's tea.  Joan took an instinctive dislike
to her.  She was a large, flashy woman, wearing a quantity of cheap
jewellery.  Her familiarity had about it something almost threatening.
Joan waited till she heard the woman's heavy tread descending the stairs,
before she expressed her opinion.

"I think she only means to be cheerful," explained Mrs. Phillips.  "She's
quite a good sort, when you know her."  The subject seemed in some way to
trouble her, and Joan dropped it.

They watched the loading of a steamer while Joan drank her tea.

"He will come this afternoon, I fancy," said Mrs. Phillips.  "I seem to
feel it.  He will be able to see you home."

Joan started.  She had been thinking about Phillips, wondering what she
should say to him when they met.

"What does he think," she asked, "about your illness?"

"Oh, it worries him, of course, poor dear," Mrs. Phillips answered.  "You
see, I've always been such a go-ahead, as a rule.  But I think he's
getting more hopeful.  As I tell him, I'll be all right by the autumn.  It
was that spell of hot weather that knocked me over."

Joan was still looking out of the window.  She didn't quite know what to
say.  The woman's altered appearance had shocked her.  Suddenly she felt
a touch upon her hand.

"You'll look after him if anything does happen, won't you?"  The woman's
eyes were pleading with her.  They seemed to have grown larger.  "You
know what I mean, dear, don't you?" she continued.  "It will be such a
comfort to me to know that it's all right."

In answer the tears sprang to Joan's eyes.  She knelt down and put her
arms about the woman.

"Don't be so silly," she cried.  "There's nothing going to happen.  You're
going to get fat and well again; and live to see him Prime Minister."

"I am getting thin, ain't I?" she said.  "I always wanted to be thin."
They both laughed.

"But I shan't see him that, even if I do live," she went on.  "He'll
never be that, without you.  And I'd be so proud to think that he would.
I shouldn't mind going then," she added.

Joan did not answer.  There seemed no words that would come.

"You will promise, won't you?" she persisted, in a whisper.  "It's only
'in case'--just that I needn't worry myself."

Joan looked up.  There was something in the eyes looking down upon her
that seemed to be compelling her.

"If you'll promise to try and get better," she answered.

Mrs. Phillips stooped and kissed her.  "Of course, dear," she said.
"Perhaps I shall, now that my mind is easier."

Phillips came, as Mrs. Phillips had predicted.  He was surprised at
seeing Joan.  He had not thought she could get back so soon.  He brought
an evening paper with him.  It contained a paragraph to the effect that
Mrs. Phillips, wife of the Rt. Hon. Robert Phillips, M.P., was
progressing favourably and hoped soon to be sufficiently recovered to
return to her London residence.  It was the first time she had had a
paragraph all to herself, headed with her name.  She flushed with
pleasure; and Joan noticed that, after reading it again, she folded the
paper up small and slipped it into her pocket.  The nurse came in from
her walk a little later and took Joan downstairs with her.

"She ought not to talk to more than one person at a time," the nurse
explained, with a shake of the head.  She was a quiet, business-like
woman.  She would not express a definite opinion.

"It's her mental state that is the trouble," was all that she would say.
"She ought to be getting better.  But she doesn't."

"You're not a Christian Scientist, by any chance?" she asked Joan
suddenly.

"No," answered Joan.  "Surely you're not one?"

"I don't know," answered the woman.  "I believe that would do her more
good than anything else.  If she would listen to it.  She seems to have
lost all will-power."

The nurse left her; and the landlady came in to lay the table.  She
understood that Joan would be dining with Mr. Phillips.  There was no
train till the eight-forty.  She kept looking at Joan as she moved about
the room.  Joan was afraid she would begin to talk, but she must have
felt Joan's antagonism for she remained silent.  Once their eyes met, and
the woman leered at her.

Phillips came down looking more cheerful.  He had detected improvement in
Mrs. Phillips.  She was more hopeful in herself.  They talked in low
tones during the meal, as people do whose thoughts are elsewhere.  It
happened quite suddenly, Phillips explained.  They had come down a few
days after the rising of Parliament.  There had been a spell of hot
weather; but nothing remarkable.  The first attack had occurred about
three weeks ago.  It was just after Hilda had gone back to school.  He
wasn't sure whether he ought to send for Hilda, or not.  Her mother
didn't want him to--not just yet.  Of course, if she got worse, he would
have to.  What did Joan think?--did she think there was any real danger?

Joan could not say.  So much depended upon the general state of health.
There was the case of her own father.  Of course she would always be
subject to attacks.  But this one would have warned her to be careful.

Phillips thought that living out of town might be better for her, in the
future--somewhere in Surrey, where he could easily get up and down.  He
could sleep himself at the club on nights when he had to be late.

They talked without looking at one another.  They did not speak about
themselves.

Mrs. Phillips was in bed when Joan went up to say good-bye.  "You'll come
again soon?" she asked, and Joan promised.  "You've made me so happy,"
she whispered.  The nurse was in the room.

They discussed politics in the train.  Phillips had found more support
for his crusade against Carleton than he had expected.  He was going to
open the attack at once, thus forestalling Carleton's opposition to his
land scheme.

"It isn't going to be the _Daily This_ and the _Daily That_ and the
_Weekly the Other_ all combined to down me.  I'm going to tell the people
that it's Carleton and only Carleton--Carleton here, Carleton there,
Carleton everywhere, against them.  I'm going to drag him out into the
open and make him put up his own fists."

Joan undertook to sound Greyson.  She was sure Greyson would support him,
in his balanced, gentlemanly way, that could nevertheless be quite
deadly.

They grew less and less afraid of looking at one another as they felt
that darkened room further and further behind them.

They parted at Charing Cross.  Joan would write.  They agreed it would be
better to choose separate days for their visits to Folkestone.

She ran against Madge in the morning, and invited herself to tea.  Her
father had returned to Liverpool, and her own rooms, for some reason,
depressed her.  Flossie was there with young Halliday.  They were both
off the next morning to his people's place in Devonshire, from where they
were going to get married, and had come to say good-bye.  Flossie put Sam
in the passage and drew-to the door.

"Have you seen her?" she asked.  "How is she?"

"Oh, she's changed a good deal," answered Joan.  "But I think she'll get
over it all right, if she's careful."

"I shall hope for the best," answered Flossie.  "Poor old soul, she's had
a good time.  Don't send me a present; and then I needn't send you
one--when your time comes.  It's a silly custom.  Besides, I've nowhere
to put it.  Shall be in a ship for the next six months.  Will let you
know when we're back."

She gave Joan a hug and a kiss, and was gone.  Joan joined Madge in the
kitchen, where she was toasting buns.

"I suppose she's satisfied herself that he's brainy," she laughed.

"Oh, brains aren't everything," answered Madge.  "Some of the worst
rotters the world has ever been cursed with have been brainy enough--men
and women.  We make too much fuss about brains; just as once upon a time
we did about mere brute strength, thinking that was all that was needed
to make a man great.  Brain is only muscle translated into civilization.
That's not going to save us."

"You've been thinking," Joan accused her.  "What's put all that into your
head?"

Madge laughed.  "Mixing with so many brainy people, perhaps," she
suggested; "and wondering what's become of their souls."

"Be good, sweet child.  And let who can be clever," Joan quoted.  "Would
that be your text?"

Madge finished buttering her buns.  "Kant, wasn't it," she answered, "who
marvelled chiefly at two things: the starry firmament above him and the
moral law within him.  And they're one and the same, if he'd only thought
it out.  It's rather big to be good."

They carried their tea into the sitting-room.

"Do you really think she'll get over it?" asked Madge.  "Or is it one of
those things one has to say?"

"I think she could," answered Joan, "if she would pull herself together.
It's her lack of will-power that's the trouble."

Madge did not reply immediately.  She was watching the rooks settling
down for the night in the elm trees just beyond the window.  There seemed
to be much need of coming and going, of much cawing.

"I met her pretty often during those months that Helen Lavery was running
her round," she said at length.  "It always seemed to me to have a touch
of the heroic, that absurd effort she was making to 'qualify' herself, so
that she might be of use to him.  I can see her doing something quite
big, if she thought it would help him."

The cawing of the rooks grew fainter.  One by one they folded their
wings.

Neither spoke for a while.  Later on, they talked about the coming
election.  If the Party got back, Phillips would go to the Board of
Trade.  It would afford him a better platform for the introduction of his
land scheme.

"What do you gather is the general opinion?" Joan asked.  "That he will
succeed?"

"The general opinion seems to be that his star is in the ascendant,"
Madge answered with a smile; "that all things are working together for
his good.  It's rather a useful atmosphere to have about one, that.  It
breeds friendship and support!"

Joan looked at her watch.  She had an article to finish.  Madge stood on
tiptoe and kissed her.

"Don't think me unsympathetic," she said.  "No one will rejoice more than
I shall if God sees fit to call you to good work.  But I can't help
letting fall my little tear of fellowship with the weeping."

"And mind your p's and q's," she added.  "You're in a difficult position.
And not all the eyes watching you are friendly."

Joan bore the germ of worry in her breast as she crossed the Gray's Inn
Garden.  It was a hard law, that of the world: knowing only winners and
losers.  Of course, the woman was to be pitied.  No one could feel more
sorry for her than Joan herself.  But what had Madge exactly meant by
those words: that she could "see her doing something really big," if she
thought it would help him?  There was no doubt about her affection for
him.  It was almost dog-like.  And the child, also!  There must be
something quite exceptional about him to have won the devotion of two
such opposite beings.  Especially Hilda.  It would be hard to imagine any
lengths to which Hilda's blind idolatry would not lead her.

She ran down twice to Folkestone during the following week.  Her visits
made her mind easier.  Mrs. Phillips seemed so placid, so contented.
There was no suggestion of suffering, either mental or physical.

She dined with the Greysons the Sunday after, and mooted the question of
the coming fight with Carleton.  Greyson thought Phillips would find
plenty of journalistic backing.  The concentration of the Press into the
hands of a few conscienceless schemers was threatening to reduce the
journalist to a mere hireling, and the better-class men were becoming
seriously alarmed.  He found in his desk the report of a speech made by a
well-known leader writer at a recent dinner of the Press Club.  The man
had risen to respond to the toast of his own health and had taken the
opportunity to unpack his heart.

"I am paid a thousand a year," so Greyson read to them, "for keeping my
own opinions out of my paper.  Some of you, perhaps, earn more, and
others less; but you're getting it for writing what you're told.  If I
were to be so foolish as to express my honest opinion, I'd be on the
street, the next morning, looking for another job."

"The business of the journalist," the man had continued, "is to destroy
the truth, to lie, to pervert, to vilify, to fawn at the feet of Mammon,
to sell his soul for his daily bread.  We are the tools and vassals of
rich men behind the scenes.  We are the jumping-jacks.  They pull the
strings and we dance.  Our talents, our possibilities, our lives are the
property of other men."

"We tried to pretend it was only one of Jack's little jokes," explained
Greyson as he folded up the cutting; "but it wouldn't work.  It was too
near the truth."

"I don't see what you are going to do," commented Mary.  "So long as men
are not afraid to sell their souls, there will always be a Devil's market
for them."

Greyson did not so much mind there being a Devil's market, provided he
could be assured of an honest market alongside, so that a man could take
his choice.  What he feared was the Devil's steady encroachment, that
could only end by the closing of the independent market altogether.  His
remedy was the introduction of the American trust law, forbidding any one
man being interested in more than a limited number of journals.

"But what's the difference," demanded Joan, "between a man owning one
paper with a circulation of, say, six millions; or owning six with a
circulation of a million apiece?  By concentrating all his energies on
one, a man with Carleton's organizing genius might easily establish a
single journal that would cover the whole field."

"Just all the difference," answered Greyson, "between Pooh Bah as
Chancellor of the Exchequer, or Lord High Admiral, or Chief Executioner,
whichever he preferred to be, and Pooh Bah as all the Officers of State
rolled into one.  Pooh Bah may be a very able statesman, entitled to
exert his legitimate influence.  But, after all, his opinion is only the
opinion of one old gentleman, with possible prejudices and preconceived
convictions.  The Mikado--or the people, according to locality--would
like to hear the views of others of his ministers.  He finds that the
Lord Chancellor and the Lord Chief Justice and the Groom of the
Bedchamber and the Attorney-General--the whole entire Cabinet, in short,
are unanimously of the same opinion as Pooh Bah.  He doesn't know it's
only Pooh Bah speaking from different corners of the stage.  The
consensus of opinion convinces him.  One statesman, however eminent,
might err in judgment.  But half a score of statesmen, all of one mind!
One must accept their verdict."

Mary smiled.  "But why shouldn't the good newspaper proprietor hurry up
and become a multi-proprietor?" she suggested.  "Why don't you persuade
Lord Sutcliffe to buy up three or four papers, before they're all gone?"

"Because I don't want the Devil to get hold of him," answered Greyson.

"You've got to face this unalterable law," he continued.  "That power
derived from worldly sources can only be employed for worldly purposes.
The power conferred by popularity, by wealth, by that ability to make use
of other men that we term organization--sooner or later the man who
wields that power becomes the Devil's servant.  So long as Kingship was
merely a force struggling against anarchy, it was a holy weapon.  As it
grew in power so it degenerated into an instrument of tyranny.  The
Church, so long as it remained a scattered body of meek, lowly men, did
the Lord's work.  Enthroned at Rome, it thundered its edicts against
human thought.  The Press is in danger of following precisely the same
history.  When it wrote in fear of the pillory and of the jail, it fought
for Liberty.  Now it has become the Fourth Estate, it fawns--as Jack
Swinton said of it--at the feet of Mammon.  My Proprietor, good fellow,
allows me to cultivate my plot amid the wilderness for other purposes
than those of quick returns.  If he were to become a competitor with the
Carletons and the Bloomfields, he would have to look upon it as a
business proposition.  The Devil would take him up on to the high
mountain, and point out to him the kingdom of huge circulations and vast
profits, whispering to him: 'All this will I give thee, if thou wilt fall
down and worship me.'  I don't want the dear good fellow to be tempted."

"Is it impossible, then, to combine duty and success?" questioned Joan.

"The combination sometimes happens, by chance," admitted Greyson.  "But
it's dangerous to seek it.  It is so easy to persuade ourselves that it's
our duty to succeed."

"But we must succeed to be of use," urged Mary.  "Must God's servants
always remain powerless?"

"Powerless to rule.  Powerful only to serve," he answered.  "Powerful as
Christ was powerful; not as Caesar was powerful--powerful as those who
have suffered and have failed, leaders of forlorn hopes--powerful as
those who have struggled on, despised and vilified; not as those of whom
all men speak well--powerful as those who have fought lone battles and
have died, not knowing their own victory.  It is those that serve, not
those that rule, shall conquer."

Joan had never known him quite so serious.  Generally there was a touch
of irony in his talk, a suggestion of aloofness that had often irritated
her.

"I wish you would always be yourself, as you are now," she said, "and
never pose."

"Do I pose?" he asked, raising his eyebrows.

"That shows how far it has gone," she told him, "that you don't even know
it.  You pretend to be a philosopher.  But you're really a man."

He laughed.  "It isn't always a pose," he explained.  "It's some men's
way of saying: Thy will be done."

"Ask Phillips to come and see me," he said.  "I can be of more help, if I
know exactly his views."

He walked with her to the bus.  They passed a corner house that he had
more than once pointed out to her.  It had belonged, years ago, to a well-
known artist, who had worked out a wonderful scheme of decoration in the
drawing-room.  A board was up, announcing that the house was for sale.  A
gas lamp, exactly opposite, threw a flood of light upon the huge white
lettering.

Joan stopped.  "Why, it's the house you are always talking about," she
said.  "Are you thinking of taking it?"

"I did go over it," he answered.  "But it would be rather absurd for just
Mary and me."

She looked up Phillips at the House, and gave him Greyson's message.  He
had just returned from Folkestone, and was worried.

"She was so much better last week," he explained.  "But it never lasts."

"Poor old girl!" he added.  "I believe she'd have been happier if I'd
always remained plain Bob Phillips."

Joan had promised to go down on the Friday; but finding, on the Thursday
morning, that it would be difficult, decided to run down that afternoon
instead.  She thought at first of sending a wire.  But in Mrs. Phillips's
state of health, telegrams were perhaps to be avoided.  It could make no
difference.  The front door of the little house was standing half open.
She called down the kitchen stairs to the landlady, but received no
answer.  The woman had probably run out on some short errand.  She went
up the stairs softly.  The bedroom door, she knew, would be open.  Mrs.
Phillips had a feeling against being "shut off," as she called it.  She
meant to tap lightly and walk straight in, as usual.  But what she saw
through the opening caused her to pause.  Mrs. Phillips was sitting up in
bed with her box of cosmetics in front of her.  She was sensitive of
anyone seeing her make-up; and Joan, knowing this, drew back a step.  But
for some reason, she couldn't help watching.  Mrs. Phillips dipped a
brush into one of the compartments and then remained with it in her hand,
as if hesitating.  Suddenly she stuck out her tongue and passed the brush
over it.  At least, so it seemed to Joan.  It was only a side view of
Mrs. Phillips's face that she was obtaining, and she may have been
mistaken.  It might have been the lips.  The woman gave a little gasp and
sat still for a moment.  Then, putting away the brush, she closed the box
and slipped it under the pillow.

Joan felt her knees trembling.  A cold, creeping fear was taking
possession of her.  Why, she could not understand.  She must have been
mistaken.  People don't make-up their tongues.  It must have been the
lips.  And even if not--if the woman had licked the brush!  It was a
silly trick people do.  Perhaps she liked the taste.  She pulled herself
together and tapped at the door.

Mrs. Phillips gave a little start at seeing her; but was glad that she
had come.  Phillips had not been down for two days and she had been
feeling lonesome.  She persisted in talking more than Joan felt was good
for her.  She was feeling so much better, she explained.  Joan was
relieved when the nurse came back from her walk and insisted on her lying
down.  She dropped to sleep while Joan and the nurse were having their
tea.

Joan went back by the early train.  She met some people at the station
that she knew and travelled up with them.  That picture of Mrs.
Phillips's tongue just showing beyond the line of Mrs. Phillips's cheek
remained at the back of her mind; but it was not until she was alone in
her own rooms that she dared let her thoughts return to it.

The suggestion that was forcing itself into her brain was
monstrous--unthinkable.  That, never possessed of any surplus vitality,
and suffering from the added lassitude of illness, the woman should have
become indifferent--willing to let a life that to her was full of fears
and difficulties slip peacefully away from her, that was possible.  But
that she should exercise thought and ingenuity--that she should have
reasoned the thing out and deliberately laid her plans, calculating at
every point on their success; it was inconceivable.

Besides, what could have put the idea into her head?  It was laughable,
the presumption that she was a finished actress, capable of deceiving
everyone about her.  If she had had an inkling of the truth, Joan, with
every nerve on the alert, almost hoping for it, would have detected it.
She had talked with her alone the day before she had left England, and
the woman had been full of hopes and projects for the future.

That picture of Mrs. Phillips, propped up against the pillows, with her
make-up box upon her knees was still before her when she went to bed.  All
night long it haunted her: whether thinking or dreaming of it, she could
not tell.

Suddenly, she sat up with a stifled cry.  It seemed as if a flash of
light had been turned upon her, almost blinding her.

Hilda!  Why had she never thought of it?  The whole thing was so obvious.
"You ought not to think about yourself.  You ought to think only of him
and of his work.  Nothing else matters."  If she could say that to Joan,
what might she not have said to her mother who, so clearly, she divined
to be the incubus--the drag upon her father's career?  She could hear the
child's dry, passionate tones--could see Mrs. Phillips's flabby cheeks
grow white--the frightened, staring eyes.  Where her father was concerned
the child had neither conscience nor compassion.  She had waited her
time.  It was a few days after Hilda's return to school that Mrs.
Phillips had been first taken ill.

She flung herself from the bed and drew the blind.  A chill, grey light
penetrated the room.  It was a little before five.  She would go round to
Phillips, wake him up.  He must be told.

With her hat in her hands, she paused.  No.  That would not do.  Phillips
must never know.  They must keep the secret to themselves.  She would go
down and see the woman; reason with her, insist.  She went into the other
room.  It was lighter there.  The "A.B.C." was standing in its usual
place upon her desk.  There was a train to Folkestone at six-fifteen.  She
had plenty of time.  It would be wise to have a cup of tea and something
to eat.  There would be no sense in arriving there with a headache.  She
would want her brain clear.

It was half-past five when she sat down with her tea in front of her.  It
was only ten minutes' walk to Charing Cross--say a quarter of an hour.
She might pick up a cab.  She grew calmer as she ate and drank.  Her
reason seemed to be returning to her.  There was no such violent hurry.
Hadn't she better think things over, in the clear daylight?  The woman
had been ill now for nearly six weeks: a few hours--a day or two--could
make no difference.  It might alarm the poor creature, her unexpected
appearance at such an unusual hour--cause a relapse.  Suppose she had
been mistaken?  Hadn't she better make a few inquiries first--feel her
way?  One did harm more often than good, acting on impulse.  After all,
had she the right to interfere?  Oughtn't the thing to be thought over as
a whole?  Mightn't there be arguments, worth considering, against her
interference?  Her brain was too much in a whirl.  Hadn't she better wait
till she could collect and arrange her thoughts?

The silver clock upon her desk struck six.  It had been a gift from her
father when she was at Girton.  It never obtruded.  Its voice was a faint
musical chime that she need not hear unless she cared to listen.  She
turned and looked at it.  It seemed to be a little face looking back at
her out of its two round, blinkless eyes.  For the first time during all
the years that it had watched beside her, she heard its quick, impatient
tick.

She sat motionless, staring at it.  The problem, in some way, had
simplified itself into a contest between herself, demanding time to
think, and the little insistent clock, shouting to her to act upon blind
impulse.  If she could remain motionless for another five minutes, she
would have won.

The ticking of the little clock was filling the room.  The thing seemed
to have become alive--to be threatening to burst its heart.  But the
thin, delicate indicator moved on.

Suddenly its ticking ceased.  It had become again a piece of lifeless
mechanism.  The hands pointed to six minutes past.  Joan took off her hat
and laid it aside.

She must think the whole thing over quietly.




CHAPTER XIV


She could help him.  Without her, he would fail.  The woman herself saw
that, and wished it.  Why should she hesitate?  It was not as if she had
only herself to consider.  The fate--the happiness of millions was at
stake.  He looked to her for aid--for guidance.  It must have been
intended.  All roads had led to it.  Her going to the house.  She
remembered now, it was the first door at which she had knocked.  Her
footsteps had surely been directed.  Her meeting with Mrs. Phillips in
Madge's rooms; and that invitation to dinner, coinciding with that crisis
in his life.  It was she who had persuaded him to accept.  But for her he
would have doubted, wavered, let his opportunities slip by.  He had
confessed it to her.

And she had promised him.  He needed her.  The words she had spoken to
Madge, not dreaming then of their swift application.  They came back to
her.  "God has called me.  He girded His sword upon me."  What right had
she to leave it rusting in its scabbard, turning aside from the pathway
pointed out to her because of one weak, useless life, crouching in her
way.  It was not as if she were being asked to do evil herself that good
might come.  The decision had been taken out of her hands.  All she had
to do was to remain quiescent, not interfering, awaiting her orders.  Her
business was with her own part, not with another's.  To be willing to
sacrifice oneself: that was at the root of all service.  Sometimes it was
one's own duty, sometimes that of another.  Must one never go forward
because another steps out of one's way, voluntarily?  Besides, she might
have been mistaken.  That picture, ever before her, of the woman pausing
with the brush above her tongue--that little stilled gasp!  It may have
been but a phantasm, born of her own fevered imagination.  She clung to
that, desperately.

It was the task that had been entrusted to her.  How could he hope to
succeed without her.  With her, he would be all powerful--accomplish the
end for which he had been sent into the world.  Society counts for so
much in England.  What public man had ever won through without its
assistance.  As Greyson had said: it is the dinner-table that rules.  She
could win it over to his side.  That mission to Paris that she had
undertaken for Mrs. Denton, that had brought her into contact with
diplomatists, politicians, the leaders and the rulers, the bearers of
names known and honoured in history.  They had accepted her as one of
themselves.  She had influenced them, swayed them.  That afternoon at
Folk's studio, where all eyes had followed her, where famous men and
women had waited to attract her notice, had hung upon her words.  Even at
school, at college, she had always commanded willing homage.  As Greyson
had once told her, it was herself--her personality that was her greatest
asset.  Was it to be utterly wasted?  There were hundreds of impersonal,
sexless women, equipped for nothing else, with pens as keen if not keener
than hers.  That was not the talent with which she had been entrusted--for
which she would have to account.  It was her beauty, her power to charm,
to draw after her--to compel by the mere exercise of her will.  Hitherto
Beauty had been content to barter itself for mere coin of the realm--for
ease and luxury and pleasure.  She only asked to be allowed to spend it
in service.  As his wife, she could use it to fine ends.  By herself she
was helpless.  One must take the world as one finds it.  It gives the
unmated woman no opportunity to employ the special gifts with which God
has endowed her--except for evil.  As the wife of a rising statesman, she
could be a force for progress.  She could become another Madame Roland;
gather round her all that was best of English social life; give back to
it its lost position in the vanguard of thought.

She could strengthen him, give him courage.  Without her, he would always
remain the mere fighter, doubtful of himself.  The confidence, the
inspiration, necessary for leadership, she alone could bring to him.  Each
by themselves was incomplete.  Together, they would be the whole.  They
would build the city of their dreams.

She seemed to have become a wandering spirit rather than a living being.
She had no sense of time or place.  Once she had started, hearing herself
laugh.  She was seated at a table, and was talking.  And then she had
passed back into forgetfulness.  Now, from somewhere, she was gazing
downward.  Roofs, domes and towers lay stretched before her, emerging
from a sea of shadows.  She held out her arms towards them and the tears
came to her eyes.  The poor tired people were calling to her to join with
him to help them.  Should she fail them--turn deaf ears to the myriad
because of pity for one useless, feeble life?

She had been fashioned to be his helpmate, as surely as if she had been
made of the same bone.  Nature was at one with God.  Spirit and body both
yearned for him.  It was not position--power for herself that she craved.
The marriage market--if that had been her desire: it had always been open
to her.  She had the gold that buys these things.  Wealth, ambition: they
had been offered to her--spread out temptingly before her eyes.  They
were always within her means, if ever she chose to purchase them.  It was
this man alone to whom she had ever felt drawn--this man of the people,
with that suggestion about him of something primitive, untamed, causing
her always in his presence that faint, compelling thrill of fear, who
stirred her blood as none of the polished men of her own class had ever
done.  His kind, strong, ugly face: it moved beside her: its fearless,
tender eyes now pleading, now commanding.

He needed her.  She heard his passionate, low voice, as she had heard it
in the little garden above Meudon: "Because you won't be there; and
without you I can do nothing."  What right had this poor, worn-out shadow
to stand between them, to the end?  Had love and life no claims, but only
weakness?  She had taken all, had given nothing.  It was but reparation
she was making.  Why stop her?

She was alone in a maze of narrow, silent streets that ended always in a
high blank wall.  It seemed impossible to get away from this blank wall.
Whatever way she turned she was always coming back to it.

What was she to do?  Drag the woman back to life against her will--lead
her back to him to be a chain about his feet until the end?  Then leave
him to fight the battle alone?

And herself?  All her world had been watching and would know.  She had
counted her chickens before they were dead.  She had set her cap at the
man, reckoning him already widowed; and his wife had come to life and
snatched it from her head.  She could hear the laughter--the half amused,
half contemptuous pity for her "rotten bad luck."  She would be their
standing jest, till she was forgotten.

What would life leave to her?  A lonely lodging and a pot of ink that she
would come to hate the smell of.  She could never marry.  It would be but
her body that she could give to any other man.  Not even for the sake of
her dreams could she bring herself to that.  It might have been possible
before, but not now.  She could have won the victory over herself, but
for hope, that had kindled the smouldering embers of her passion into
flame.  What cunning devil had flung open this door, showing her all her
heart's desire, merely that she should be called upon to slam it to in
her own face?

A fierce anger blazed up in her brain.  Why should she listen?  Why had
reason been given to us if we were not to use it--weigh good and evil in
the balance and decide for ourselves where lay the nobler gain?  Were we
to be led hither and thither like blind children?  What was right--what
wrong, but what our own God-given judgment told us?  Was it wrong of the
woman to perform this act of self-renunciation, yielding up all things to
love?  No, it was great--heroic of her.  It would be her cross of
victory, her crown.

If the gift were noble, so also it could not be ignoble to accept it.

To reject it would be to dishonour it.

She would accept it.  The wonder of it should cast out her doubts and
fears.  She would seek to make herself worthy of it.  Consecrate it with
her steadfastness, her devotion.

She thought it ended.  But yet she sat there motionless.

What was plucking at her sleeve--still holding her?

Unknowing, she had entered a small garden.  It formed a passage between
two streets, and was left open day and night.  It was but a narrow strip
of rank grass and withered shrubs with an asphalte pathway widening to a
circle in the centre, where stood a gas lamp and two seats, facing one
another.

And suddenly it came to her that this was her Garden of Gethsemane; and a
dull laugh broke from her that she could not help.  It was such a
ridiculous apology for Gethsemane.  There was not a corner in which one
could possibly pray.  Only these two iron seats, one each side of the
gaunt gas lamp that glared down upon them.  Even the withered shrubs were
fenced off behind a railing.  A ragged figure sprawled upon the bench
opposite to her.  It snored gently, and its breath came laden with the
odour of cheap whisky.

But it was her Gethsemane: the best that Fate had been able to do for
her.  It was here that her choice would be made.  She felt that.

And there rose before her the vision of that other Garden of Gethsemane
with, below it, the soft lights of the city shining through the trees;
and above, clear against the starlit sky, the cold, dark cross.

It was only a little cross, hers, by comparison.  She could see that.
They seemed to be standing side by side.  But then she was only a
woman--little more than a girl.  And her courage was so small.  She
thought He ought to know that.  For her, it was quite a big cross.  She
wondered if He had been listening to all her arguments.  There was really
a good deal of sense in some of them.  Perhaps He would understand.  Not
all His prayer had come down to us.  He, too, had put up a fight for
life.  He, too, was young.  For Him, also, life must have seemed but just
beginning.  Perhaps He, too, had felt that His duty still lay among the
people--teaching, guiding, healing them.  To Him, too, life must have
been sweet with its noble work, its loving comradeship.  Even from Him
the words had to be wrung: "Thy will, not Mine, be done."

She whispered them at last.  Not bravely, at all.  Feebly, haltingly,
with a little sob: her forehead pressed against the cold iron seat, as if
that could help her.

She thought that even then God might reconsider it--see her point of
view.  Perhaps He would send her a sign.

The ragged figure on the bench opposite opened its eyes, stared at her;
then went to sleep again.  A prowling cat paused to rub itself against
her foot, but meeting no response, passed on.  Through an open window,
somewhere near, filtered the sound of a child's low whimpering.

It was daylight when she awoke.  She was cold and her limbs ached.  Slowly
her senses came back to her.  The seat opposite was vacant.  The gas lamp
showed but a faint blue point of flame.  Her dress was torn, her boots
soiled and muddy.  Strands of her hair had escaped from underneath her
hat.

She looked at her watch.  Fortunately it was still early.  She would be
able to let herself in before anyone was up.  It was but a little way.
She wondered, while rearranging her hair, what day it was.  She would
find out, when she got home, from the newspaper.

In the street she paused a moment and looked back through the railings.
It seemed even still more sordid in the daylight: the sooty grass and the
withered shrubs and the asphalte pathway strewn with dirty paper.  And
again a laugh she could not help broke from her.  Her Garden of
Gethsemane!

She sent a brief letter round to Phillips, and a telegram to the nurse,
preparing them for what she meant to do.  She had just time to pack a
small trunk and catch the morning train.  At Folkestone, she drove first
to a house where she herself had once lodged and fixed things to her
satisfaction.  The nurse was waiting for her in the downstairs room, and
opened the door to her.  She was opposed to Joan's interference.  But
Joan had come prepared for that.  "Let me have a talk with her," she
said.  "I think I've found out what it is that is causing all the
trouble."

The nurse shot her a swift glance.  "I'm glad of that," she said dryly.
She let Joan go upstairs.

Mrs. Phillips was asleep.  Joan seated herself beside the bed and waited.
She had not yet made herself up for the day and the dyed hair was hidden
beneath a white, close-fitting cap.  The pale, thin face with its closed
eyes looked strangely young.  Suddenly the thin hands clasped, and her
lips moved, as if she were praying in her sleep.  Perhaps she also was
dreaming of Gethsemane.  It must be quite a crowded garden, if only we
could see it.

After a while, her eyes opened.  Joan drew her chair nearer and slipped
her arm in under her, and their eyes met.

"You're not playing the game," whispered Joan, shaking her head.  "I only
promised on condition that you would try to get well."

The woman made no attempt to deny.  Something told her that Joan had
learned her secret.  She glanced towards the door.  Joan had closed it.

"Don't drag me back," she whispered.  "It's all finished."  She raised
herself up and put her arms about Joan's neck.  "It was hard at first,
and I hated you.  And then it came to me that this was what I had been
wanting to do, all my life--something to help him, that nobody else could
do.  Don't take it from me."

"I know," whispered Joan.  "I've been there, too.  I knew you were doing
it, though I didn't quite know how--till the other day.  I wouldn't
think.  I wanted to pretend that I didn't.  I know all you can say.  I've
been listening to it.  It was right of you to want to give it all up to
me for his sake.  But it would be wrong of me to take it.  I don't quite
see why.  I can't explain it.  But I mustn't.  So you see it would be no
good."

"But I'm so useless," pleaded the woman.

"I said that," answered Joan.  "I wanted to do it and I talked and
talked, so hard.  I said everything I could think of.  But that was the
only answer: I mustn't do it."

They remained for a while with their arms round one another.  It struck
Joan as curious, even at the time, that all feeling of superiority had
gone out of her.  They might have been two puzzled children that had met
one another on a path that neither knew.  But Joan was the stronger
character.

"I want you to give me up that box," she said, "and to come away with me
where I can be with you and take care of you until you are well."

Mrs. Phillips made yet another effort.  "Have you thought about him?" she
asked.

Joan answered with a faint smile.  "Oh, yes," she said.  "I didn't forget
that argument in case it hadn't occurred to the Lord."

"Perhaps," she added, "the helpmate theory was intended to apply only to
our bodies.  There was nothing said about our souls.  Perhaps God doesn't
have to work in pairs.  Perhaps we were meant to stand alone."

Mrs. Phillips's thin hands were playing nervously with the bed clothes.
There still seemed something that she had to say.  As if Joan hadn't
thought of everything.  Her eyes were fixed upon the narrow strip of
light between the window curtains.

"You don't think you could, dear," she whispered, "if I didn't do
anything wicked any more.  But just let things take their course."

"You see, dear," she went on, her face still turned away, "I thought it
all finished.  It will be hard for me to go back to him, knowing as I do
now that he doesn't want me.  I shall always feel that I am in his way.
And Hilda," she added after a pause, "she will hate me."

Joan looked at the white patient face and was silent.  What would be the
use of senseless contradiction.  The woman knew.  It would only seem an
added stab of mockery.  She knelt beside the bed, and took the thin hands
in hers.

"I think God must want you very badly," she said, "or He wouldn't have
laid so heavy a cross upon you.  You will come?"

The woman did not answer in words.  The big tears were rolling down her
cheeks.  There was no paint to mingle with and mar them.  She drew the
little metal box from under the pillow and gave it into Joan's hands.

Joan crept out softly from the room.

The nurse was standing by the window.  She turned sharply on Joan's
entrance.  Joan slipped the box into her hands.

The nurse raised the lid.  "What a fool I've been," she said.  "I never
thought of that."

She held out a large strong hand and gave Joan a longish grip.  "You're
right," she said, "we must get her out of this house at once.  Forgive
me."

Phillips had been called up north and wired that he would not be able to
get down till the Wednesday evening.  Joan met him at the station.

"She won't be expecting you, just yet," she explained.  "We might have a
little walk."

She waited till they had reached a quiet road leading to the hills.

"You will find her changed," she said.  "Mentally, I mean.  Though she
will try not to show it.  She was dying for your sake--to set you free.
Hilda seems to have had a talk with her and to have spared her no part of
the truth.  Her great love for you made the sacrifice possible and even
welcome.  It was the one gift she had in her hands.  She was giving it
gladly, proudly.  So far as she was concerned, it would have been kinder
to let her make an end of it.  But during the last few days I have come
to the conclusion there is a law within us that we may not argue with.
She is coming back to life, knowing you no longer want her, that she is
only in the way.  Perhaps you may be able to think of something to say or
do that will lessen her martyrdom.  I can't."

They had paused where a group of trees threw a blot of shadow across the
moonlit road.

"You mean she was killing herself?" he asked.

"Quite cleverly.  So as to avoid all danger of after discovery: that
might have hurt us," she answered.

They walked in silence, and coming to a road that led back into the town,
he turned down it.  She had the feeling she was following him without his
knowing it.  A cab was standing outside the gate of a house, having just
discharged its fare.  He seemed to have suddenly recollected her.

"Do you mind?" he said.  "We shall get there so much quicker."

"You go," she said.  "I'll stroll on quietly."

"You're sure?" he said.

"I would rather," she answered.

It struck her that he was relieved.  He gave the man the address,
speaking hurriedly, and jumped in.

She had gone on.  She heard the closing of the door behind her, and the
next moment the cab passed her.

She did not see him again that night.  They met in the morning at
breakfast.  A curious strangeness to each other seemed to have grown up
between them, as if they had known one another long ago, and had half
forgotten.  When they had finished she rose to leave; but he asked her to
stop, and, after the table had been cleared, he walked up and down the
room, while she sat sideways on the window seat from where she could
watch the little ships moving to and fro across the horizon, like painted
figures in a show.

"I had a long talk with Nan last night," he said.  "And, trying to
explain it to her, I came a little nearer to understanding it myself.  My
love for you would have been strong enough to ruin both of us.  I see
that now.  It would have dominated every other thought in me.  It would
have swallowed up my dreams.  It would have been blind, unscrupulous.
Married to you, I should have aimed only at success.  It would not have
been your fault.  You would not have known.  About mere birth I should
never have troubled myself.  I've met daughters of a hundred earls--more
or less: clever, jolly little women I could have chucked under the chin
and have been chummy with.  Nature creates her own ranks, and puts her
ban upon misalliances.  Every time I took you in my arms I should have
felt that you had stepped down from your proper order to mate yourself
with me and that it was up to me to make the sacrifice good to you by
giving you power--position.  Already within the last few weeks, when it
looked as if this thing was going to be possible, I have been thinking
against my will of a compromise with Carleton that would give me his
support.  This coming election was beginning to have terrors for me that
I have never before felt.  The thought of defeat--having to go back to
comparative poverty, to comparative obscurity, with you as my wife, was
growing into a nightmare.  I should have wanted wealth, fame, victory,
for your sake--to see you honoured, courted, envied, finely dressed and
finely housed--grateful to me for having won for you these things.  It
wasn't honest, healthy love--the love that unites, that makes a man
willing to take as well as to give, that I felt for you; it was worship
that separates a man from a woman, that puts fear between them.  It isn't
good that man should worship a woman.  He can't serve God and woman.
Their interests are liable to clash.  Nan's my helpmate--just a loving
woman that the Lord brought to me and gave me when I was alone--that I
still love.  I didn't know it till last night.  She will never stand in
my way.  I haven't to put her against my duty.  She will leave me free to
obey the voice that calls to me.  And no man can hear that voice but
himself."

He had been speaking in a clear, self-confident tone, as if at last he
saw his road before him to the end; and felt that nothing else mattered
but that he should go forward hopefully, unfalteringly.  Now he paused,
and his eyes wandered.  But the lines about his strong mouth deepened.

"Perhaps, I am not of the stuff that conquerors are made," he went on.
"Perhaps, if I were, I should be thinking differently.  It comes to me
sometimes that I may be one of those intended only to prepare the
way--that for me there may be only the endless struggle.  I may have to
face unpopularity, abuse, failure.  She won't mind."

"Nor would you," he added, turning to her suddenly for the first time, "I
know that.  But I should be afraid--for you."

She had listened to him without interrupting, and even now she did not
speak for a while.

It was hard not to.  She wanted to tell him that he was all wrong--at
least, so far as she was concerned.  It. was not the conqueror she loved
in him; it was the fighter.  Not in the hour of triumph but in the hour
of despair she would have yearned to put her arms about him.
"Unpopularity, abuse, failure," it was against the fear of such that she
would have guarded him.  Yes, she had dreamed of leadership, influence,
command.  But it was the leadership of the valiant few against the hosts
of the oppressors that she claimed.  Wealth, honours!  Would she have
given up a life of ease, shut herself off from society, if these had been
her standards?  "_Mesalliance_!"  Had the male animal no instinct,
telling it when it was loved with all a woman's being, so that any other
union would be her degradation.

It was better for him he should think as he did.  She rose and held out
her hand.

"I will stay with her for a little while," she said.  "Till I feel there
is no more need.  Then I must get back to work."

He looked into her eyes, holding her hand, and she felt his body
trembling.  She knew he was about to speak, and held up a warning hand.

"That's all, my lad," she said with a smile.  "My love to you, and God
speed you."

Mrs. Phillips progressed slowly but steadily.  Life was returning to her,
but it was not the same.  Out of those days there had come to her a
gentle dignity, a strengthening and refining.  The face, now pale and
drawn, had lost its foolishness.  Under the thin, white hair, and in
spite of its deep lines, it had grown younger.  A great patience, a child-
like thoughtfulness had come into the quiet eyes.

She was sitting by the window, her hands folded.  Joan had been reading
to her, and the chapter finished, she had closed the book and her
thoughts had been wandering.  Mrs. Phillips's voice recalled them.

"Do you remember that day, my dear," she said, "when we went furnishing
together.  And I would have all the wrong things.  And you let me."

"Yes," answered Joan with a laugh.  "They were pretty awful, some of
them."

"I was just wondering," she went on.  "It was a pity, wasn't it?  I was
silly and began to cry."

"I expect that was it," Joan confessed.  "It interferes with our reason
at times."

"It was only a little thing, of course, that," she answered.  "But I've
been thinking it must be that that's at the bottom of it all; and that is
why God lets there be weak things--children and little animals and men
and women in pain, that we feel sorry for, so that people like you and
Robert and so many others are willing to give up all your lives to
helping them.  And that is what He wants."

"Perhaps God cannot help there being weak things," answered Joan.
"Perhaps He, too, is sorry for them."

"It comes to the same thing, doesn't it, dear?" she answered.  "They are
there, anyhow.  And that is how He knows those who are willing to serve
Him: by their being pitiful."

They fell into a silence.  Joan found herself dreaming.

Yes, it was true.  It must have been the beginning of all things.  Man,
pitiless, deaf, blind, groping in the darkness, knowing not even himself.
And to her vision, far off, out of the mist, he shaped himself before
her: that dim, first standard-bearer of the Lord, the man who first felt
pity.  Savage, brutish, dumb--lonely there amid the desolation, staring
down at some hurt creature, man or beast it mattered not, his dull eyes
troubled with a strange new pain he understood not.

And suddenly, as he stooped, there must have come a great light into his
eyes.

Man had heard God's voice across the deep, and had made answer.




CHAPTER XV


The years that followed--till, like some shipwrecked swimmer to whom
returning light reveals the land, she felt new life and hopes come back
to her--always remained in her memory vague, confused; a jumble of
events, thoughts, feelings, without sequence or connection.

She had gone down to Liverpool, intending to persuade her father to leave
the control of the works to Arthur, and to come and live with her in
London; but had left without broaching the subject.  There were nights
when she would trapse the streets till she would almost fall exhausted,
rather than face the solitude awaiting her in her own rooms.  But so also
there were moods when, like some stricken animal, her instinct was to
shun all living things.  At such times his presence, for all his loving
patience, would have been as a knife in her wound.  Besides, he would
always be there, when escape from herself for a while became an absolute
necessity.  More and more she had come to regard him as her comforter.
Not from anything he ever said or did.  Rather, it seemed to her, because
that with him she felt no need of words.

The works, since Arthur had shared the management, had gradually been
regaining their position; and he had urged her to let him increase her
allowance.

"It will give you greater freedom," he had suggested with fine assumption
of propounding a mere business proposition; "enabling you to choose your
work entirely for its own sake.  I have always wanted to take a hand in
helping things on.  It will come to just the same, your doing it for me."

She had suppressed a smile, and had accepted.  "Thanks, Dad," she had
answered.  "It will be nice, having you as my backer."

Her admiration of the independent woman had undergone some modification
since she had come in contact with her.  Woman was intended to be
dependent upon man.  It was the part appointed to him in the social
scheme.  Woman had hers, no less important.  Earning her own living did
not improve her.  It was one of the drawbacks of civilization that so
many had to do it of necessity.  It developed her on the wrong
lines--against her nature.  This cry of the unsexed: that woman must
always be the paid servant instead of the helper of man--paid for being
mother, paid for being wife!  Why not carry it to its logical conclusion,
and insist that she should be paid for her embraces?  That she should
share in man's labour, in his hopes, that was the true comradeship.  What
mattered it, who held the purse-strings!

Her room was always kept ready for her.  Often she would lie there,
watching the moonlight creep across the floor; and a curious feeling
would come to her of being something wandering, incomplete.  She would
see as through a mist the passionate, restless child with the rebellious
eyes to whom the room had once belonged; and later the strangely self-
possessed girl with that impalpable veil of mystery around her who would
stand with folded hands, there by the window, seeming always to be
listening.  And she, too, had passed away.  The tears would come into her
eyes, and she would stretch out yearning arms towards their shadowy
forms.  But they would only turn upon her eyes that saw not, and would
fade away.

In the day-time, when Arthur and her father were at the works, she would
move through the high, square, stiffly-furnished rooms, or about the
great formal garden, with its ordered walks and level lawns.  And as with
knowledge we come to love some old, stern face our childish eyes had
thought forbidding, and would not have it changed, there came to her with
the years a growing fondness for the old, plain brick-built house.
Generations of Allways had lived and died there: men and women somewhat
narrow, unsympathetic, a little hard of understanding; but at least
earnest, sincere, seeking to do their duty in their solid, unimaginative
way.  Perhaps there were other ways besides those of speech and pen.
Perhaps one did better, keeping to one's own people; the very qualities
that separated us from them being intended for their need.  What mattered
the colours, so that one followed the flag?  Somewhere, all roads would
meet.

Arthur had to be in London generally once or twice a month, and it came
to be accepted that he should always call upon her and "take her out."
She had lost the self-sufficiency that had made roaming about London by
herself a pleasurable adventure; and a newly-born fear of what people
were saying and thinking about her made her shy even of the few friends
she still clung to, so that his visits grew to be of the nature of
childish treats to which she found herself looking forward--counting the
days.  Also, she came to be dependent upon him for the keeping alight
within her of that little kindly fire of self-conceit at which we warm
our hands in wintry days.  It is not good that a young woman should
remain for long a stranger to her mirror--above her frocks, indifferent
to the angle of her hat.  She had met the women superior to feminine
vanities.  Handsome enough, some of them must once have been; now sunk in
slovenliness, uncleanliness, in disrespect to womanhood.  It would not be
fair to him.  The worshipper has his rights.  The goddess must remember
always that she is a goddess--must pull herself together and behave as
such, appearing upon her pedestal becomingly attired; seeing to it that
in all things she is at her best; not allowing private grief to render
her neglectful of this duty.

She had not told him of the Phillips episode.  But she felt instinctively
that he knew.  It was always a little mysterious to her, his perception
in matters pertaining to herself.

"I want your love," she said to him one day.  "It helps me.  I used to
think it was selfish of me to take it, knowing I could never return
it--not that love.  But I no longer feel that now.  Your love seems to me
a fountain from which I can drink without hurting you."

"I should love to be with you always," he answered, "if you wished it.
You won't forget your promise?"

She remembered it then.  "No," she answered with a smile.  "I shall keep
watch.  Perhaps I shall be worthy of it by that time."

She had lost her faith in journalism as a drum for the rousing of the
people against wrong.  Its beat had led too often to the trickster's
booth, to the cheap-jack's rostrum.  It had lost its rallying power.  The
popular Press had made the newspaper a byword for falsehood.  Even its
supporters, while reading it because it pandered to their passions,
tickled their vices, and flattered their ignorance, despised and
disbelieved it.  Here and there, an honest journal advocated a reform,
pleaded for the sweeping away of an injustice.  The public shrugged its
shoulders.  Another newspaper stunt!  A bid for popularity, for
notoriety: with its consequent financial kudos.

She still continued to write for Greyson, but felt she was labouring for
the doomed.  Lord Sutcliffe had died suddenly and his holding in the
_Evening Gazette_ had passed to his nephew, a gentleman more interested
in big game shooting than in politics.  Greyson's support of Phillips had
brought him within the net of Carleton's operations, and negotiations for
purchase had already been commenced.  She knew that, sooner or later,
Greyson would be offered the alternative of either changing his opinions
or of going.  And she knew that he would go.  Her work for Mrs. Denton
was less likely to be interfered with.  It appealed only to the few, and
aimed at informing and explaining rather than directly converting.  Useful
enough work in its way, no doubt; but to put heart into it seemed to
require longer views than is given to the eyes of youth.

Besides, her pen was no longer able to absorb her attention, to keep her
mind from wandering.  The solitude of her desk gave her the feeling of a
prison.  Her body made perpetual claims upon her, as though it were some
restless, fretful child, dragging her out into the streets without
knowing where it wanted to go, discontented with everything it did: then
hurrying her back to fling itself upon a chair, weary, but still
dissatisfied.

If only she could do something.  She was sick of thinking.

These physical activities into which women were throwing themselves!
Where one used one's body as well as one's brain--hastened to
appointments; gathered round noisy tables; met fellow human beings,
argued with them, walked with them, laughing and talking; forced one's
way through crowds; cheered, shouted; stood up on platforms before a sea
of faces; roused applause, filling and emptying one's lungs; met
interruptions with swift flash of wit or anger, faced opposition,
danger--felt one's blood surging through one's veins, felt one's nerves
quivering with excitement; felt the delirious thrill of passion; felt the
mad joy of the loosened animal.

She threw herself into the suffrage movement.  It satisfied her for a
while.  She had the rare gift of public speaking, and enjoyed her
triumphs.  She was temperate, reasonable; persuasive rather than
aggressive; feeling her audience as she went, never losing touch with
them.  She had the magnetism that comes of sympathy.  Medical students
who came intending to tell her to go home and mind the baby, remained to
wonder if man really was the undoubted sovereign of the world, born to
look upon woman as his willing subject; to wonder whether under some
unwritten whispered law it might not be the other way about.  Perhaps she
had the right--with or without the baby--to move about the kingdom,
express her wishes for its care and management.  Possibly his doubts may
not have been brought about solely by the force and logic of her
arguments.  Possibly the voice of Nature is not altogether out of place
in discussions upon Humanity's affairs.

She wanted votes for women.  But she wanted them clean--won without
dishonour.  These "monkey tricks"--this apish fury and impatience!
Suppose it did hasten by a few months, more or less, the coming of the
inevitable.  Suppose, by unlawful methods, one could succeed in dragging
a reform a little prematurely from the womb of time, did not one endanger
the child's health?  Of what value was woman's influence on public
affairs going to be, if she was to boast that she had won the right to
exercise it by unscrupulousness and brutality?

They were to be found at every corner: the reformers who could not reform
themselves.  The believers in universal brotherhood who hated half the
people.  The denouncers of tyranny demanding lamp-posts for their
opponents.  The bloodthirsty preachers of peace.  The moralists who had
persuaded themselves that every wrong was justified provided one were
fighting for the right.  The deaf shouters for justice.  The excellent
intentioned men and women labouring for reforms that could only be hoped
for when greed and prejudice had yielded place to reason, and who sought
to bring about their ends by appeals to passion and self-interest.

And the insincere, the self-seekers, the self-advertisers!  Those who
were in the business for even coarser profit!  The lime-light lovers who
would always say and do the clever, the unexpected thing rather than the
useful and the helpful thing: to whom paradox was more than principle.

Ought there not to be a school for reformers, a training college where
could be inculcated self-examination, patience, temperance, subordination
to duty; with lectures on the fundamental laws, within which all progress
must be accomplished, outside which lay confusion and explosions; with
lectures on history, showing how improvements had been brought about and
how failure had been invited, thus avoiding much waste of reforming zeal;
with lectures on the properties and tendencies of human nature,
forbidding the attempt to treat it as a sum in rule of three?

There were the others.  The men and women not in the lime-light.  The
lone, scattered men and women who saw no flag but Pity's ragged skirt;
who heard no drum but the world's low cry of pain; who fought with feeble
hands against the wrong around them; who with aching heart and troubled
eyes laboured to make kinder the little space about them.  The great army
of the nameless reformers uncheered, unparagraphed, unhonoured.  The
unknown sowers of the seed.  Would the reapers of the harvest remember
them?

Beyond giving up her visits to the house, she had made no attempt to
avoid meeting Phillips; and at public functions and at mutual friends
they sometimes found themselves near to one another.  It surprised her
that she could see him, talk to him, and even be alone with him without
its troubling her.  He seemed to belong to a part of her that lay dead
and buried--something belonging to her that she had thrust away with her
own hands: that she knew would never come back to her.

She was still interested in his work and keen to help him.  It was going
to be a stiff fight.  He himself, in spite of Carleton's opposition, had
been returned with an increased majority; but the Party as a whole had
suffered loss, especially in the counties.  The struggle centred round
the agricultural labourer.  If he could be won over the Government would
go ahead with Phillips's scheme.  Otherwise there was danger of its being
shelved.  The difficulty was the old problem of how to get at the men of
the scattered villages, the lonely cottages.  The only papers that they
ever saw were those, chiefly of the Carleton group, that the farmers and
the gentry took care should come within their reach; that were handed to
them at the end of their day's work as a kindly gift; given to the school
children to take home with them; supplied in ample numbers to all the
little inns and public-houses.  In all these, Phillips was held up as
their arch enemy, his proposal explained as a device to lower their
wages, decrease their chances of employment, and rob them of the produce
of their gardens and allotments.  No arguments were used.  A daily stream
of abuse, misrepresentation and deliberate lies, set forth under flaming
headlines, served their simple purpose.  The one weekly paper that had
got itself established among them, that their fathers had always taken,
that dimly they had come to look upon as their one friend, Carleton had
at last succeeded in purchasing.  When that, too, pictured Phillips's
plan as a diabolical intent to take from them even the little that they
had, and give it to the loafing socialist and the bloated foreigner, no
room for doubt was left to them.

He had organized volunteer cycle companies of speakers from the towns,
young working-men and women and students, to go out on summer evenings
and hold meetings on the village greens.  They were winning their way.
But it was slow work.  And Carleton was countering their efforts by a
hired opposition that followed them from place to place, and whose
interruptions were made use of to represent the whole campaign as a
fiasco.

"He's clever," laughed Phillips.  "I'd enjoy the fight, if I'd only
myself to think of, and life wasn't so short."

The laugh died away and a shadow fell upon his face.

"If I could get a few of the big landlords to come in on my side," he
continued, "it would make all the difference in the world.  They're
sensible men, some of them; and the whole thing could be carried out
without injury to any legitimate interest.  I could make them see that,
if I could only get them quietly into a corner."

"But they're frightened of me," he added, with a shrug of his broad
shoulders, "and I don't seem to know how to tackle them."

Those drawing-rooms?  Might not something of the sort be possible?  Not,
perhaps, the sumptuous salon of her imagination, thronged with the fair
and famous, suitably attired.  Something, perhaps, more homely, more
immediately attainable.  Some of the women dressed, perhaps, a little
dowdily; not all of them young and beautiful.  The men wise, perhaps,
rather than persistently witty; a few of them prosy, maybe a trifle
ponderous; but solid and influential.  Mrs. Denton's great empty house in
Gower Street?  A central situation and near to the tube.  Lords and
ladies had once ruffled there; trod a measure on its spacious floors;
filled its echoing stone hall with their greetings and their partings.
The gaping sconces, where their link-boys had extinguished their torches,
still capped its grim iron railings.

Seated in the great, sombre library, Joan hazarded the suggestion.  Mrs.
Denton might almost have been waiting for it.  It would be quite easy.  A
little opening of long fastened windows; a lighting of chill grates; a
little mending of moth-eaten curtains, a sweeping away of long-gathered
dust and cobwebs.

Mrs. Denton knew just the right people.  They might be induced to bring
their sons and daughters--it might be their grandchildren, youth being
there to welcome them.  For Joan, of course, would play her part.

The lonely woman touched her lightly on the hand.  There shot a pleading
look from the old stern eyes.

"You will have to imagine yourself my daughter," she said.  "You are
taller, but the colouring was the same.  You won't mind, will you?"

The right people did come: Mrs. Denton being a personage that a landed
gentry, rendered jumpy by the perpetual explosion of new ideas under
their very feet, and casting about eagerly for friends, could not afford
to snub.  A kindly, simple folk, quite intelligent, some of them, as
Phillips had surmised.  Mrs. Denton made no mystery of why she had
invited them.  Why should all questions be left to the politicians and
the journalists?  Why should not the people interested take a hand; meet
and talk over these little matters with quiet voices and attentive ears,
amid surroundings where the unwritten law would restrain ladies and
gentlemen from addressing other ladies and gentlemen as blood-suckers or
anarchists, as grinders of the faces of the poor or as oily-tongued
rogues; arguments not really conducive to mutual understanding and the
bridging over of differences.  The latest Russian dancer, the last new
musical revue, the marvellous things that can happen at golf, the curious
hands that one picks up at bridge, the eternal fox, the sacred bird!
Excellent material for nine-tenths of our conversation.  But the
remaining tenth?  Would it be such excruciatingly bad form for us to be
intelligent, occasionally; say, on one or two Fridays during the season?
Mrs. Denton wrapped it up tactfully; but that was her daring suggestion.

It took them aback at first.  There were people who did this sort of
thing.  People of no class, who called themselves names and took up
things.  But for people of social standing to talk about serious
subjects--except, perhaps, in bed to one's wife!  It sounded so
un-English.

With the elders it was sense of duty that prevailed.  That, at all
events, was English.  The country must be saved.  To their sons and
daughters it was the originality, the novelty that gradually appealed.
Mrs. Denton's Fridays became a new sensation.  It came to be the chic and
proper thing to appear at them in shades of mauve or purple.  A pushing
little woman in Hanover Street designed the "Denton" bodice, with hanging
sleeves and square-cut neck.  The younger men inclined towards a coat
shaped to the waist with a roll collar.

Joan sighed.  It looked as if the word had been passed round to treat the
whole thing as a joke.  Mrs. Denton took a different view.

"Nothing better could have happened," she was of opinion.  "It means that
their hearts are in it."

The stone hall was still vibrating to the voices of the last departed
guests.  Joan was seated on a footstool before the fire in front of Mrs.
Denton's chair.

"It's the thing that gives me greatest hope," she continued.  "The
childishness of men and women.  It means that the world is still young,
still teachable."

"But they're so slow at their lessons," grumbled Joan.  "One repeats it
and repeats it; and then, when one feels that surely now at least one has
drummed it into their heads, one finds they have forgotten all that one
has ever said."

"Not always forgotten," answered Mrs. Denton; "mislaid, it may be, for
the moment.  An Indian student, the son of an old Rajah, called on me a
little while ago.  He was going back to organize a system of education
among his people.  'My father heard you speak when you were over in
India,' he told me.  'He has always been thinking about it.'  Thirty
years ago it must have been, that I undertook that mission to India.  I
had always looked back upon it as one of my many failures."

"But why leave it to his son," argued Joan.  "Why couldn't the old man
have set about it himself, instead of wasting thirty precious years?"

"I should have preferred it, myself," agreed Mrs. Denton.  "I remember
when I was a very little girl my mother longing for a tree upon the lawn
underneath which she could sit.  I found an acorn and planted it just in
the right spot.  I thought I would surprise her.  I happened to be in the
neighbourhood last summer, and I walked over.  There was such a nice old
lady sitting under it, knitting stockings.  So you see it wasn't wasted."

"I wouldn't mind the waiting," answered Joan, "if it were not for the
sorrow and the suffering that I see all round me.  I want to get rid of
it right away, now.  I could be patient for myself, but not for others."

The little old lady straightened herself.  There came a hardening of the
thin, firm mouth.

"And those that have gone before?" she demanded.  "Those that have won
the ground from where we are fighting.  Had they no need of patience?  Was
the cry never wrung from their lips: 'How long, oh Lord, how long?'  Is
it for us to lay aside the sword that they bequeath us because we cannot
hope any more than they to see the far-off victory?  Fifty years I have
fought, and what, a few years hence, will my closing eyes still see but
the banners of the foe still waving, fresh armies pouring to his
standard?"

She flung back her head and the grim mouth broke into a smile.

"But I've won," she said.  "I'm dying further forward.  I've helped
advance the line."

She put out her hands and drew Joan to her.

"Let me think of you," she said, "as taking my place, pushing the
outposts a little further on."

Joan did not meet Hilda again till the child had grown into a
woman--practically speaking.  She had always been years older than her
age.  It was at a reception given in the Foreign Office.  Joan's dress
had been trodden on and torn.  She had struggled out of the crowd into an
empty room, and was examining the damage somewhat ruefully, when she
heard a voice behind her, proffering help.  It was a hard, cold voice,
that yet sounded familiar, and she turned.

There was no forgetting those deep, burning eyes, though the face had
changed.  The thin red lips still remained its one touch of colour; but
the unhealthy whiteness of the skin had given place to a delicate pallor;
and the features that had been indistinct had shaped themselves in fine,
firm lines.  It was a beautiful, arresting face, marred only by the
sullen callousness of the dark, clouded eyes.

Joan was glad of the assistance.  Hilda produced pins.

"I always come prepared to these scrimmages," she explained.  "I've got
some Hazeline in my bag.  They haven't kicked you, have they?"

"No," laughed Joan.  "At least, I don't think so."

"They do sometimes," answered Hilda, "if you happen to be in the way,
near the feeding troughs.  If they'd only put all the refreshments into
one room, one could avoid it.  But they will scatter them about so that
one never knows for certain whether one is in the danger zone or not.  I
hate a mob."

"Why do you come?" asked Joan.

"Oh, I!" answered the girl.  "I go everywhere where there's a chance of
picking up a swell husband.  They've got to come to these shows, they
can't help themselves.  One never knows what incident may give one one's
opportunity."

Joan shot a glance.  The girl was evidently serious.

"You think it would prove a useful alliance?" she suggested.

"It would help, undoubtedly," the girl answered.  "I don't see any other
way of getting hold of them."

Joan seated herself on one of the chairs ranged round the walls, and drew
the girl down beside her.  Through the closed door, the mingled voices of
the Foreign Secretary's guests sounded curiously like the buzzing of
flies.

"It's quite easy," said Joan, "with your beauty.  Especially if you're
not going to be particular.  But isn't there danger of your devotion to
your father leading you too far?  A marriage founded on a lie--no matter
for what purpose!--mustn't it degrade a woman--smirch her soul for all
time?  We have a right to give up the things that belong to ourselves,
but not the things that belong to God: our truth, our sincerity, our
cleanliness of mind and body; the things that He may one day want of us.
It led you into evil once before.  Don't think I'm judging you.  I was no
better than you.  I argued just as you must have done.  Something stopped
me just in time.  That was the only difference between us."

The girl turned her dark eyes full upon Joan.  "What did stop you?" she
demanded.

"Does it matter what we call it?" answered Joan.  "It was a voice."

"It told me to do it," answered the girl.

"Did no other voice speak to you?" asked Joan.

"Yes," answered the girl.  "The voice of weakness."

There came a fierce anger into the dark eyes.  "Why did you listen to
it?" she demanded.  "All would have been easy if you hadn't."

"You mean," answered Joan quietly, "that if I had let your mother die and
had married your father, that he and I would have loved each other to the
end; that I should have helped him and encouraged him in all things, so
that his success would have been certain.  Is that the argument?"

"Didn't you love him?" asked the girl, staring.  "Wouldn't you have
helped him?"

"I can't tell," answered Joan.  "I should have meant to.  Many men and
women have loved, and have meant to help each other all their lives; and
with the years have drifted asunder; coming even to be against one
another.  We change and our thoughts change; slight differences of
temperament grow into barriers between us; unguessed antagonisms widen
into gulfs.  Accidents come into our lives.  A friend was telling me the
other day of a woman who practically proposed to and married a musical
genius, purely and solely to be of use to him.  She earned quite a big
income, drawing fashions; and her idea was to relieve him of the
necessity of doing pot-boilers for a living, so that he might devote his
whole time to his real work.  And a few weeks after they were married she
ran the point of a lead pencil through her eye and it set up inflammation
of her brain.  And now all the poor fellow has to think of is how to make
enough to pay for her keep at a private lunatic asylum.  I don't mean to
be flippant.  It's the very absurdity of it all that makes the mystery of
life--that renders it so hopeless for us to attempt to find our way
through it by our own judgment.  It is like the ants making all their
clever, laborious plans, knowing nothing of chickens and the gardener's
spade.  That is why we have to cling to the life we can order for
ourselves--the life within us.  Truth, Justice, Pity.  They are the
strong things, the eternal things, the things we've got to sacrifice
ourselves for--serve with our bodies and our souls.

"Don't think me a prig," she pleaded.  "I'm talking as if I knew all
about it.  I don't really.  I grope in the dark; and now and then--at
least so it seems to me--I catch a glint of light.  We are powerless in
ourselves.  It is only God working through us that enables us to be of
any use.  All we can do is to keep ourselves kind and clean and free from
self, waiting for Him to come to us."

The girl rose.  "I must be getting back," she said.  "Dad will be
wondering where I've got to."

She paused with the door in her hand, and a faint smile played round the
thin red lips.

"Tell me," she said.  "What is God?"

"A Labourer, together with man, according to Saint Paul," Joan answered.

The girl turned and went.  Joan watched her as she descended the great
staircase.  She moved with a curious, gliding motion, pausing at times
for the people to make way for her.




CHAPTER XVI


It was a summer's evening; Joan had dropped in at the Greysons and had
found Mary alone, Francis not having yet returned from a bachelor dinner
at his uncle's, who was some big pot in the Navy.  They sat in the
twilight, facing the open French windows, through which one caught a
glimpse of the park.  A great stillness seemed to be around them.

The sale and purchase of the _Evening Gazette_ had been completed a few
days before.  Greyson had been offered the alternative of gradually and
gracefully changing his opinions, or getting out; and had, of course,
chosen dismissal.  He was taking a holiday, as Mary explained with a
short laugh.

"He had some shares in it himself, hadn't he?" Joan asked.

"Oh, just enough to be of no use," Mary answered.  "Carleton was rather
decent, so far as that part of it was concerned, and insisted on paying
him a fair price.  The market value would have been much less; and he
wanted to be out of it."

Joan remained silent.  It made her mad, that a man could be suddenly
robbed of fifteen years' labour: the weapon that his heart and brain had
made keen wrested from his hand by a legal process, and turned against
the very principles for which all his life he had been fighting.

"I'm almost more sorry for myself than for him," said Mary, making a
whimsical grimace.  "He will start something else, so soon as he's got
over his first soreness; but I'm too old to dream of another child."

He came in a little later and, seating himself between them, filled and
lighted his pipe.  Looking back, Joan remembered that curiously none of
them had spoken.  Mary had turned at the sound of his key in the door.
She seemed to be watching him intently; but it was too dark to notice her
expression.  He pulled at his pipe till it was well alight and then
removed it.

"It's war," he said.

The words made no immediate impression upon Joan.  There had been
rumours, threatenings and alarms, newspaper talk.  But so there had been
before.  It would come one day: the world war that one felt was gathering
in the air; that would burst like a second deluge on the nations.  But it
would not be in our time: it was too big.  A way out would be found.

"Is there no hope?" asked Mary.

"Yes," he answered.  "The hope that a miracle may happen.  The Navy's got
its orders."

And suddenly--as years before in a Paris music hall--there leapt to life
within Joan's brain a little impish creature that took possession of her.
She hoped the miracle would not happen.  The little impish creature
within her brain was marching up and down beating a drum.  She wished he
would stop a minute.  Someone was trying to talk to her, telling her she
ought to be tremendously shocked and grieved.  He--or she, or whatever it
was that was trying to talk to her, appeared concerned about Reason and
Pity and Universal Brotherhood and Civilization's clock--things like
that.  But the little impish drummer was making such a din, she couldn't
properly hear.  Later on, perhaps, he would get tired; and then she would
be able to listen to this humane and sensible person, whoever it might
be.

Mary argued that England could and should keep out of it; but Greyson was
convinced it would be impossible, not to say dishonourable: a sentiment
that won the enthusiastic approval of the little drummer in Joan's brain.
He played "Rule Britannia" and "God Save the King," the "Marseillaise"
and the Russian National hymn, all at the same time.  He would have
included "Deutschland uber Alles," if Joan hadn't made a supreme effort
and stopped him.  Evidently a sporting little devil.  He took himself off
into a corner after a time, where he played quietly to himself; and Joan
was able to join in the conversation.

Greyson spoke with an enthusiasm that was unusual to him.  So many of our
wars had been mean wars--wars for the wrong; sordid wars for territory,
for gold mines; wars against the weak at the bidding of our traders, our
financiers.  "Shouldering the white man's burden," we called it.  Wars
for the right of selling opium; wars to perpetuate the vile rule of the
Turk because it happened to serve our commercial interests.  This time,
we were out to play the knight; to save the smaller peoples; to rescue
our once "sweet enemy," fair France.  Russia was the disturbing thought.
It somewhat discounted the knight-errant idea, riding stirrup to stirrup
beside that barbarian horseman.  But there were possibilities about
Russia.  Idealism lay hid within that sleeping brain.  It would be a holy
war for the Kingdom of the Peoples.  With Germany freed from the monster
of blood and iron that was crushing out her soul, with Russia awakened to
life, we would build the United States of Europe.  Even his voice was
changed.  Joan could almost fancy it was some excited schoolboy that was
talking.

Mary had been clasping and unclasping her hands, a habit of hers when
troubled.  Could good ever come out of evil?  That was her doubt.  Did
war ever do anything but sow the seeds of future violence; substitute one
injustice for another; change wrong for wrong.  Did it ever do anything
but add to the world's sum of evil, making God's task the heavier?

Suddenly, while speaking, she fell into a passionate fit of weeping.  She
went on through her tears:

"It will be terrible," she said.  "It will last longer than you say.
Every nation will be drawn into it.  There will be no voice left to speak
for reason.  Every day we shall grow more brutalized, more pitiless.  It
will degrade us, crush the soul out of us.  Blood and iron!  It will
become our God too: the God of all the world.  You say we are going into
it with clean hands, this time.  How long will they keep clean?  The
people who only live for making money: how long do you think they will
remain silent?  What has been all the talk of the last ten years but of
capturing German trade.  We shall be told that we owe it to our dead to
make a profit out of them; that otherwise they will have died in vain.
Who will care for the people but to use them for killing one another--to
hound them on like dogs.  In every country nothing but greed and hatred
will be preached.  Horrible men and women will write to the papers crying
out for more blood, more cruelty.  Everything that can make for anger and
revenge will be screamed from every newspaper.  Every plea for humanity
will be jeered at as 'sickly sentimentality.'  Every man and woman who
remembers the ideals with which we started will be shrieked at as a
traitor.  The people who are doing well out of it, they will get hold of
the Press, appeal to the passions of the mob.  Nobody else will be
allowed to speak.  It always has been so in war.  It always will be.  This
will be no exception merely because it's bigger.  Every country will be
given over to savagery.  There will be no appeal against it.  The whole
world will sink back into the beast."

She ended by rising abruptly and wishing them good-night.  Her outburst
had silenced Joan's impish drummer, for the time.  He appeared to be
nervous and depressed, but bucked up again on the way to the bus.  Greyson
walked with her as usual.  They took the long way round by the outer
circle.

"Poor Mary!" he said.  "I should not have talked before her if I had
thought.  Her horror of war is almost physical.  She will not even read
about them.  It has the same effect upon her as stories of cruelty."

"But there's truth in a good deal that she says," he added.  "War can
bring out all that is best in a people; but also it brings out the worst.
We shall have to take care that the ideals are not lost sight of."

"I wish this wretched business of the paper hadn't come just at this
time," said Joan: "just when your voice is most needed.

"Couldn't you get enough money together to start something quickly," she
continued, the idea suddenly coming to her.  "I think I could help you.
It wouldn't matter its being something small to begin with.  So long as
it was entirely your own, and couldn't be taken away from you.  You'd
soon work it up."

"Thanks," he answered.  "I may ask you to later on.  But just now--"  He
paused.

Of course.  For war you wanted men, to fight.  She had been thinking of
them in the lump: hurrying masses such as one sees on cinema screens,
blurred but picturesque.  Of course, when you came to think of it, they
would have to be made up of individuals--gallant-hearted, boyish sort of
men who would pass through doors, one at a time, into little rooms; give
their name and address to a soldier man seated at a big deal table.  Later
on, one would say good-bye to them on crowded platforms, wave a
handkerchief.  Not all of them would come back.  "You can't make
omelettes without breaking eggs," she told herself.

It annoyed her, that silly saying having come into her mind.  She could
see them lying there, with their white faces to the night.  Surely she
might have thought of some remark less idiotic to make to herself, at
such a time.

He was explaining to her things about the air service.  It seemed he had
had experience in flying--some relation of his with whom he had spent a
holiday last summer.

It would mean his getting out quickly.  He seemed quite eager to be gone.

"Isn't it rather dangerous work?" she asked.  She felt it was a footling
question even as she asked it.  Her brain had become stodgy.

"Nothing like as dangerous as being in the Infantry," he answered.  "And
that would be my only other alternative.  Besides I get out of the
drilling."  He laughed.  "I should hate being shouted at and ordered
about by a husky old sergeant."

They neither spoke again till they came to the bridge, from the other
side of which the busses started.

"I may not see you again before I go," he said.  "Look after Mary.  I
shall try to persuade her to go down to her aunt in Hampshire.  It's
rather a bit of luck, as it turns out, the paper being finished with.  I
shouldn't have quite known what to do."

He had stopped at the corner.  They were still beneath the shadow of the
trees.  Quite unconsciously she put her face up; and as if it had always
been the custom at their partings, he drew her to him and kissed her;
though it really was for the first time.

She walked home instead of taking the bus.  She wanted to think.  A day
or two would decide the question.  She determined that if the miracle did
not happen, she would go down to Liverpool.  Her father was on the
committee of one of the great hospitals; and she knew one or two of the
matrons.  She would want to be doing something--to get out to the front,
if possible.  Maybe, her desire to serve was not altogether free from
curiosity--from the craving for adventure.  There's a spice of the man
even in the best of women.

Her conscience plagued her when she thought of Mrs. Denton.  For some
time now, they had been very close together; and the old lady had come to
depend upon her.  She waited till all doubt was ended before calling to
say good-bye.  Mrs. Denton was seated before an old bureau that had long
stood locked in a corner of the library.  The drawers were open and books
and papers were scattered about.

Joan told her plans.  "You'll be able to get along without me for a
little while?" she asked doubtfully.

Mrs. Denton laughed.  "I haven't much more to do," she answered.  "Just
tidying up, as you see; and two or three half-finished things I shall try
to complete.  After that, I'll perhaps take a rest."

She took from among the litter a faded photograph and handed it to Joan.
"Odd," she said.  "I've just turned it out."

It represented a long, thin line of eminently respectable ladies and
gentlemen in early Victorian costume.  The men in peg-top trousers and
silk stocks, the women in crinolines and poke bonnets.  Among them,
holding the hand of a benevolent-looking, stoutish gentleman, was a mere
girl.  The terminating frills of a white unmentionable garment showed
beneath her skirts.  She wore a porkpie hat with a feather in it.

"My first public appearance," explained Mrs. Denton.  "I teased my father
into taking me with him.  We represented Great Britain and Ireland.  I
suppose I'm the only one left."

"I shouldn't have recognized you," laughed Joan.  "What was the
occasion?"

"The great International Peace Congress at Paris," explained Mrs. Denton;
"just after the Crimean war.  It made quite a stir at the time.  The
Emperor opened our proceedings in person, and the Pope and the Archbishop
of Canterbury both sent us their blessing.  We had a copy of the speeches
presented to us on leaving, in every known language in Europe, bound in
vellum.  I'm hoping to find it.  And the Press was enthusiastic.  There
were to be Acts of Parliament, Courts of Arbitration, International Laws,
Diplomatic Treaties.  A Sub-Committee was appointed to prepare a special
set of prayers and a Palace of Peace was to be erected.  There was only
one thing we forgot, and that was the foundation."

"I may not be here," she continued, "when the new plans are submitted.
Tell them not to forget the foundation this time.  Tell them to teach the
children."

Joan dined at a popular restaurant that evening.  She fancied it might
cheer her up.  But the noisy patriotism of the over-fed crowd only
irritated her.  These elderly, flabby men, these fleshy women, who would
form the spectators, who would loll on their cushioned seats protected
from the sun, munching contentedly from their well-provided baskets while
listening to the dying groans rising upwards from the drenched arena.  She
glanced from one podgy thumb to another and a feeling of nausea crept
over her.

Suddenly the band struck up "God Save the King."  Three commonplace
enough young men, seated at a table near to her, laid down their napkins
and stood up.  Yes, there was something to be said for war, she felt, as
she looked at their boyish faces, transfigured.  Not for them Business as
usual, the Capture of German Trade.  Other visions those young eyes were
seeing.  The little imp within her brain had seized his drum again.
"Follow me"--so he seemed to beat--"I teach men courage, duty, the laying
down of self.  I open the gates of honour.  I make heroes out of dust.
Isn't it worth my price?"

A figure was loitering the other side of the street when she reached
home.  She thought she somehow recognized it, and crossed over.  It was
McKean, smoking his everlasting pipe.  Success having demanded some such
change, he had migrated to "The Albany," and she had not seen him for
some time.  He had come to have a last look at the house--in case it
might happen to be the last.  He was off to Scotland the next morning,
where he intended to "join up."

"But are you sure it's your particular duty?" suggested Joan.  "I'm told
you've become a household word both in Germany and France.  If we really
are out to end war and establish the brotherhood of nations, the work you
are doing is of more importance than even the killing of Germans.  It
isn't as if there wouldn't be enough without you."

"To tell the truth," he answered, "that's exactly what I've been saying
to myself.  I shan't be any good.  I don't see myself sticking a bayonet
into even a German.  Unless he happened to be abnormally clumsy.  I tried
to shoot a rabbit once.  I might have done it if the little beggar,
instead of running away, hadn't turned and looked at me."

"I should keep out of it if I were you," laughed Joan.

"I can't," he answered.  "I'm too great a coward."

"An odd reason for enlisting," thought Joan.

"I couldn't face it," he went on; "the way people would be looking at me
in trains and omnibuses; the things people would say of me, the things I
should imagine they were saying; what my valet would be thinking of me.
Oh, I'm ashamed enough of myself.  It's the artistic temperament, I
suppose.  We must always be admired, praised.  We're not the stuff that
martyrs are made of.  We must for ever be kow-towing to the cackling
geese around us.  We're so terrified lest they should hiss us."

The street was empty.  They were pacing it slowly, up and down.

"I've always been a coward," he continued.  "I fell in love with you the
first day I met you on the stairs.  But I dared not tell you."

"You didn't give me that impression," answered Joan.

She had always found it difficult to know when to take him seriously and
when not.

"I was so afraid you would find it out," he explained.

"You thought I would take advantage of it," she suggested.

"One can never be sure of a woman," he answered.  "And it would have been
so difficult.  There was a girl down in Scotland, one of the village
girls.  It wasn't anything really.  We had just been children together.
But they all thought I had gone away to make my fortune so as to come
back and marry her--even my mother.  It would have looked so mean if
after getting on I had married a fine London lady.  I could never have
gone home again."

"But you haven't married her--or have you?" asked Joan.

"No," he answered.  "She wrote me a beautiful letter that I shall always
keep, begging me to forgive her, and hoping I might be happy.  She had
married a young farmer, and was going out to Canada.  My mother will
never allow her name to be mentioned in our house."

They had reached the end of the street again.  Joan held out her hand
with a laugh.

"Thanks for the compliment," she said.  "Though I notice you wait till
you're going away before telling me."

"But quite seriously," she added, "give it a little more thought--the
enlisting, I mean.  The world isn't too rich in kind influences.  It
needs men like you.  Come, pull yourself together and show a little
pluck."  She laughed.

"I'll try," he promised, "but it won't be any use; I shall drift about
the streets, seeking to put heart into myself, but all the while my
footsteps will be bearing me nearer and nearer to the recruiting office;
and outside the door some girl in the crowd will smile approval or some
old fool will pat me on the shoulder and I shall sneak in and it will
close behind me.  It must be fine to have courage."

He wrote her two days later from Ayr, giving her the name of his
regiment, and again some six months later from Flanders.  But there would
have been no sense in her replying to that last.

She lingered in the street by herself, a little time, after he had turned
the corner.  It had been a house of sorrow and disappointment to her; but
so also she had dreamed her dreams there, seen her visions.  She had
never made much headway with her landlord and her landlady: a worthy
couple, who had proved most excellent servants, but who prided
themselves, to use their own expression, on knowing their place and
keeping themselves to themselves.  Joan had given them notice that
morning, and had been surprised at the woman's bursting into tears.

"I felt it just the same when young Mr. McKean left us," she explained
with apologies.  "He had been with us five years.  He was like you, miss,
so unpracticable.  I'd got used to looking after him."

Mary Greyson called on her in the morning, while she was still at
breakfast.  She had come from seeing Francis off by an early train from
Euston.  He had sent Joan a ring.

"He is so afraid you may not be able to wear it--that it will not fit
you," said Mary, "but I told him I was sure it would."

Joan held our her hand for the letter.  "I was afraid he had forgotten
it," she answered, with a smile.

She placed the ring on her finger and held out her hand.  "I might have
been measured for it," she said.  "I wonder how he knew."

"You left a glove behind you, the first day you ever came to our house,"
Mary explained.  "And I kept it."

She was following his wishes and going down into the country.  They did
not meet again until after the war.

Madge dropped in on her during the week and brought Flossie with her.
Flossie's husband, Sam, had departed for the Navy; and Niel Singleton,
who had offered and been rejected for the Army, had joined a Red Cross
unit.  Madge herself was taking up canteen work.  Joan rather expected
Flossie to be in favour of the war, and Madge against it.  Instead of
which, it turned out the other way round.  It seemed difficult to
forecast opinion in this matter.

Madge thought that England, in particular, had been too much given up to
luxury and pleasure.  There had been too much idleness and empty
laughter: Hitchicoo dances and women undressing themselves upon the
stage.  Even the working classes seemed to think of nothing else but
cinemas and beer.  She dreamed of a United Kingdom purified by suffering,
cleansed by tears; its people drawn together by memory of common
sacrifice; class antagonism buried in the grave where Duke's son and
cook's son would lie side by side: of a new-born Europe rising from the
ashes of the old.  With Germany beaten, her lust of war burnt out, her
hideous doctrine of Force proved to be false, the world would breathe a
freer air.  Passion and hatred would fall from man's eyes.  The people
would see one another and join hands.

Flossie was sceptical.  "Why hasn't it done it before?" she wanted to
know.  "Good Lord!  There's been enough of it."

"Why didn't we all kiss and be friends after the Napoleonic wars?" she
demanded, "instead of getting up Peterloo massacres, and anti-Corn Law
riots, and breaking the Duke of Wellington's windows?"

"All this talk of downing Militarism," she continued.  "It's like trying
to do away with the other sort of disorderly house.  You don't stamp out
a vice by chivying it round the corner.  When men and women have become
decent there will be no more disorderly houses.  But it won't come
before.  Suppose we do knock Militarism out of Germany, like we did out
of France, not so very long ago?  It will only slip round the corner into
Russia or Japan.  Come and settle over here, as likely as not, especially
if we have a few victories and get to fancy ourselves."

Madge was of opinion that the world would have had enough of war.  Not
armies but whole peoples would be involved this time.  The lesson would
be driven home.

"Oh, yes, we shall have had enough of it," agreed Flossie, "by the time
we've paid up.  There's no doubt of that.  What about our children?  I've
just left young Frank strutting all over the house and flourishing a
paper knife.  And the servants have had to bar the kitchen door to
prevent his bursting in every five minutes and attacking them.  What's he
going to say when I tell him, later on, that his father and myself have
had all the war we want, and have decided there shall be no more?  The
old folks have had their fun.  Why shouldn't I have mine?  That will be
his argument."

"You can't do it," she concluded, "unless you are prepared to keep half
the world's literature away from the children, scrap half your music,
edit your museums and your picture galleries; bowdlerize your Old
Testament and rewrite your histories.  And then you'll have to be careful
for twenty-four hours a day that they never see a dog-fight."

Madge still held to her hope.  God would make a wind of reason to pass
over the earth.  He would not smite again his people.

"I wish poor dear Sam could have been kept out of it," said Flossie.  She
wiped her eyes and finished her tea.

Joan had arranged to leave on the Monday.  She ran down to see Mary
Stopperton on the Saturday afternoon.  Mr. Stopperton had died the year
before, and Mary had been a little hurt, divining insincerity in the
condolences offered to her by most of her friends.

"You didn't know him, dear," she had said to Joan.  "All his faults were
on the outside."

She did not want to talk about the war.

"Perhaps it's wrong of me," she said.  "But it makes me so sad.  And I
can do nothing."

She had been busy at her machine when Joan had entered; and a pile of
delicate white work lay folded on a chair beside her.

"What are you making?" asked Joan.

The little withered face lighted up.  "Guess," she said, as she unfolded
and displayed a tiny garment.

"I so love making them," she said.  "I say to myself, 'It will all come
right.  God will send more and more of His Christ babies; till at last
there will be thousands and thousands of them everywhere; and their love
will change the world!'"

Her bright eyes had caught sight of the ring upon Joan's hand.  She
touched it with her little fragile fingers.

"You will let me make one for you, dearie, won't you?" she said.  "I feel
sure it will be a little Christ baby."

Arthur was still away when she arrived home.  He had gone to Norway on
business.  Her father was afraid he would find it difficult to get back.
Telegraphic communication had been stopped, and they had had no news of
him.  Her father was worried.  A big Government contract had come in,
while many of his best men had left to enlist.

"I've fixed you up all right at the hospital," he said.  "It was good of
you to think of coming home.  Don't go away, for a bit."  It was the
first time he had asked anything of her.

Another fortnight passed before they heard from Arthur, and then he wrote
them both from Hull.  He would be somewhere in the North Sea, mine
sweeping, when they read his letters.  He had hoped to get a day or two
to run across and say good-bye; but the need for men was pressing and he
had not liked to plead excuses.  The boat by which he had managed to
leave Bergen had gone down.  He and a few others had been picked up, but
the sights that he had seen were haunting him.  He felt sure his uncle
would agree that he ought to be helping, and this was work for England he
could do with all his heart.  He hoped he was not leaving his uncle in
the lurch; but he did not think the war would last long, and he would
soon be back.

"Dear lad," said her father, "he would take the most dangerous work that
he could find.  But I wish he hadn't been quite so impulsive.  He could
have been of more use helping me with this War Office contract.  I
suppose he never got my letter, telling him about it."

In his letter to Joan he went further.  He had received his uncle's
letter, so he confided to her.  Perhaps she would think him a crank, but
he couldn't help it.  He hated this killing business, this making of
machinery for slaughtering men in bulk, like they killed pigs in Chicago.
Out on the free, sweet sea, helping to keep it clean from man's
abominations, he would be away from it all.

She saw the vision of him that night, as, leaning from her window, she
looked out beyond the pines: the little lonely ship amid the waste of
waters; his beautiful, almost womanish, face, and the gentle dreamy eyes
with their haunting suggestion of a shadow.

Her little drummer played less and less frequently to her as the months
passed by.  It didn't seem to be the war he had looked forward to.  The
illustrated papers continued to picture it as a sort of glorified picnic
where smiling young men lolled luxuriously in cosy dug-outs, reading
their favourite paper.  By curious coincidence, it generally happened to
be the journal publishing the photograph.  Occasionally, it appeared,
they came across the enemy, who then put up both hands and shouted
"Kamerad."  But the weary, wounded men she talked to told another story.

She grew impatient of the fighters with their mouths; the savage old
baldheads heroically prepared to sacrifice the last young man; the sleek,
purring women who talked childish nonsense about killing every man, woman
and child in Germany, but quite meant it; the shrieking journalists who
had decided that their place was the home front; the press-spurred mobs,
the spy hunters, chasing terrified old men and sobbing children through
the streets.  It was a relief to enter the quiet ward and close the door
behind her.  The camp-followers: the traders and pedlars, the
balladmongers, and the mountebanks, the ghoulish sightseers!  War brought
out all that was worst in them.  But the givers of their blood, the lads
who suffered, who had made the sacrifice: war had taught them chivalry,
manhood.  She heard no revilings of hatred and revenge from those drawn
lips.  Patience, humour, forgiveness, they had learnt from war.  They
told her kindly stories even of Hans and Fritz.

The little drummer in her brain would creep out of his corner, play to
her softly while she moved about among them.

One day she received a letter from Folk.  He had come to London at the
request of the French Government to consult with English artists on a
matter he must not mention.  He would not have the time, he told her, to
run down to Liverpool.  Could she get a couple of days' leave and dine
with him in London.

She found him in the uniform of a French Colonel.  He had quite a
military bearing and seemed pleased with himself.  He kissed her hand,
and then held her out at arms' length.

"It's wonderful how like you are to your mother," he said, "I wish I were
as young as I feel."

She had written him at the beginning of the war, telling him of her wish
to get out to the front, and he thought that now he might be able to help
her.

"But perhaps you've changed your mind," he said.  "It isn't quite as
pretty as it's painted."

"I want to," she answered.  "It isn't all curiosity.  I think it's time
for women to insist on seeing war with their own eyes, not trust any
longer to the pictures you men paint."  She smiled.

"But I've got to give it up," she added.  "I can't leave Dad."

They were sitting in the hall of the hotel.  It was the dressing hour and
the place was almost empty.  He shot a swift glance at her.

"Arthur is still away," she explained, "and I feel that he wants me.  I
should be worrying myself, thinking of him all alone with no one to look
after him.  It's the mother instinct I suppose.  It always has hampered
woman."  She laughed.

"Dear old boy," he said.  He was watching her with a little smile.  "I'm
glad he's got some luck at last."

They dined in the great restaurant belonging to the hotel.  He was still
vastly pleased with himself as he marched up the crowded room with Joan
upon his arm.  He held himself upright and talked and laughed perhaps
louder than an elderly gentleman should.  "Swaggering old beggar," he
must have overheard a young sub. mutter as they passed.  But he did not
seem to mind it.

They lingered over the meal.  Folk was a brilliant talker.  Most of the
men whose names were filling the newspapers had sat to him at one time or
another.  He made them seem quite human.  Joan was surprised at the time.

"Come up to my rooms, will you?" he asked.  "There's something I want to
say to you.  And then I'll walk back with you."  She was staying at a
small hotel off Jermyn Street.

He sat her down by the fire and went into the next room.  He had a letter
in his hand when he returned.  Joan noticed that the envelope was written
upon across the corner, but she was not near enough to distinguish the
handwriting.  He placed it on the mantelpiece and sat down opposite her.

"So you have come to love the dear old chap," he said.

"I have always loved him," Joan answered.  "It was he didn't love me, for
a time, as I thought.  But I know now that he does."

He was silent for a few moments, and then he leant across and took her
hands in his.

"I am going," he said, "where there is just the possibility of an
accident: one never knows.  I wanted to be sure that all was well with
you."

He was looking at the ring upon her hand.

"A soldier boy?" he asked.

"Yes," she answered.  "If he comes back."  There was a little catch in
her voice.

"I know he'll come back," he said.  "I won't tell you why I am so sure.
Perhaps you wouldn't believe."  He was still holding her hands, looking
into her eyes.

"Tell me," he said, "did you see your mother before she died.  Did she
speak to you?"

"No," Joan answered.  "I was too late.  She had died the night before.  I
hardly recognized her when I saw her.  She looked so sweet and young."

"She loved you very dearly," he said.  "Better than herself.  All those
years of sorrow: they came to her because of that.  I thought it foolish
of her at the time, but now I know she was wise.  I want you always to
love and honour her.  I wouldn't ask you if it wasn't right."

She looked at him and smiled.  "It's quite easy," she answered.  "I
always see her as she lay there with all the sorrow gone from her.  She
looked so beautiful and kind."

He rose and took the letter from where he had placed it on the
mantelpiece.  He stooped and held it out above the fire and a little
flame leaped up and seemed to take it from his hand.

They neither spoke during the short walk between the two hotels.  But at
the door she turned and held out her hands to him.

"Thank you," she said, "for being so kind--and wise.  I shall always love
and honour her."

He kissed her, promising to take care of himself.

She ran against Phillips, the next day, at one of the big stores where
she was shopping.  He had obtained a commission early in the war and was
now a captain.  He had just come back from the front on leave.  The
alternative had not appealed to him, of being one of those responsible
for sending other men to death while remaining himself in security and
comfort.

"It's a matter of temperament," he said.  "Somebody's got to stop behind
and do the patriotic speechifying.  I'm glad I didn't.  Especially after
what I've seen."

He had lost interest in politics.

"There's something bigger coming," he said.  "Here everything seems to be
going on much the same, but over there you feel it.  Something growing
silently out of all this blood and mud.  I find myself wondering what the
men are staring at, but when I look there's nothing as far as my field-
glasses will reach but waste and desolation.  And it isn't only on the
faces of our own men.  It's in the eyes of the prisoners too.  As if they
saw something.  A funny ending to the war, if the people began to think."

Mrs. Phillips was running a Convalescent Home in Folkestone, he told her;
and had even made a speech.  Hilda was doing relief work among the ruined
villages of France.

"It's a new world we shall be called upon to build," he said.  "We must
pay more heed to the foundation this time."

She seldom discussed the war with her father.  At the beginning, he had
dreamed with Greyson of a short and glorious campaign that should weld
all classes together, and after which we should forgive our enemies and
shape with them a better world.  But as the months went by, he appeared
to grow indifferent; and Joan, who got about twelve hours a day of it
outside, welcomed other subjects.

It surprised her when one evening after dinner he introduced it himself.

"What are you going to do when it's over?" he asked her.  "You won't give
up the fight, will you, whatever happens?"  She had not known till then
that he had been taking any interest in her work.

"No," she answered with a laugh, "no matter what happens, I shall always
want to be in it."

"Good lad," he said, patting her on the shoulder.  "It will be an ugly
world that will come out of all this hate and anger.  The Lord will want
all the help that He can get."

"And you don't forget our compact, do you?" he continued, "that I am to
be your backer.  I want to be in it too."

She shot a glance at him.  He was looking at the portrait of that old
Ironside Allway who had fought and died to make a nobler England, as he
had dreamed.  A grim, unprepossessing gentleman, unless the artist had
done him much injustice, with high, narrow forehead, and puzzled, staring
eyes.

She took the cigarette from her lips and her voice trembled a little.

"I want you to be something more to me than that, sir," she said.  "I
want to feel that I'm an Allway, fighting for the things we've always had
at heart.  I'll try and be worthy of the name."

Her hand stole out to him across the table, but she kept her face away
from him.  Until she felt his grasp grow tight, and then she turned and
their eyes met.

"You'll be the last of the name," he said.  "Something tells me that.  I'm
glad you're a fighter.  I always prayed my child might be a fighter."

Arthur had not been home since the beginning of the war.  Twice he had
written them to expect him, but the little fleet of mine sweepers had
been hard pressed, and on both occasions his leave had been stopped at
the last moment.  One afternoon he turned up unexpectedly at the
hospital.  It was a few weeks after the Conscription Act had been passed.

Joan took him into her room at the end of the ward, from where, through
the open door, she could still keep watch.  They spoke in low tones.

"It's done you good," said Joan.  "You look every inch the jolly Jack
Tar."  He was hard and tanned, and his eyes were marvellously bright.

"Yes," he said, "I love the sea.  It's clean and strong."

A fear was creeping over her.  "Why have you come back?" she asked.

He hesitated, keeping his eyes upon the ground.

"I don't suppose you will agree with me," he said.  "Somehow I felt I had
to."

A Conscientious Objector.  She might have guessed it.  A "Conchy," as
they would call him in the Press: all the spiteful screamers who had
never risked a scratch, themselves, denouncing him as a coward.  The
local Dogberrys of the tribunals would fire off their little stock of
gibes and platitudes upon him, propound with owlish solemnity the new
Christianity, abuse him and condemn him, without listening to him.
Jeering mobs would follow him through the streets.  More than once, of
late, she had encountered such crowds made up of shrieking girls and foul-
mouthed men, surging round some white-faced youngster while the
well-dressed passers-by looked on and grinned.

She came to him and stood over him with her hands upon his shoulders.

"Must you, dear?" she said.  "Can't you reconcile it to yourself--to go
on with your work of mercy, of saving poor folks' lives?"

He raised his eyes to hers.  The shadow that, to her fancy, had always
rested there seemed to have departed.  A light had come to them.

"There are more important things than saving men's bodies.  You think
that, don't you?" he asked.

"Yes," she answered.  "I won't try to hold you back, dear, if you think
you can do that."

He caught her hands and held them.

"I wanted to be a coward," he said, "to keep out of the fight.  I thought
of the shame, of the petty persecutions--that even you might despise me.
But I couldn't.  I was always seeing His face before me with His
beautiful tender eyes, and the blood drops on His brow.  It is He alone
can save the world.  It is perishing for want of love; and by a little
suffering I might be able to help Him.  And then one night--I suppose it
was a piece of driftwood--there rose up out of the sea a little cross
that seemed to call to me to stretch out my hand and grasp it, and gird
it to my side."

He had risen.  "Don't you see," he said.  "It is only by suffering that
one can help Him.  It is the sword that He has chosen--by which one day
He will conquer the world.  And this is such a splendid opportunity to
fight for Him.  It would be like deserting Him on the eve of a great
battle."

She looked into his eager, hopeful eyes.  Yes, it had always been so--it
always would be, to the end.  Not priests and prophets, but ever that
little scattered band of glad sufferers for His sake would be His army.
His weapon still the cross, till the victory should be won.

She glanced through the open door to where the poor, broken fellows she
always thought of as "her boys" lay so patient, and then held out her
hand to him with a smile, though the tears were in her eyes.

"So you're like all the rest of them, lad," she said.  "It's for King and
country.  Good luck to you."

After the war was over and the men, released from their long terms of
solitary confinement, came back to life injured in mind and body, she was
almost glad he had escaped.  But at the time it filled her soul with
darkness.

It was one noonday.  He had been down to the tribunal and his case had
been again adjourned.  She was returning from a lecture, and, crossing a
street in the neighbourhood of the docks, found herself suddenly faced by
an oncoming crowd.  It was yelping and snarling, curiously suggestive of
a pack of hungry wolves.  A couple of young soldiers were standing back
against a wall.

"Better not go on, nurse," said one of them.  "It's some poor devil of a
Conchy, I expect.  Must have a damned sight more pluck than I should."

It was the fear that had been haunting her.  She did not know how white
she had turned.

"I think it is someone I know," she said.  "Won't you help me?"

The crowd gave way to them, and they had all but reached him.  He was
hatless and bespattered, but his tender eyes had neither fear nor anger
in them.  She reached out her arms and called to him.  Another step and
she would have been beside him, but at the moment a slim, laughing girl
darted in front of him and slipped her foot between his legs and he went
down.

She heard the joyous yell and the shrill laughter as she struggled wildly
to force her way to him.  And then for a moment there was a space and a
man with bent body and clenched hands was rushing forward as if upon a
football field, and there came a little sickening thud and then the crowd
closed in again.

Her strength was gone and she could only wait.  More soldiers had come up
and were using their fists freely, and gradually the crowd retired, still
snarling; and they lifted him up and brought him to her.

"There's a chemist's shop in the next street.  We'd better take him
there," suggested the one who had first spoken to her.  And she thanked
them and followed them.

They made a bed for him with their coats upon the floor, and some of them
kept guard outside the shop, while one, putting aside the frightened,
useless little chemist, waited upon her, bringing things needful, while
she cleansed the foulness from his smooth young face, and washed the
matted blood from his fair hair, and closed the lids upon his tender
eyes, and, stooping, kissed the cold, quiet lips.

There had been whispered talk among the men, and when she rose the one
who had first spoken to her came forward.  He was nervous and stood
stiffly.

"Beg pardon, nurse," he said, "but we've sent for a stretcher, as the
police don't seem in any hurry.  Would you like us to take him.  Or would
it upset him, do you think, if he knew?"

"Thank you," she answered.  "He would think it kind of you, I know."

She had the feeling that he was being borne by comrades.




CHAPTER XVII


It was from a small operating hospital in a village of the Argonne that
she first saw the war with her own eyes.

Her father had wished her to go.  Arthur's death had stirred in him the
old Puritan blood with its record of long battle for liberty of
conscience.  If war claimed to be master of a man's soul, then the new
warfare must be against war.  He remembered the saying of a Frenchwoman
who had been through the Franco-Prussian war.  Joan, on her return from
Paris some years before, had told him of her, repeating her words: "But,
of course, it would not do to tell the truth," the old lady had said, "or
we should have our children growing up to hate war."

"I'll be lonely and anxious till you come back," he said.  "But that will
have to be my part of the fight."

She had written to Folk.  No female nurses were supposed to be allowed
within the battle zone; but under pressure of shortage the French staff
were relaxing the rule, and Folk had pledged himself to her discretion.
"I am not doing you any kindness," he had written.  "You will have to
share the common hardships and privations, and the danger is real.  If I
didn't feel instinctively that underneath your mask of sweet
reasonableness you are one of the most obstinate young women God ever
made, and that without me you would probably get yourself into a still
worse hole, I'd have refused."  And then followed a list of the things
she was to be sure to take with her, including a pound or two of
Keating's insect powder, and a hint that it might save her trouble, if
she had her hair cut short.

There was but one other woman at the hospital.  It had been a farmhouse.
The man and both sons had been killed during the first year of the war,
and the woman had asked to be allowed to stay on.  Her name was Madame
Lelanne.  She was useful by reason of her great physical strength.  She
could take up a man as he lay and carry him on her outstretched arms.  It
was an expressionless face, with dull, slow-moving eyes that never
changed.  She and Joan shared a small _grenier_ in one of the barns.  Joan
had brought with her a camp bedstead; but the woman, wrapping a blanket
round her, would creep into a hole she had made for herself among the
hay.  She never took off her clothes, except the great wooden-soled
boots, so far as Joan could discover.

The medical staff consisted of a Dr. Poujoulet and two assistants.  The
authorities were always promising to send him more help, but it never
arrived.  One of the assistants, a Monsieur Dubos, a little man with a
remarkably big beard, was a chemist, who, at the outbreak of the war, had
been on the verge, as he made sure, of an important discovery in
connection with colour photography.  Almost the first question he asked
Joan was could she speak German.  Finding that she could, he had hurried
her across the yard into a small hut where patients who had borne their
operation successfully awaited their turn to be moved down to one of the
convalescent hospitals at the base.  Among them was a German prisoner, an
elderly man, belonging to the Landwehr; in private life a photographer.
He also had been making experiments in the direction of colour
photography.  Chance had revealed to the two men their common interest,
and they had been exchanging notes.  The German talked a little French,
but not sufficient; and on the day of Joan's arrival they had reached an
impasse that was maddening to both of them.  Joan found herself up
against technical terms that rendered her task difficult, but fortunately
had brought a dictionary with her, and was able to make them understand
one another.  But she had to be firm with both of them, allowing them
only ten minutes together at a time.  The little Frenchman would kneel by
the bedside, holding the German at an angle where he could talk with
least danger to his wound.  It seemed that each was the very man the
other had been waiting all his life to meet.  They shed tears on one
another's neck when they parted, making all arrangements to write to one
another.

"And you will come and stay with me," persisted the little Frenchman,
"when this affair is finished"--he made an impatient gesture with his
hands.  "My wife takes much interest.  She will be delighted."

And the big German, again embracing the little Frenchman, had promised,
and had sent his compliments to Madame.

The other was a young priest.  He wore the regulation Red Cross uniform,
but kept his cassock hanging on a peg behind his bed.  He had pretty
frequent occasion to take it down.  These small emergency hospitals,
within range of the guns, were reserved for only dangerous cases: men
whose wounds would not permit of their being carried further; and there
never was much more than a sporting chance of saving them.  They were
always glad to find there was a priest among the staff.  Often it was the
first question they would ask on being lifted out of the ambulance.  Even
those who professed to no religion seemed comforted by the idea.  He went
by the title of "Monsieur le Pretre:" Joan never learned his name.  It
was he who had laid out the little cemetery on the opposite side of the
village street.  It had once been an orchard, and some of the trees were
still standing.  In the centre, rising out of a pile of rockwork, he had
placed a crucifix that had been found upon the roadside and had
surrounded it with flowers.  It formed the one bright spot of colour in
the village; and at night time, when all other sounds were hushed, the
iron wreaths upon its little crosses, swaying against one another in the
wind, would make a low, clear, tinkling music.  Joan would sometimes lie
awake listening to it.  In some way she could not explain it always
brought the thought of children to her mind.

The doctor himself was a broad-shouldered, bullet-headed man, clean
shaven, with close-cropped, bristly hair.  He had curiously square hands,
with short, squat fingers.  He had been head surgeon in one of the Paris
hospitals, and had been assigned his present post because of his
marvellous quickness with the knife.  The hospital was the nearest to a
hill of great strategical importance, and the fighting in the
neighbourhood was almost continuous.  Often a single ambulance would
bring in three or four cases, each one demanding instant attention.  Dr.
Poujoulet, with his hairy arms bare to the shoulder, would polish them
off one after another, with hardly a moment's rest between, not allowing
time even for the washing of the table.  Joan would have to summon all
her nerve to keep herself from collapsing.  At times the need for haste
was such that it was impossible to wait for the anaesthetic to take
effect.  The one redeeming feature was the extraordinary heroism of the
men, though occasionally there was nothing for it but to call in the
orderlies to hold some poor fellow down, and to deafen one's ears.

One day, after a successful operation, she was tending a young sergeant.
He was a well-built, handsome man, with skin as white as a woman's.  He
watched her with curious indifference in his eyes as she busied herself,
trying to make him comfortable, and did nothing to help her.

"Has Mam'selle ever seen a bull fight?" he asked her.

"No," she answered.  "I've seen all the horror and cruelty I want to for
the rest of my life."

"Ah," he said, "you would understand if you had.  When one of the horses
goes down gored, his entrails lying out upon the sand, you know what they
do, don't you?  They put a rope round him, and drag him, groaning, into
the shambles behind.  And once there, kind people like you and Monsieur
le Medecin tend him and wash him, and put his entrails back, and sew him
up again.  He thinks it so kind of them--the first time.  But the second!
He understands.  He will be sent back into the arena to be ripped up
again, and again after that.  This is the third time I have been wounded,
and as soon as you've all patched me up and I've got my breath again,
they'll send me back into it.  Mam'selle will forgive my not feeling
grateful to her."  He gave a short laugh that brought the blood into his
mouth.

The village consisted of one long straggling street, following the course
of a small stream between two lines of hills.  It was on one of the great
lines of communication: and troops and war material passed through it,
going and coming, in almost endless procession.  It served also as a camp
of rest.  Companies from the trenches would arrive there, generally
towards the evening, weary, listless, dull-eyed, many of them staggering
like over-driven cattle beneath their mass of burdens.  They would fling
their accoutrements from them and stand in silent groups till the
sergeants and corporals returned to lead them to the barns and out-houses
that had been assigned to them, the houses still habitable being mostly
reserved for the officers.  Like those of most French villages, they were
drab, plaster-covered buildings without gardens; but some of them were
covered with vines, hiding their ugliness; and the village as a whole,
with its groups, here and there, of fine sycamore trees and its great
stone fountain in the centre, was picturesque enough.  It had twice
changed hands, and a part of it was in ruins.  From one or two of the
more solidly built houses merely the front had fallen, leaving the rooms
just as they had always been: the furniture in its accustomed place, the
pictures on the walls.  They suggested doll's houses standing open.  One
wondered when the giant child would come along and close them up.  The
iron spire of the little church had been hit twice.  It stood above the
village, twisted into the form of a note of interrogation.  In the
churchyard many of the graves had been ripped open.  Bones and skulls lay
scattered about among the shattered tombstones.  But, save for a couple
of holes in the roof, the body was still intact, and every afternoon a
faint, timid-sounding bell called a few villagers and a sprinkling of
soldiers to Mass.  Most of the inhabitants had fled, but the farmers and
shopkeepers had remained.  At intervals, the German batteries, searching
round with apparent aimlessness, would drop a score or so of shells about
the neighbourhood; but the peasant, with an indifference that was almost
animal, would still follow his ox-drawn plough; the old, bent crone,
muttering curses, still ply the hoe.  The proprietors of the tiny
_epiceries_ must have been rapidly making their fortunes, considering the
prices that they charged the unfortunate _poilu_, dreaming of some small
luxury out of his five sous a day.  But as one of them, a stout, smiling
lady, explained to Joan, with a gesture: "It is not often that one has a
war."

Joan had gone out in September, and for a while the weather was pleasant.
The men, wrapped up in their great-coats, would sleep for preference
under the great sycamore trees.  Through open doorways she would catch
glimpses of picturesque groups of eager card-players, crowded round a
flickering candle.  From the darkness there would steal the sound of
flute or zither, of voices singing.  Occasionally it would be some
strident ditty of the Paris music-halls, but more often it was sad and
plaintive.  But early in October the rains commenced and the stream
became a roaring torrent, and a clammy mist lay like a white river
between the wooded hills.

Mud! that seemed to be the one word with which to describe modern war.
Mud everywhere!  Mud ankle-deep upon the roads; mud into which you sank
up to your knees the moment you stepped off it; tents and huts to which
you waded through the mud, avoiding the slimy gangways on which you
slipped and fell; mud-bespattered men, mud-bespattered horses, little
donkeys, looking as if they had been sculptured out of mud, struggling up
and down the light railways that every now and then would disappear and
be lost beneath the mud; guns and wagons groaning through the mud;
lorries and ambulances, that in the darkness had swerved from the
straight course, overturned and lying abandoned in the mud,
motor-cyclists ploughing swift furrows through the mud, rolling it back
in liquid streams each side of them; staff cars rushing screaming through
the mud, followed by a rushing fountain of mud; serried ranks of muddy
men stamping through the mud with steady rhythm, moving through a rain of
mud, rising upward from the ground; long lines of motor-buses filled with
a mass of muddy humanity packed shoulder to shoulder, rumbling ever
through the endless mud.

Men sitting by the roadside in the mud, gnawing at unsavoury food; men
squatting by the ditches, examining their sores, washing their bleeding
feet in the muddy water, replacing the muddy rags about their wounds.

A world without colour.  No other colour to be seen beneath the sky but
mud.  The very buttons on the men's coats painted to make them look like
mud.

Mud and dirt!  Dirty faces, dirty hands, dirty clothes, dirty food, dirty
beds; dirty interiors, from which there was never time to wash the mud;
dirty linen hanging up to dry, beneath which dirty children played, while
dirty women scolded.  Filth and desolation all around.  Shattered
farmsteads half buried in the mud; shattered gardens trampled into mud.  A
weary land of foulness, breeding foulness; tangled wire the only harvest
of the fields; mile after mile of gaping holes, filled with muddy water;
stinking carcases of dead horses; birds of prey clinging to broken
fences, flapping their great wings.

A land where man died, and vermin increased and multiplied.  Vermin on
your body, vermin in your head, vermin in your food, vermin waiting for
you in your bed; vermin the only thing that throve, the only thing that
looked at you with bright eyes; vermin the only thing to which the joy of
life had still been left.

Joan had found a liking gradually growing up in her for the quick-moving,
curt-tongued doctor.  She had dismissed him at first as a mere butcher:
his brutal haste, his indifference apparently to the suffering he was
causing, his great, strong, hairy hands, with their squat fingers, his
cold grey eyes.  But she learnt as time went by, that his callousness was
a thing that he put on at the same time that he tied his white apron
round his waist, and rolled up his sleeves.

She was resting, after a morning of grim work, on a bench outside the
hospital, struggling with clenched, quivering hands against a craving to
fling herself upon the ground and sob.  And he had found her there; and
had sat down beside her.

"So you wanted to see it with your own eyes," he said.  He laid his hand
upon her shoulder, and she had some difficulty in not catching hold of
him and clinging to him.  She was feeling absurdly womanish just at that
moment.

"Yes," she answered.  "And I'm glad that I did it," she added, defiantly.

"So am I," he said.  "Tell your children what you have seen.  Tell other
women."

"It's you women that make war," he continued.  "Oh, I don't mean that you
do it on purpose, but it's in your blood.  It comes from the days when to
live it was needful to kill.  When a man who was swift and strong to kill
was the only thing that could save a woman and her brood.  Every other
man that crept towards them through the grass was an enemy, and her only
hope was that her man might kill him, while she watched and waited.  And
later came the tribe; and instead of the one man creeping through the
grass, the everlasting warfare was against all other tribes.  So you
loved only the men ever ready and willing to fight, lest you and your
children should be carried into slavery: then it was the only way.  You
brought up your boys to be fighters.  You told them stories of their
gallant sires.  You sang to them the songs of battle: the glory of
killing and of conquering.  You have never unlearnt the lesson.  Man has
learnt comradeship--would have travelled further but for you.  But woman
is still primitive.  She would still have her man the hater and the
killer.  To the woman the world has never changed."

"Tell the other women," he said.  "Open their eyes.  Tell them of their
sons that you have seen dead and dying in the foolish quarrel for which
there was no need.  Tell them of the foulness, of the cruelty, of the
senselessness of it all.  Set the women against War.  That is the only
way to end it."

It was a morning or two later that, knocking at the door of her loft, he
asked her if she would care to come with him to the trenches.  He had
brought an outfit for her which he handed to her with a grin.  She had
followed Folk's advice and had cut her hair; and when she appeared before
him for inspection in trousers and overcoat, the collar turned up about
her neck, and reaching to her helmet, he had laughingly pronounced the
experiment safe.

A motor carried them to where the road ended, and from there, a little
one-horse ambulance took them on to almost the last trees of the forest.
There was no life to be seen anywhere.  During the last mile, they had
passed through a continuous double line of graves; here and there a group
of tiny crosses keeping one another company; others standing singly,
looking strangely lonesome amid the torn-up earth and shattered trees.
But even these had ceased.  Death itself seemed to have been frightened
away from this terror-haunted desert.

Looking down, she could see thin wreaths of smoke, rising from the
ground.  From underneath her feet there came a low, faint, ceaseless
murmur.

"Quick," said the doctor.  He pushed her in front of him, and she almost
fell down a flight of mud-covered steps that led into the earth.  She
found herself in a long, low gallery, lighted by a dim oil lamp,
suspended from the blackened roof.  A shelf ran along one side of it,
covered with straw.  Three men lay there.  The straw was soaked with
their blood.  They had been brought in the night before by the stretcher-
bearers.  A young surgeon was rearranging their splints and bandages, and
redressing their wounds.  They would lie there for another hour or so,
and then start for their twenty kilometre drive over shell-ridden roads
to one or another of the great hospitals at the base.  While she was
there, two more cases were brought in.  The doctor gave but a glance at
the first one and then made a sign; and the bearers passed on with him to
the further end of the gallery.  He seemed to understand, for he gave a
low, despairing cry and the tears sprang to his eyes.  He was but a boy.
The other had a foot torn off.  One of the orderlies gave him two round
pieces of wood to hold in his hands while the young surgeon cut away the
hanging flesh and bound up the stump.

The doctor had been whispering to one of the bearers.  He had the face of
an old man, but his shoulders were broad and he looked sturdy.  He
nodded, and beckoned Joan to follow him up the slippery steps.

"It is breakfast time," he explained, as they emerged into the air.  "We
leave each other alone for half an hour--even the snipers.  But we must
be careful."  She followed in his footsteps, stooping so low that her
hands could have touched the ground.  They had to be sure that they did
not step off the narrow track marked with white stones, lest they should
be drowned in the mud.  They passed the head of a dead horse.  It looked
as if it had been cut off and laid there; the body was below it in the
mud.

They spoke in whispers, and Joan at first had made an effort to disguise
her voice.  But her conductor had smiled.  "They shall be called the
brothers and the sisters of the Lord," he had said.  "Mademoiselle is
brave for her Brothers' sake."  He was a priest.  There were many priests
among the stretcher-bearers.

Crouching close to the ground, behind the spreading roots of a giant oak,
she raised her eyes.  Before her lay a sea of smooth, soft mud nearly a
mile wide.  From the centre rose a solitary tree, from which all had been
shot away but two bare branches like outstretched arms above the silence.
Beyond, the hills rose again.  There was something unearthly in the
silence that seemed to brood above that sea of mud.  The old priest told
her of the living men, French and German, who had stood there day and
night sunk in it up to their waists, screaming hour after hour, and
waving their arms, sinking into it lower and lower, none able to help
them: until at last only their screaming heads were left, and after a
time these, too, would disappear: and the silence come again.

She saw the ditches, like long graves dug for the living, where the
weary, listless men stood knee-deep in mud, hoping for wounds that would
relieve them from the ghastly monotony of their existence; the holes of
muddy water where the dead things lay, to which they crept out in the
night to wash a little of the filth from their clammy bodies and their
stinking clothes; the holes dug out of the mud in which they ate and
slept and lived year after year: till brain and heart and soul seemed to
have died out of them, and they remembered with an effort that they once
were men.

* * * * *

After a time, the care of the convalescents passed almost entirely into
Joan's hands, Madame Lelanne being told off to assist her.  By dint of
much persistence she had succeeded in getting the leaky roof repaired,
and in place of the smoky stove that had long been her despair she had
one night procured a fine calorifere by the simple process of stealing
it.  Madame Lelanne had heard about it from the gossips.  It had been
brought to a lonely house at the end of the village by a major of
engineers.  He had returned to the trenches the day before, and the place
for the time being was empty.  The thieves were never discovered.  The
sentry was positive that no one had passed him but two women, one of them
carrying a baby.  Madame Lelanne had dressed it up in a child's cloak and
hood, and had carried it in her arms.  As it must have weighed nearly a
couple of hundred-weight suspicion had not attached to them.

Space did not allow of any separation; broken Frenchmen and broken
Germans would often lie side by side.  Joan would wonder, with a grim
smile to herself, what the patriotic Press of the different countries
would have thought had they been there to have overheard the
conversations.  Neither France nor Germany appeared to be the enemy, but
a thing called "They," a mysterious power that worked its will upon them
both from a place they always spoke of as "Back there."  One day the talk
fell on courage.  A young French soldier was holding forth when Joan
entered the hut.

"It makes me laugh," he was saying, "all this newspaper talk.  Every
nation, properly led, fights bravely.  It is the male instinct.  Women go
into hysterics about it, because it has not been given them.  I have the
Croix de Guerre with all three leaves, and I haven't half the courage of
my dog, who weighs twelve kilos, and would face a regiment by himself.
Why, a game cock has got more than the best of us.  It's the man who
doesn't think, who can't think, who has the most courage--who imagines
nothing, but just goes forward with his head down, like a bull.  There
is, of course, a real courage.  When you are by yourself, and have to do
something in cold blood.  But the courage required for rushing forward,
shouting and yelling with a lot of other fellows--why, it would take a
hundred times more pluck to turn back."

"They know that," chimed in the man lying next to him; "or they would not
drug us.  Why, when we stormed La Haye I knew nothing until an
ugly-looking German spat a pint of blood into my face and woke me up."

A middle-aged sergeant, who had a wound in the stomach and was sitting up
in his bed, looked across.  "There was a line of Germans came upon us,"
he said, "at Bras.  I thought I must be suffering from a nightmare when I
saw them.  They had thrown away their rifles and had all joined hands.
They came dancing towards us just like a row of ballet girls.  They were
shrieking and laughing, and they never attempted to do anything.  We just
waited until they were close up and then shot them down.  It was like
killing a lot of kids who had come to have a game with us.  The one I
potted got his arms round me before he coughed himself out, calling me
his 'liebe Elsa,' and wanting to kiss me.  Lord!  You can guess how the
Boche ink-slingers spread themselves over that business: 'Sonderbar!
Colossal!  Unvergessliche Helden.'  Poor devils!"

"They'll give us ginger before it is over," said another.  He had had
both his lips torn away, and appeared to be always laughing.  "Stuff it
into us as if we were horses at a fair.  That will make us run forward,
right enough."

"Oh, come," struck in a youngster who was lying perfectly flat, face
downwards on his bed: it was the position in which he could breathe
easiest.  He raised his head a couple of inches and twisted it round so
as to get his mouth free.  "It isn't as bad as all that.  Why, the Thirty-
third swarmed into Fort Malmaison of their own accord, though 'twas like
jumping into a boiling furnace, and held it for three days against pretty
nearly a division.  There weren't a dozen of them left when we relieved
them.  They had no ammunition left.  They'd just been filling up the gaps
with their bodies.  And they wouldn't go back even then.  We had to drag
them away.  'They shan't pass,' 'They shan't pass!'--that's all they kept
saying."  His voice had sunk to a thin whisper.

A young officer was lying in a corner behind a screen.  He leant forward
and pushed it aside.

"Oh, give the devil his due, you fellows," he said.  "War isn't a pretty
game, but it does make for courage.  We all know that.  And things even
finer than mere fighting pluck.  There was a man in my company, a Jacques
Decrusy.  He was just a stupid peasant lad.  We were crowded into one end
of the trench, about a score of us.  The rest of it had fallen in, and we
couldn't move.  And a bomb dropped into the middle of us; and the same
instant that it touched the ground Decrusy threw himself flat down upon
it and took the whole of it into his body.  There was nothing left of him
but scraps.  But the rest of us got off.  Nobody had drugged him to do
that.  There isn't one of us who was in that trench that will not be a
better man to the end of his days, remembering how Jacques Decrusy gave
his life for ours."

"I'll grant you all that, sir," answered the young soldier who had first
spoken.  He had long, delicate hands and eager, restless eyes.  "War does
bring out heroism.  So does pestilence and famine.  Read Defoe's account
of the Plague of London.  How men and women left their safe homes, to
serve in the pest-houses, knowing that sooner or later they were doomed.
Read of the mothers in India who die of slow starvation, never allowing a
morsel of food to pass their lips so that they may save up their own
small daily portion to add it to their children's.  Why don't we pray to
God not to withhold from us His precious medicine of pestilence and
famine?  So is shipwreck a fine school for courage.  Look at the chance
it gives the captain to set a fine example.  And the engineers who stick
to their post with the water pouring in upon them.  We don't reconcile
ourselves to shipwrecks as a necessary school for sailors.  We do our
best to lessen them.  So did persecution bring out heroism.  It made
saints and martyrs.  Why have we done away with it?  If this game of
killing and being killed is the fine school for virtue it is made out to
be, then all our efforts towards law and order have been a mistake.  We
never ought to have emerged from the jungle."

He took a note-book from under his pillow and commenced to scribble.

An old-looking man spoke.  He lay with his arms folded across his breast,
addressing apparently the smoky rafters.  He was a Russian, a teacher of
languages in Paris at the outbreak of the war, and had joined the French
Army.

"It is not only courage," he said, "that War brings out.  It brings out
vile things too.  Oh, I'm not thinking merely of the Boches.  That's the
cant of every nation: that all the heroism is on one side and all the
brutality on the other.  Take men from anywhere and some of them will be
devils.  War gives them their opportunity, brings out the beast.  Can you
wonder at it?  You teach a man to plunge a bayonet into the writhing
flesh of a fellow human being, and twist it round and round and jamb it
further in, while the blood is spurting from him like a fountain.  What
are you making of him but a beast?  A man's got to be a beast before he
can bring himself to do it.  I have seen things done by our own men in
cold blood, the horror of which will haunt my memory until I die.  But of
course, we hush it up when it happens to be our own people."

He ceased speaking.  No one seemed inclined to break the silence.

They remained confused in her memory, these talks among the wounded men
in the low, dimly lighted hut that had become her world.  At times it was
but two men speaking to one another in whispers, at others every creaking
bed would be drawn into the argument.

One topic that never lost its interest was: Who made wars?  Who hounded
the people into them, and kept them there, tearing at one another's
throats?  They never settled it.

"God knows I didn't want it, speaking personally," said a German prisoner
one day, with a laugh.  "I had been working at a printing business
sixteen hours a day for seven years.  It was just beginning to pay me,
and now my wife writes me that she has had to shut the place up and sell
the machinery to keep them all from starving."

"But couldn't you have done anything to stop it?" demanded a Frenchman,
lying next to him.  "All your millions of Socialists, what were they up
to?  What went wrong with the Internationale, the Universal Brotherhood
of Labour, and all that Tra-la-la?"

The German laughed again.  "Oh, they know their business," he answered.
"You have your glass of beer and go to bed, and when you wake up in the
morning you find that war has been declared; and you keep your mouth
shut--unless you want to be shot for a traitor.  Not that it would have
made much difference," he added.  "I admit that.  The ground had been too
well prepared.  England was envious of our trade.  King Edward had been
plotting our destruction.  Our papers were full of translations from
yours, talking about '_La Revanche_!'  We were told that you had been
lending money to Russia to enable her to build railways, and that when
they were complete France and Russia would fall upon us suddenly.  'The
Fatherland in danger!'  It may be lies or it may not; what is one to do?
What would you have done--even if you could have done anything?"

"He's right," said a dreamy-eyed looking man, laying down the book he had
been reading.  "We should have done just the same.  'My country, right or
wrong.'  After all, it is an ideal."

A dark, black-bearded man raised himself painfully upon his elbow.  He
was a tailor in the Rue Parnesse, and prided himself on a decided
resemblance to Victor Hugo.

"It's a noble ideal," he said.  "_La Patrie_!  The great Mother.  Right
or wrong, who shall dare to harm her?  Yes, if it was she who rose up in
her majesty and called to us."  He laughed.  "What does it mean in
reality: Germania, Italia, La France, Britannia?  Half a score of pompous
old muddlers with their fat wives egging them on: sons of the fools
before them; talkers who have wormed themselves into power by making
frothy speeches and fine promises.  My Country!" he laughed again.  "Look
at them.  Can't you see their swelling paunches and their flabby faces?
Half a score of ambitious politicians, gouty old financiers, bald-headed
old toffs, with their waxed moustaches and false teeth.  That's what we
mean when we talk about 'My Country': a pack of selfish, soulless, muddle-
headed old men.  And whether they're right or whether they're wrong, our
duty is to fight at their bidding--to bleed for them, to die for them,
that they may grow more sleek and prosperous."  He sank back on his
pillow with another laugh.

Sometimes they agreed it was the newspapers that made war--that fanned
every trivial difference into a vital question of national honour--that,
whenever there was any fear of peace, re-stoked the fires of hatred with
their never-failing stories of atrocities.  At other times they decided
it was the capitalists, the traders, scenting profit for themselves.  Some
held it was the politicians, dreaming of going down to history as
Richelieus or as Bismarcks.  A popular theory was that cause for war was
always discovered by the ruling classes whenever there seemed danger that
the workers were getting out of hand.  In war, you put the common people
back in their place, revived in them the habits of submission and
obedience.  Napoleon the Little, it was argued, had started the war of
1870 with that idea.  Russia had welcomed the present war as an answer to
the Revolution that was threatening Czardom.  Others contended it was the
great munition industries, aided by the military party, the officers
impatient for opportunities of advancement, the strategists eager to put
their theories to the test.  A few of the more philosophical shrugged
their shoulders.  It was the thing itself that sooner or later was bound
to go off of its own accord.  Half every country's energy, half every
country's time and money was spent in piling up explosives.  In every
country envy and hatred of every other country was preached as a
religion.  They called it patriotism.  Sooner or later the spark fell.

A wizened little man had been listening to it all one day.  He had a
curiously rat-like face, with round, red, twinkling eyes, and a long,
pointed nose that twitched as he talked.

"I'll tell you who makes all the wars," he said.  "It's you and me, my
dears: we make the wars.  We love them.  That's why we open our mouths
and swallow all the twaddle that the papers give us; and cheer the fine,
black-coated gentlemen when they tell us it's our sacred duty to kill
Germans, or Italians, or Russians, or anybody else.  We are just crazy to
kill something: it doesn't matter what.  If it's to be Germans, we shout
'_A Berlin_!'; and if it's to be Russians we cheer for Liberty.  I was in
Paris at the time of the Fashoda trouble.  How we hissed the English in
the cafes!  And how they glared back at us!  They were just as eager to
kill us.  Who makes a dog fight?  Why, the dog.  Anybody can do it.  Who
could make us fight each other, if we didn't want to?  Not all the king's
horses and all the King's men.  No, my dears, it's we make the wars.  You
and me, my dears."

There came a day in early spring.  All night long the guns had never
ceased.  It sounded like the tireless barking of ten thousand giant dogs.
Behind the hills, the whole horizon, like a fiery circle, was ringed with
flashing light.  Shapeless forms, bent beneath burdens, passed in endless
procession through the village.  Masses of rushing men swept like shadowy
phantoms through the fitfully-illumined darkness.  Beneath that
everlasting barking, Joan would hear, now the piercing wail of a child;
now a clap of thunder that for the moment would drown all other sounds,
followed by a faint, low, rumbling crash, like the shooting of coals into
a cellar.  The wounded on their beds lay with wide-open, terrified eyes,
moving feverishly from side to side.

At dawn the order came that the hospital was to be evacuated.  The
ambulances were already waiting in the street.  Joan flew up the ladder
to her loft, the other side of the yard.  Madame Lelanne was already
there.  She had thrown a few things into a bundle, and her foot was again
upon the ladder, when it seemed to her that someone struck her, hurling
her back upon the floor, and the house the other side of the yard rose up
into the air, and then fell quite slowly, and a cloud of dust hid it from
her sight.

Madame Lelanne must have carried her down the ladder.  She was standing
in the yard, and the dust was choking her.  Across the street, beyond the
ruins of the hospital, swarms of men were running about like ants when
their nest has been disturbed.  Some were running this way, and some
that.  And then they would turn and run back again, making dancing
movements round one another and jostling one another.  The guns had
ceased; and instead, it sounded as if all the babies in the world were
playing with their rattles.  Suddenly Madame Lelanne reappeared out of
the dust, and seizing Joan, dragged her through a dark opening and down a
flight of steps, and then left her.  She was in a great vaulted cellar.  A
faint light crept in through a grated window at the other end.  There was
a long table against the wall, and in front of it a bench.  She staggered
to it and sat down, leaning against the damp wall.  The place was very
silent.  Suddenly she began to laugh.  She tried to stop herself, but
couldn't.  And then she heard footsteps descending, and her memory came
back to her with a rush.  They were German footsteps, she felt sure by
the sound: they were so slow and heavy.  They should not find her in
hysterics, anyhow.  She fixed her teeth into the wooden table in front of
her and held on to it with clenched hands.  She had recovered herself
before the footsteps had finished their descent.  With a relief that made
it difficult for her not to begin laughing again, she found it was Madame
Lelanne and Monsieur Dubos.  They were carrying something between them.
She hardly recognized Dubos at first.  His beard was gone, and a line of
flaming scars had taken its place.  They laid their burden on the table.
It was one of the wounded men from the hut.  They told her they were
bringing down two more.  The hut itself had not been hit, but the roof
had been torn off by the force of the explosion, and the others had been
killed by the falling beams.  Joan wanted to return with them, but Madame
Lelanne had assumed an air of authority, and told her she would be more
useful where she was.  From the top of the steps they threw down bundles
of straw, on which they laid the wounded men, and Joan tended them, while
Madame Lelanne and the little chemist went up and down continuously.
Before evening the place, considering all things, was fairly habitable.
Madame Lelanne brought down the great stove from the hut; and breaking a
pane of glass in the barred window, they fixed it up with its chimney and
lighted it.  From time to time the turmoil above them would break out
again: the rattling, and sometimes a dull rumbling as of rushing water.
But only a faint murmur of it penetrated into the cellar.  Towards night
it became quiet again.

How long Joan remained there she was never quite sure.  There was little
difference between day and night.  After it had been quiet for an hour or
so, Madame Lelanne would go out, to return a little later with a wounded
man upon her back; and when one died, she would throw him across her
shoulder and disappear again up the steps.  Sometimes it was a Frenchman
and sometimes a German she brought in.  One gathered that the fight for
the village still continued.  There was but little they could do for them
beyond dressing their wounds and easing their pain.  Joan and the little
chemist took it in turns to relieve one another.  If Madame Lelanne ever
slept, it was when she would sit in the shadow behind the stove, her
hands upon her knees.  Dubos had been in the house when it had fallen.
Madame Lelanne had discovered him pinned against a wall underneath a
great oak beam that had withstood the falling debris.  His beard had been
burnt off, but otherwise he had been unharmed.

She seemed to be living in a dream.  She could not shake from her the
feeling that it was not bodies but souls that she was tending.  The men
themselves gave colour to this fancy of hers.  Stripped of their poor,
stained, tattered uniforms, they were neither French nor Germans.  Friend
or foe! it was already but a memory.  Often, awakening out of a sleep,
they would look across at one another and smile as to a comrade.  A great
peace seemed to have entered there.  Faint murmurs as from some distant
troubled world would steal at times into the silence.  It brought a pang
of pity, but it did not drive away the quiet that dwelt there.

Once, someone who must have known the place and had descended the steps
softly, sat there among them and talked with them.  Joan could not
remember seeing him enter.  Perhaps unknowing, she had fallen to sleep
for a few minutes.  Madame Lelanne was seated by the stove, her great
coarse hands upon her knees, her patient, dull, slow-moving eyes fixed
upon the speaker's face.  Dubos was half standing, half resting against
the table, his arms folded upon his breast.  The wounded men had raised
themselves upon the straw and were listening.  Some leant upon their
elbows, some sat with their hands clasped round their knees, and one,
with head bent down, remained with his face hidden in his hands.

The speaker sat a little way apart.  The light from the oil lamp,
suspended from the ceiling, fell upon his face.  He wore a peasant's
blouse.  It seemed to her a face she knew.  Possibly she had passed him
in the village street and had looked at him without remembering.  It was
his eyes that for long years afterwards still haunted her.  She did not
notice at the time what language he was speaking.  But there were none
who did not understand him.

"You think of God as of a great King," he said, "a Ruler who orders all
things: who could change all things in the twinkling of an eye.  You see
the cruelty and the wrong around you.  And you say to yourselves: 'He has
ordered it.  If He would, He could have willed it differently.'  So that
in your hearts you are angry with Him.  How could it be otherwise?  What
father, loving his children, would see them suffer wrong, when by
stretching out a hand he could protect them: turn their tears to
gladness?  What father would see his children doing evil to one another
and not check them: would see them following ways leading to their
destruction, and not pluck them back?  If God has ordered all things, why
has He created evil, making His creatures weak and sinful?  Does a father
lay snares for his children: leading them into temptation: delivering
them unto evil?"

"There is no God, apart from Man."

"God is a spirit.  His dwelling-place is in man's heart.  We are His
fellow-labourers.  It is through man that He shall one day rule the
world."

"God is knocking at your heart, but you will not open to Him.  You have
filled your hearts with love of self.  There is no room for Him to enter
in."

"God whispers to you: 'Be pitiful.  Be merciful.  Be just.'  But you
answer Him: 'If I am pitiful, I lose my time and money.  If I am
merciful, I forego advantage to myself.  If I am just, I lessen my own
profit, and another passes me in the race.'"

"And yet in your inmost thoughts you know that you are wrong: that love
of self brings you no peace.  Who is happier than the lover, thinking
only how to serve?  Who is the more joyous: he who sits alone at the
table, or he who shares his meal with a friend?  It is more blessed to
give than to receive.  How can you doubt it?  For what do you toil and
strive but that you may give to your children, to your loved ones,
reaping the harvest of their good?"

"Who among you is the more honoured?  The miser or the giver: he who
heaps up riches for himself or he who labours for others?"

"Who is the true soldier?  He who has put away self.  His own ease and
comfort, even his own needs, his own safety: they are but as a feather in
the balance when weighed against his love for his comrades, for his
country.  The true soldier is not afraid to love.  He gives his life for
his friend.  Do you jeer at him?  Do you say he is a fool for his pains?
No, it is his honour, his glory."

"God is love.  Why are you afraid to let Him in?  Hate knocks also at
your door and to him you open wide.  Why are you afraid of love?  All
things are created by love.  Hate can but destroy.  Why choose you death
instead of life?  God pleads to you.  He is waiting for your help."

And one answered him.

"We are but poor men," he said.  "What can we do?  Of what use are such
as we?"

The young man looked at him and smiled.

"You can ask that," he said: "you, a soldier?  Does the soldier say: 'I
am of no use.  I am but a poor man of no account.  Who has need of such
as I?'  God has need of all.  There is none that shall not help to win
the victory.  It is with his life the soldier serves.  Who were they
whose teaching moved the world more than it has ever yet been moved by
the teaching of the wisest?  They were men of little knowledge, of but
little learning, poor and lowly.  It was with their lives they taught."

"Cast out self, and God shall enter in, and you shall be One with God.
For there is none so lowly that he may not become the Temple of God:
there is none so great that he shall be greater than this."

The speaker ceased.  There came a faint sound at which she turned her
head; and when she looked again he was gone.

The wounded men had heard it also.  Dubos had moved forward.  Madame
Lelanne had risen.  It came again, the thin, faint shrill of a distant
bugle.  Footsteps were descending the stairs.  French soldiers, laughing,
shouting, were crowding round them.




CHAPTER XVIII


Her father met her at Waterloo.  He had business in London, and they
stayed on for a few days.  Reading between the lines of his later
letters, she had felt that all was not well with him.  His old heart
trouble had come back; and she noticed that he walked to meet her very
slowly.  It would be all right, now that she had returned, he explained:
he had been worrying himself about her.

Mrs. Denton had died.  She had left Joan her library, together with her
wonderful collection of note books.  She had brought them all up-to-date
and indexed them.  They would be invaluable to Francis when he started
the new paper upon which they had determined.  He was still in the
hospital at Breganze, near to where his machine had been shot down.  She
had tried to get to him; but it would have meant endless delays; and she
had been anxious about her father.  The Italian surgeons were very proud
of him, he wrote.  They had had him X-rayed before and after; and beyond
a slight lameness which gave him, he thought, a touch of distinction,
there was no flaw that the most careful scrutiny would be likely to
detect.  Any day, now, he expected to be discharged.  Mary had married an
old sweetheart.  She had grown restless in the country with nothing to
do, and, at the suggestion of some friends, had gone to Bristol to help
in a children's hospital; and there they had met once more.

Neil Singleton, after serving two years in a cholera hospital at Baghdad,
had died of the flu in Dover twenty-fours hours after landing.  Madge was
in Palestine.  She had been appointed secretary to a committee for the
establishment of native schools.  She expected to be there for some
years, she wrote.  The work was interesting, and appealed to her.

Flossie 'phoned her from Paddington Station, the second day, and by luck
she happened to be in.  Flossie had just come up from Devonshire.  Sam
had "got through," and she was on her way to meet him at Hull.  She had
heard of Joan's arrival in London from one of Carleton's illustrated
dailies.  She brought the paper with her.  They had used the old
photograph that once had adorned each week the _Sunday Post_.  Joan
hardly recognized herself in the serene, self-confident young woman who
seemed to be looking down upon a world at her feet.  The world was strong
and cruel, she had discovered; and Joans but small and weak.  One had to
pretend that one was not afraid of it.

Flossie had joined every society she could hear of that was working for
the League of Nations.  Her hope was that it would get itself established
before young Frank grew up.

"Not that I really believe it will," she confessed.  "A draw might have
disgusted us all with fighting.  As it is, half the world is dancing at
Victory balls, exhibiting captured guns on every village green, and
hanging father's helmet above the mantelpiece; while the other half is
nursing its revenge.  Young Frank only cares for life because he is
looking forward to one day driving a tank.  I've made up my mind to burn
Sam's uniform; but I expect it will end in my wrapping it up in lavender
and hiding it away in a drawer.  And then there will be all the books and
plays.  No self-respecting heroine, for the next ten years will dream of
marrying anyone but a soldier."

Joan laughed.  "Difficult to get anything else, just at present," she
said.  "It's the soldiers I'm looking to for help.  I don't think the men
who have been there will want their sons to go.  It's the women I'm
afraid of."

Flossie caught sight of the clock and jumped up.  "Who was it said that
woman would be the last thing man would civilize?" she asked.

"It sounds like Meredith," suggested Joan.  "I am not quite sure."

"Well, he's wrong, anyhow," retorted Flossie.  "It's no good our waiting
for man.  He is too much afraid of us to be of any real help to us.  We
shall have to do it ourselves."  She gave Joan a hug and was gone.

Phillips was still abroad with the Army of Occupation.  He had tried to
get out of it, but had not succeeded.  He held it to be gaoler's work;
and the sight of the starving populace was stirring in him a fierce
anger.

He would not put up again for Parliament.  He was thinking of going back
to his old work upon the Union.  "Parliament is played out," he had
written her.  "Kings and Aristocracies have served their purpose and have
gone, and now the Ruling Classes, as they call themselves, must be
content to hear the bell toll for them also.  Parliament was never
anything more than an instrument in their hands, and never can be.  What
happens?  Once in every five years you wake the people up: tell them the
time has come for them to exercise their Heaven-ordained privilege of
putting a cross against the names of some seven hundred gentlemen who
have kindly expressed their willingness to rule over them.  After that,
you send the people back to sleep; and for the next five years these
seven hundred gentlemen, consulting no one but themselves, rule over the
country as absolutely as ever a Caesar ruled over Rome.  What sort of
Democracy is that?  Even a Labour Government--supposing that in spite of
the Press it did win through--what would be its fate?  Separated from its
base, imprisoned within those tradition-haunted walls, it would lose
touch with the people, would become in its turn a mere oligarchy.  If the
people are ever to govern they must keep their hand firmly upon the
machine; not remain content with pulling a lever and then being shown the
door."

She had sent a note by messenger to Mary Stopperton to say she was
coming.  Mary had looked very fragile the last time she had seen her,
just before leaving for France; and she had felt a fear.  Mary had
answered in her neat, thin, quavering writing, asking her to come early
in the morning.  Sometimes she was a little tired and had to lie down
again.  She had been waiting for Joan.  She had a present for her.

The morning promised to be fair, and she decided to walk by way of the
Embankment.  The great river with its deep, strong patience had always
been a friend to her.  It was Sunday and the city was still sleeping.  The
pale December sun rose above the mist as she reached the corner of
Westminster Bridge, turning the river into silver and flooding the silent
streets with a soft, white, tender light.

The tower of Chelsea Church brought back to her remembrance of the wheezy
old clergyman who had preached there that Sunday evening, that now seemed
so long ago, when her footsteps had first taken her that way by chance.
Always she had intended making inquiries and discovering his name.  Why
had she never done so?  It would surely have been easy.  He was someone
she had known as a child.  She had become quite convinced of that.  She
could see his face close to hers as if he had lifted her up in his arms
and was smiling at her.  But pride and power had looked out of his eyes
then.

It was earlier than the time she had fixed in her own mind and, pausing
with her elbows resting on the granite parapet, she watched the ceaseless
waters returning to the sea, bearing their burden of impurities.

"All roads lead to Calvary."  It was curious how the words had dwelt with
her, till gradually they had become a part of her creed.  She remembered
how at first they had seemed to her a threat chilling her with fear.  They
had grown to be a promise, a hope held out to all.  The road to Calvary!
It was the road to life.  By the giving up of self we gained God.

And suddenly a great peace came to her.  One was not alone in the fight,
God was with us: the great Comrade.  The evil and the cruelty all round
her: she was no longer afraid of it.  God was coming.  Beyond the menace
of the passing day, black with the war's foul aftermath of evil dreams
and hatreds, she saw the breaking of the distant dawn.  The devil should
not always triumph.  God was gathering His labourers.

God was conquering.  Unceasing through the ages, God's voice had crept
round man, seeking entry.  Through the long darkness of that dim
beginning, when man knew no law but self, unceasing God had striven:
until at last one here and there, emerging from the brute, had heard--had
listened to the voice of love and pity, and in that hour, unknowing, had
built to God a temple in the wilderness.

Labourers together with God.  The mighty host of those who through the
ages had heard the voice of God and had made answer.  The men and women
in all lands who had made room in their hearts for God.  Still nameless,
scattered, unknown to one another: still powerless as yet against the
world's foul law of hate, they should continue to increase and multiply,
until one day they should speak with God's voice and should be heard.  And
a new world should be created.

God.  The tireless Spirit of eternal creation, the Spirit of Love.  What
else was it that out of formlessness had shaped the spheres, had planned
the orbits of the suns.  The law of gravity we named it.  What was it but
another name for Love, the yearning of like for like, the calling to one
another of the stars.  What else but Love had made the worlds, had
gathered together the waters, had fashioned the dry land.  The cohesion
of elements, so we explained it.  The clinging of like to like.  The
brotherhood of the atoms.

God.  The Eternal Creator.  Out of matter, lifeless void, he had moulded
His worlds, had ordered His endless firmament.  It was finished.  The
greater task remained: the Universe of mind, of soul.  Out of man it
should be created.  God in man and man in God: made in like image: fellow
labourers together with one another: together they should build it.  Out
of the senseless strife and discord, above the chaos and the tumult
should be heard the new command: "Let there be Love."

The striking of the old church clock recalled her to herself.  But she
had only a few minutes' walk before her.  Mary had given up her Church
work.  It included the cleaning, and she had found it beyond her failing
strength.  But she still lived in the tiny cottage behind its long strip
of garden.  The door yielded to Joan's touch: it was seldom fast closed.
And knowing Mary's ways, she entered without knocking and pushed it to
behind her, leaving it still ajar.

And as she did so, it seemed to her that someone passing breathed upon
her lips a little kiss: and for a while she did not move.  Then, treading
softly, she looked into the room.

It welcomed her, as always, with its smile of cosy neatness.  The
spotless curtains that were Mary's pride: the gay flowers in the window,
to which she had given children's names: the few poor pieces of
furniture, polished with much loving labour: the shining grate: the
foolish china dogs and the little china house between them on the
mantelpiece.  The fire was burning brightly, and the kettle was singing
on the hob.

Mary's work was finished.  She sat upright in her straight-backed chair
before the table, her eyes half closed.  It seemed so odd to see those
little work-worn hands idle upon her lap.

Joan's present lay on the table near to her, as if she had just folded it
and placed it there: the little cap and the fine robe of lawn: as if for
a king's child.

Joan had never thought that Death could be so beautiful.  It was as if
some friend had looked in at the door, and, seeing her so tired, had
taken the work gently from her hands, and had folded them upon her lap.
And she had yielded with a smile.

Joan heard a faint rustle and looked up.  A woman had entered.  It was
the girl she had met there on a Christmas Day, a Miss Ensor.  Joan had
met her once or twice since then.  She was still in the chorus.  Neither
of them spoke for a few minutes.

"I have been expecting every morning to find her gone," said the girl.  "I
think she only waited to finish this."  She gently unfolded the fine lawn
robe, and they saw the delicate insertion and the wonderful, embroidery.

"I asked her once," said the girl, "why she wasted so much work on them.
They were mostly only for poor people.  'One never knows, dearie,' she
answered, with that childish smile of hers.  'It may be for a little
Christ.'"

They would not let less loving hands come near her.

* * * * *

Her father had completed his business, and both were glad to leave
London.  She had a sense of something sinister, foreboding, casting its
shadow on the sordid, unclean streets, the neglected buildings falling
into disrepair.  A lurking savagery, a half-veiled enmity seemed to be
stealing among the people.  The town's mad lust for pleasure: its fierce,
unjoyous laughter: its desire ever to be in crowds as if afraid of
itself: its orgies of eating and drinking: its animal-like indifference
to the misery and death that lay but a little way beyond its own horizon!
She dared not remember history.  Perhaps it would pass.

The long, slow journey tried her father's strength, and assuming an
authority to which he yielded obedience tempered by grumbling, Joan sent
him to bed, and would not let him come down till Christmas Day.  The big,
square house was on the outskirts of the town where it was quiet, and in
the afternoon they walked in the garden sheltered behind its high brick
wall.

He told her of what had been done at the works.  Arthur's plan had
succeeded.  It might not be the last word, but at least it was on the
road to the right end.  The men had been brought into it and shared the
management.  And the disasters predicted had proved groundless.

"You won't be able to indulge in all your mad schemes," he laughed, "but
there'll be enough to help on a few.  And you will be among friends.
Arthur told me he had explained it to you and that you had agreed."

"Yes," she answered.  "It was the last time he came to see me in London.
And I could not help feeling a bit jealous.  He was doing things while I
was writing and talking.  But I was glad he was an Allway.  It will be
known as the Allway scheme.  New ways will date from it."

She had thought it time for him to return indoors, but he pleaded for a
visit to his beloved roses.  He prided himself on being always able to
pick roses on Christmas Day.

"This young man of yours," he asked, "what is he like?"

"Oh, just a Christian gentleman," she answered.  "You will love him when
you know him."

He laughed.  "And this new journal of his?" he asked.  "It's got to be
published in London, hasn't it?"

She gave a slight start, for in their letters to one another they had
been discussing this very point.

"No," she answered, "it could be circulated just as well from, say,
Birmingham or Manchester."

He was choosing his roses.  They held their petals wrapped tight round
them, trying to keep the cold from their brave hearts.  In the warmth
they would open out and be gay, until the end.

"Not Liverpool?" he suggested.

"Or even Liverpool," she laughed.

They looked at one another, and then beyond the sheltering evergreens and
the wide lawns to where the great square house seemed to be listening.

"It's an ugly old thing," he said.

"No, it isn't," she contradicted.  "It's simple and big and kind.  I
always used to feel it disapproved of me.  I believe it has come to love
me, in its solemn old brick way."

"It was built by Kent in seventeen-forty for your great-great
grandfather," he explained.  He was regarding it more affectionately.
"Solid respectability was the dream, then."

"I think that's why I love it," she said: "for it's dear, old-fashioned
ways.  We will teach it the new dreams, too.  It will be so shocked, at
first."

They dined in state in the great dining-room.

"I was going to buy you a present," he grumbled.  "But you wouldn't let
me get up."

"I want to give you something quite expensive, Dad," she said.  "I've had
my eye on it for years."

She slipped her hand in his.  "I want you to give me that Dream of yours;
that you built for my mother, and that all went wrong.  They call it
Allway's Folly; and it makes me so mad.  I want to make it all come true.
May I try?"

* * * * *

It was there that he came to her.

She stood beneath the withered trees, beside the shattered fountain.  The
sad-faced ghosts peeped out at her from the broken windows of the little
silent houses.

She wondered later why she had not been surprised to see him.  But at the
time it seemed to be in the order of things that she should look up and
find him there.

She went to him with outstretched arms.

"I'm so glad you've come," she said.  "I was just wanting you."

They sat on the stone step of the fountain, where they were sheltered
from the wind; and she buttoned his long coat about him.

"Do you think you will go on doing it?" he asked, with a laugh.

"I'm so afraid," she answered gravely.  "That I shall come to love you
too much: the home, the children and you.  I shall have none left over."

"There is an old Hindoo proverb," he said: "That when a man and woman
love they dig a fountain down to God."

"This poor, little choked-up thing," he said, "against which we are
sitting; it's for want of men and women drawing water, of children
dabbling their hands in it and making themselves all wet, that it has run
dry."

She took his hands in hers to keep them warm.  The nursing habit seemed
to have taken root in her.

"I see your argument," she said.  "The more I love you, the deeper will
be the fountain.  So that the more Love I want to come to me, the more I
must love you."

"Don't you see it for yourself?" he demanded.

She broke into a little laugh.

"Perhaps you are right," she admitted.  "Perhaps that is why He made us
male and female: to teach us to love."

A robin broke into a song of triumph.  He had seen the sad-faced ghosts
steal silently away.





CLOCKS.

There are two kinds of clocks. There is the clock that is always wrong,
and that knows it is wrong, and glories in it; and there is the clock
that is always right--except when you rely upon it, and then it is more
wrong than you would think a clock _could_ be in a civilized country.

I remember a clock of this latter type, that we had in the house when I
was a boy, routing us all up at three o'clock one winter's morning. We
had finished breakfast at ten minutes to four, and I got to school a
little after five, and sat down on the step outside and cried, because I
thought the world had come to an end; everything was so death-like!

The man who can live in the same house with one of these clocks, and
not endanger his chance of heaven about once a month by standing up and
telling it what he thinks of it, is either a dangerous rival to that old
established firm, Job, or else he does not know enough bad language to
make it worth his while to start saying anything at all.

The great dream of its life is to lure you on into trying to catch a
train by it. For weeks and weeks it will keep the most perfect time. If
there were any difference in time between that clock and the sun, you
would be convinced it was the sun, not the clock, that wanted seeing to.
You feel that if that clock happened to get a quarter of a second fast,
or the eighth of an instant slow, it would break its heart and die.

It is in this spirit of child-like faith in its integrity that, one
morning, you gather your family around you in the passage, kiss your
children, and afterward wipe your jammy mouth, poke your finger in the
baby's eye, promise not to forget to order the coals, wave at last fond
adieu with the umbrella, and depart for the railway-station.

I never have been quite able to decide, myself, which is the more
irritating to run two miles at the top of your speed, and then to find,
when you reach the station, that you are three-quarters of an hour too
early; or to stroll along leisurely the whole way, and dawdle about
outside the booking-office, talking to some local idiot, and then to
swagger carelessly on to the platform, just in time to see the train go
out!

As for the other class of clocks--the common or always-wrong
clocks--they are harmless enough. You wind them up at the proper
intervals, and once or twice a week you put them right and "regulate"
them, as you call it (and you might just as well try to "regulate" a
London tom-cat). But you do all this, not from any selfish motives,
but from a sense of duty to the clock itself. You want to feel that,
whatever may happen, you have done the right thing by it, and that no
blame can attach to you.

So far as looking to it for any return is concerned, that you never
dream of doing, and consequently you are not disappointed. You ask what
the time is, and the girl replies:

"Well, the clock in the dining-room says a quarter past two."

But you are not deceived by this. You know that, as a matter of fact, it
must be somewhere between nine and ten in the evening; and, remembering
that you noticed, as a curious circumstance, that the clock was only
forty minutes past four, hours ago, you mildly admire its energies and
resources, and wonder how it does it.

I myself possess a clock that for complicated unconventionality and
light-hearted independence, could, I should think, give points
to anything yet discovered in the chronometrical line. As a mere
time-piece, it leaves much to be desired; but, considered as a
self-acting conundrum, it is full of interest and variety.

I heard of a man once who had a clock that he used to say was of no good
to any one except himself, because he was the only man who understood
it. He said it was an excellent clock, and one that you could thoroughly
depend upon; but you wanted to know it--to have studied its system. An
outsider might be easily misled by it.

"For instance," he would say, "when it strikes fifteen, and the hands
point to twenty minutes past eleven, I know it is a quarter to eight."

His acquaintanceship with that clock must certainly have given him an
advantage over the cursory observer!

But the great charm about my clock is its reliable uncertainty. It works
on no method whatever; it is a pure emotionalist. One day it will be
quite frolicsome, and gain three hours in the course of the morning, and
think nothing of it; and the next day it will wish it were dead, and be
hardly able to drag itself along, and lose two hours out of every four,
and stop altogether in the afternoon, too miserable to do anything; and
then, getting cheerful once more toward evening, will start off again of
its own accord.

I do not care to talk much about this clock; because when I tell the
simple truth concerning it, people think I am exaggerating.

It is very discouraging to find, when you are straining every nerve to
tell the truth, that people do not believe you, and fancy that you
are exaggerating. It makes you feel inclined to go and exaggerate on
purpose, just to show them the difference. I know I often feel tempted
to do so myself--it is my early training that saves me.

We should always be very careful never to give way to exaggeration; it
is a habit that grows upon one.

And it is such a vulgar habit, too. In the old times, when poets and
dry-goods salesmen were the only people who exaggerated, there was
something clever and _distingue_ about a reputation for "a tendency to
over, rather than to under-estimate the mere bald facts." But everybody
exaggerates nowadays. The art of exaggeration is no longer regarded
as an "extra" in the modern bill of education; it is an essential
requirement, held to be most needful for the battle of life.

The whole world exaggerates. It exaggerates everything, from the yearly
number of bicycles sold to the yearly number of heathens converted--into
the hope of salvation and more whiskey. Exaggeration is the basis of our
trade, the fallow-field of our art and literature, the groundwork of our
social life, the foundation of our political existence. As schoolboys,
we exaggerate our fights and our marks and our fathers' debts. As men,
we exaggerate our wares, we exaggerate our feelings, we exaggerate
our incomes--except to the tax-collector, and to him we exaggerate our
"outgoings"; we exaggerate our virtues; we even exaggerate our vices,
and, being in reality the mildest of men, pretend we are dare-devil
scamps.

We have sunk so low now that we try to _act_ our exaggerations, and to
live up to our lies. We call it "keeping up appearances;" and no
more bitter phrase could, perhaps, have been invented to describe our
childish folly.

If we possess a hundred pounds a year, do we not call it two? Our larder
may be low and our grates be chill, but we are happy if the "world" (six
acquaintances and a prying neighbor) gives us credit for one hundred and
fifty. And, when we have five hundred, we talk of a thousand, and the
all-important and beloved "world" (sixteen friends now, and two of them
carriage-folks!) agree that we really must be spending seven hundred, or
at all events, running into debt up to that figure; but the butcher and
baker, who have gone into the matter with the housemaid, know better.

After awhile, having learned the trick, we launch out boldly and spend
like Indian Princes--or rather _seem_ to spend; for we know, by this
time, how to purchase the seeming with the seeming, how to buy the
appearance of wealth with the appearance of cash. And the dear old
world--Beelzebub bless it! for it is his own child, sure enough; there
is no mistaking the likeness, it has all his funny little ways--gathers
round, applauding and laughing at the lie, and sharing in the cheat, and
gloating over the thought of the blow that it knows must sooner or later
fall on us from the Thor-like hammer of Truth.

And all goes merry as a witches' frolic--until the gray morning dawns.

Truth and fact are old-fashioned and out-of-date, my friends, fit only
for the dull and vulgar to live by. Appearance, not reality, is what the
clever dog grasps at in these clever days. We spurn the dull-brown solid
earth; we build our lives and homes in the fair-seeming rainbow-land of
shadow and chimera.

To ourselves, sleeping and waking there, _behind_ the rainbow, there is
no beauty in the house; only a chill damp mist in every room, and, over
all, a haunting fear of the hour when the gilded clouds will melt
away, and let us fall--somewhat heavily, no doubt--upon the hard world
underneath.

But, there! of what matter is _our_ misery, _our_ terror? To the
stranger, our home appears fair and bright. The workers in the fields
below look up and envy us our abode of glory and delight! If _they_
think it pleasant, surely _we_ should be content. Have we not been
taught to live for others and not for ourselves, and are we not acting
up bravely to the teaching--in this most curious method?

Ah! yes, we are self-sacrificing enough, and loyal enough in our
devotion to this new-crowned king, the child of Prince Imposture and
Princess Pretense. Never before was despot so blindly worshiped! Never
had earthly sovereign yet such world-wide sway!

Man, if he would live, _must_ worship. He looks around, and what to him,
within the vision of his life, is the greatest and the best, that he
falls down and does reverence to. To him whose eyes have opened on the
nineteenth century, what nobler image can the universe produce than
the figure of Falsehood in stolen robes? It is cunning and brazen and
hollow-hearted, and it realizes his souls ideal, and he falls and kisses
its feet, and clings to its skinny knees, swearing fealty to it for
evermore!

Ah! he is a mighty monarch, bladder-bodied King Humbug! Come, let us
build up temples of hewn shadows wherein we may adore him, safe from the
light. Let us raise him aloft upon our Brummagem shields. Long live our
coward, falsehearted chief!--fit leader for such soldiers as we! Long
live the Lord-of-Lies, anointed! Long live poor King Appearances, to
whom all mankind bows the knee!

But we must hold him aloft very carefully, oh, my brother warriors! He
needs much "keeping up." He has no bones and sinews of his own, the poor
old flimsy fellow! If we take our hands from him, he will fall a heap
of worn-out rags, and the angry wind will whirl him away, and leave us
forlorn. Oh, let us spend our lives keeping him up, and serving him,
and making him great--that is, evermore puffed out with air and
nothingness--until he burst, and we along with him!

Burst one day he must, as it is in the nature of bubbles to burst,
especially when they grow big. Meanwhile, he still reigns over us, and
the world grows more and more a world of pretense and exaggeration
and lies; and he who pretends and exaggerates and lies the most
successfully, is the greatest of us all.

The world is a gingerbread fair, and we all stand outside our booths and
point to the gorgeous-colored pictures, and beat the big drum and brag.
Brag! brag! Life is one great game of brag!

"Buy my soap, oh ye people, and ye will never look old, and the hair
will grow again on your bald places, and ye will never be poor or
unhappy again; and mine is the only true soap. Oh, beware of spurious
imitations!"

"Buy my lotion, all ye that suffer from pains in the head, or the
stomach, or the feet, or that have broken arms, or broken hearts, or
objectionable mothers-in-law; and drink one bottle a day, and all your
troubles will be ended."

"Come to my church, all ye that want to go to Heaven, and buy my penny
weekly guide, and pay my pew-rates; and, pray ye, have nothing to do
with my misguided brother over the road. _This_ is the only safe way!"

"Oh, vote for me, my noble and intelligent electors, and send our party
into power, and the world shall be a new place, and there shall be no
sin or sorrow any more! And each free and independent voter shall have
a bran new Utopia made on purpose for him, according to his own ideas,
with a good-sized, extra-unpleasant purgatory attached, to which he can
send everybody he does not like. Oh! do not miss this chance!"

Oh! listen to my philosophy, it is the best and deepest. Oh! hear my
songs, they are the sweetest. Oh! buy my pictures, they alone are true
art. Oh! read my books, they are the finest.

Oh! _I_ am the greatest cheesemonger, _I_ am the greatest soldier, _I_
am the greatest statesman, _I_ am the greatest poet, _I_ am the greatest
showman, _I_ am the greatest mountebank, _I_ am the greatest editor, and
_I_ am the greatest patriot. _We_ are the greatest nation. _We_ are
the only good people. _Ours_ is the only true religion. Bah! how we all
yell!

How we all brag and bounce, and beat the drum and shout; and nobody
believes a word we utter; and the people ask one another, saying:

"How can we tell who is the greatest and the cleverest among all these
shrieking braggarts?"

And they answer:

"There is none great or clever. The great and clever men are not here;
there is no place for them in this pandemonium of charlatans and quacks.
The men you see here are crowing cocks. We suppose the greatest and the
best of _them_ are they who crow the loudest and the longest; that is
the only test of _their_ merits."

Therefore, what is left for us to do, but to crow? And the best and
greatest of us all, is he who crows the loudest and the longest on this
little dunghill that we call our world!

Well, I was going to tell you about our clock.

It was my wife's idea, getting it, in the first instance. We had been to
dinner at the Buggles', and Buggles had just bought a clock--"picked
it up in Essex," was the way he described the transaction. Buggles is
always going about "picking up" things. He will stand before an old
carved bedstead, weighing about three tons, and say:

"Yes--pretty little thing! I picked it up in Holland;" as though he had
found it by the roadside, and slipped it into his umbrella when nobody
was looking!

Buggles was rather full of this clock. It was of the good old-fashioned
"grandfather" type. It stood eight feet high, in a carved-oak case, and
had a deep, sonorous, solemn tick, that made a pleasant accompaniment to
the after-dinner chat, and seemed to fill the room with an air of homely
dignity.

We discussed the clock, and Buggles said how he loved the sound of its
slow, grave tick; and how, when all the house was still, and he and
it were sitting up alone together, it seemed like some wise old friend
talking to him, and telling him about the old days and the old ways of
thought, and the old life and the old people.

The clock impressed my wife very much. She was very thoughtful all the
way home, and, as we went upstairs to our flat, she said, "Why could not
we have a clock like that?" She said it would seem like having some one
in the house to take care of us all--she should fancy it was looking
after baby!

I have a man in Northamptonshire from whom I buy old furniture now and
then, and to him I applied. He answered by return to say that he had got
exactly the very thing I wanted. (He always has. I am very lucky in this
respect.) It was the quaintest and most old-fashioned clock he had
come across for a long while, and he enclosed photograph and full
particulars; should he send it up?

From the photograph and the particulars, it seemed, as he said, the very
thing, and I told him, "Yes; send it up at once."

Three days afterward, there came a knock at the door--there had been
other knocks at the door before this, of course; but I am dealing
merely with the history of the clock. The girl said a couple of men were
outside, and wanted to see me, and I went to them.

I found they were Pickford's carriers, and glancing at the way-bill, I
saw that it was my clock that they had brought, and I said, airily, "Oh,
yes, it's quite right; bring it up!"

They said they were very sorry, but that was just the difficulty. They
could not get it up.

I went down with them, and wedged securely across the second landing
of the staircase, I found a box which I should have judged to be the
original case in which Cleopatra's Needle came over.

They said that was my clock.

I brought down a chopper and a crowbar, and we sent out and collected in
two extra hired ruffians and the five of us worked away for half an hour
and got the clock out; after which the traffic up and down the staircase
was resumed, much to the satisfaction of the other tenants.

We then got the clock upstairs and put it together, and I fixed it in
the corner of the dining-room.

At first it exhibited a strong desire to topple over and fall on people,
but by the liberal use of nails and screws and bits of firewood, I made
life in the same room with it possible, and then, being exhausted, I had
my wounds dressed, and went to bed.

In the middle of the night my wife woke me up in a great state of alarm,
to say that the clock had just struck thirteen, and who did I think was
going to die?

I said I did not know, but hoped it might be the next-door dog.

My wife said she had a presentiment it meant baby. There was no
comforting her; she cried herself to sleep again.

During the course of the morning, I succeeded in persuading her that she
must have made a mistake, and she consented to smile once more. In the
afternoon the clock struck thirteen again.

This renewed all her fears. She was convinced now that both baby and I
were doomed, and that she would be left a childless widow. I tried to
treat the matter as a joke, and this only made her more wretched.
She said that she could see I really felt as she did, and was only
pretending to be light-hearted for her sake, and she said she would try
and bear it bravely.

The person she chiefly blamed was Buggles.

In the night the clock gave us another warning, and my wife accepted it
for her Aunt Maria, and seemed resigned. She wished, however, that I had
never had the clock, and wondered when, if ever, I should get cured of
my absurd craze for filling the house with tomfoolery.

The next day the clock struck thirteen four times and this cheered
her up. She said that if we were all going to die, it did not so much
matter. Most likely there was a fever or a plague coming, and we should
all be taken together.

She was quite light-hearted over it!

After that the clock went on and killed every friend and relation we
had, and then it started on the neighbors.

It struck thirteen all day long for months, until we were sick of
slaughter, and there could not have been a human being left alive for
miles around.

Then it turned over a new leaf, and gave up murdering folks, and took to
striking mere harmless thirty-nines and forty-ones. Its favorite number
now is thirty-two, but once a day it strikes forty-nine. It never
strikes more than forty-nine. I don't know why--I have never been able
to understand why--but it doesn't.

It does not strike at regular intervals, but when it feels it wants to
and would be better for it. Sometimes it strikes three or four times
within the same hour, and at other times it will go for half-a-day
without striking at all.

He is an odd old fellow!

I have thought now and then of having him "seen to," and made to keep
regular hours and be respectable; but, somehow, I seem to have grown to
love him as he is with his daring mockery of Time.

He certainly has not much respect for it. He seems to go out of his way
almost to openly insult it. He calls half-past two thirty-eight o'clock,
and in twenty minutes from then he says it is one!

Is it that he really has grown to feel contempt for his master, and
wishes to show it? They say no man is a hero to his valet; may it be
that even stony-face Time himself is but a short-lived, puny mortal--a
little greater than some others, that is all--to the dim eyes of this
old servant of his? Has he, ticking, ticking, all these years, come at
last to see into the littleness of that Time that looms so great to our
awed human eyes?

Is he saying, as he grimly laughs, and strikes his thirty-fives and
forties: "Bah! I know you, Time, godlike and dread though you seem. What
are you but a phantom--a dream--like the rest of us here? Ay, less, for
you will pass away and be no more. Fear him not, immortal men. Time is
but the shadow of the world upon the background of Eternity!"








MONDAY, 19TH


My Friend B.--Invitation to the Theatre.--A Most Unpleasant
Regulation.--Yearnings of the Embryo Traveller.--How to Make the Most of
One's Own Country.--Friday, a Lucky Day.--The Pilgrimage Decided On.

My friend B. called on me this morning and asked me if I would go to a
theatre with him on Monday next.

"Oh, yes! certainly, old man," I replied.  "Have you got an order, then?"

He said:

"No; they don't give orders.  We shall have to pay."

"Pay!  Pay to go into a theatre!" I answered, in astonishment.  "Oh,
nonsense!  You are joking."

"My dear fellow," he rejoined, "do you think I should suggest paying if
it were possible to get in by any other means?  But the people who run
this theatre would not even understand what was meant by a 'free list,'
the uncivilised barbarians!  It is of no use pretending to them that you
are on the Press, because they don't want the Press; they don't think
anything of the Press.  It is no good writing to the acting manager,
because there is no acting manager.  It would be a waste of time offering
to exhibit bills, because they don't have any bills--not of that sort.
If you want to go in to see the show, you've got to pay.  If you don't
pay, you stop outside; that's their brutal rule."

"Dear me," I said, "what a very unpleasant arrangement!  And whereabouts
is this extraordinary theatre?  I don't think I can ever have been inside
it."

"I don't think you have," he replied; "it is at Ober-Ammergau--first
turning on the left after you leave Ober railway-station, fifty miles
from Munich."

"Um! rather out of the way for a theatre," I said.  "I should not have
thought an outlying house like that could have afforded to give itself
airs."

"The house holds seven thousand people," answered my friend B., "and
money is turned away at each performance.  The first production is on
Monday next.  Will you come?"

I pondered for a moment, looked at my diary, and saw that Aunt Emma was
coming to spend Saturday to Wednesday next with us, calculated that if I
went I should miss her, and might not see her again for years, and
decided that I would go.

To tell the truth, it was the journey more than the play that tempted me.
To be a great traveller has always been one of my cherished ambitions.  I
yearn to be able to write in this sort of strain:--

"I have smoked my fragrant Havana in the sunny streets of old Madrid, and
I have puffed the rude and not sweet-smelling calumet of peace in the
draughty wigwam of the Wild West; I have sipped my evening coffee in the
silent tent, while the tethered camel browsed without upon the desert
grass, and I have quaffed the fiery brandy of the North while the
reindeer munched his fodder beside me in the hut, and the pale light of
the midnight sun threw the shadows of the pines across the snow; I have
felt the stab of lustrous eyes that, ghostlike, looked at me from out
veil-covered faces in Byzantium's narrow ways, and I have laughed back
(though it was wrong of me to do so) at the saucy, wanton glances of the
black-eyed girls of Jedo; I have wandered where 'good'--but not too
good--Haroun Alraschid crept disguised at nightfall, with his faithful
Mesrour by his side; I have stood upon the bridge where Dante watched the
sainted Beatrice pass by; I have floated on the waters that once bore the
barge of Cleopatra; I have stood where Caesar fell; I have heard the soft
rustle of rich, rare robes in the drawing-rooms of Mayfair, and I have
heard the teeth-necklaces rattle around the ebony throats of the belles
of Tongataboo; I have panted beneath the sun's fierce rays in India, and
frozen under the icy blasts of Greenland; I have mingled with the teeming
hordes of old Cathay, and, deep in the great pine forests of the Western
World, I have lain, wrapped in my blanket, a thousand miles beyond the
shores of human life."

B., to whom I explained my leaning towards this style of diction, said
that exactly the same effect could be produced by writing about places
quite handy.  He said:--

"I could go on like that without having been outside England at all.  I
should say:

"I have smoked my fourpenny shag in the sanded bars of Fleet Street, and
I have puffed my twopenny Manilla in the gilded balls of the Criterion; I
have quaffed my foaming beer of Burton where Islington's famed Angel
gathers the little thirsty ones beneath her shadowing wings, and I have
sipped my tenpenny _ordinaire_ in many a garlic-scented salon of Soho.
On the back of the strangely-moving ass I have urged--or, to speak more
correctly, the proprietor of the ass, or his agent, from behind has
urged--my wild career across the sandy heaths of Hampstead, and my canoe
has startled the screaming wild-fowl from their lonely haunts amid the
sub-tropical regions of Battersea.  Adown the long, steep slope of One
Tree Hill have I rolled from top to foot, while laughing maidens of the
East stood round and clapped their hands and yelled; and, in the
old-world garden of that pleasant Court, where played the fair-haired
children of the ill-starred Stuarts, have I wandered long through many
paths, my arm entwined about the waist of one of Eve's sweet daughters,
while her mother raged around indignantly on the other side of the hedge,
and never seemed to get any nearer to us.  I have chased the
lodging-house Norfolk Howard to his watery death by the pale lamp's
light; I have, shivering, followed the leaping flea o'er many a mile of
pillow and sheet, by the great Atlantic's margin.  Round and round, till
the heart--and not only the heart--grows sick, and the mad brain whirls
and reels, have I ridden the small, but extremely hard, horse, that may,
for a penny, be mounted amid the plains of Peckham Rye; and high above
the heads of the giddy throngs of Barnet (though it is doubtful if anyone
among them was half so giddy as was I) have I swung in highly-coloured
car, worked by a man with a rope.  I have trod in stately measure the
floor of Kensington's Town Hall (the tickets were a guinea each, and
included refreshments--when you could get to them through the crowd), and
on the green sward of the forest that borders eastern Anglia by the
oft-sung town of Epping I have performed quaint ceremonies in a ring; I
have mingled with the teeming hordes of Drury Lane on Boxing Night, and,
during the run of a high-class piece, I have sat in lonely grandeur in
the front row of the gallery, and wished that I had spent my shilling
instead in the Oriental halls of the Alhambra."

"There you are," said B., "that is just as good as yours; and you can
write like that without going more than a few hours' journey from
London."

"We will discuss the matter no further," I replied.  "You cannot, I see,
enter into my feelings.  The wild heart of the traveller does not throb
within your breast; you cannot understand his longings.  No matter!
Suffice it that I will come this journey with you.  I will buy a German
conversation book, and a check-suit, and a blue veil, and a white
umbrella, and suchlike necessities of the English tourist in Germany,
this very afternoon.  When do you start?"

"Well," he said, "it is a good two days' journey.  I propose to start on
Friday."

"Is not Friday rather an unlucky day to start on?" I suggested.

"Oh, good gracious!" he retorted quite sharply, "what rubbish next?  As
if the affairs of Europe were going to be arranged by Providence
according to whether you and I start for an excursion on a Thursday or a
Friday!"

He said he was surprised that a man who could be so sensible,
occasionally, as myself, could have patience to even think of such
old-womanish nonsense.  He said that years ago, when he was a silly boy,
he used to pay attention to this foolish superstition himself, and would
never upon any consideration start for a trip upon a Friday.

But, one year, he was compelled to do so.  It was a case of either
starting on a Friday or not going at all, and he determined to chance it.

He went, prepared for and expecting a series of accidents and
misfortunes.  To return home alive was the only bit of pleasure he hoped
for from that trip.

As it turned out, however, he had never had a more enjoyable holiday in
his life before.  The whole event was a tremendous success.

And after that, he had made up his mind to _always_ start on a Friday;
and he always did, and always had a good time.

He said that he would never, upon any consideration, start for a trip
upon any other day but a Friday now.  It was so absurd, this superstition
about Friday.

So we agreed to start on the Friday, and I am to meet him at Victoria
Station at a quarter to eight in the evening.




THURSDAY, 22ND


The Question of Luggage.--First Friend's Suggestion.--Second Friend's
Suggestion.--Third Friend's Suggestion.--Mrs. Briggs' Advice.--Our
Vicar's Advice.--His Wife's Advice.--Medical Advice.--Literary
Advice.--George's Recommendation.--My Sister-in-Law's Help.--Young
Smith's Counsel.--My Own Ideas.--B.'s Idea.

I have been a good deal worried to-day about the question of what luggage
to take with me.  I met a man this morning, and he said:

"Oh, if you are going to Ober-Ammergau, mind you take plenty of warm
clothing with you.  You'll need all your winter things up there."

He said that a friend of his had gone up there some years ago, and had
not taken enough warm things with him, and had caught a chill there, and
had come home and died.  He said:

"You be guided by me, and take plenty of warm things with you."

I met another man later on, and he said:

"I hear you are going abroad.  Now, tell me, what part of Europe are you
going to?"

I replied that I thought it was somewhere about the middle.  He said:

"Well, now, you take my advice, and get a calico suit and a sunshade.
Never mind the look of the thing.  You be comfortable.  You've no idea of
the heat on the Continent at this time of the year.  English people will
persist in travelling about the Continent in the same stuffy clothes that
they wear at home.  That's how so many of them get sunstrokes, and are
ruined for life."

I went into the club, and there I met a friend of mine--a newspaper
correspondent--who has travelled a good deal, and knows Europe pretty
well.  I told him what my two other friends had said, and asked him which
I was to believe.  He said:

"Well, as a matter of fact, they are both right.  You see, up in those
hilly districts, the weather changes very quickly.  In the morning it may
be blazing hot, and you will be melting, and in the evening you may be
very glad of a flannel shirt and a fur coat."

"Why, that is exactly the sort of weather we have in England!" I
exclaimed.  "If that's all these foreigners can manage in their own
country, what right have they to come over here, as they do, and grumble
about our weather?"

"Well, as a matter of fact," he replied, "they haven't any right; but you
can't stop them--they will do it.  No, you take my advice, and be
prepared for everything.  Take a cool suit and some thin things, for if
it's hot, and plenty of warm things in case it is cold."

When I got home I found Mrs. Briggs there, she having looked in to see
how the baby was.  She said:--

"Oh! if you're going anywhere near Germany, you take a bit of soap with
you."

She said that Mr. Briggs had been called over to Germany once in a hurry,
on business, and had forgotten to take a piece of soap with him, and
didn't know enough German to ask for any when he got over there, and
didn't see any to ask for even if he had known, and was away for three
weeks, and wasn't able to wash himself all the time, and came home so
dirty that they didn't know him, and mistook him for the man that was to
come to see what was the matter with the kitchen boiler.

Mrs. Briggs also advised me to take some towels with me, as they give you
such small towels to wipe on.

I went out after lunch, and met our Vicar.  He said:

"Take a blanket with you."

He said that not only did the German hotel-keepers never give you
sufficient bedclothes to keep you warm of a night, but they never
properly aired their sheets.  He said that a young friend of his had gone
for a tour through Germany once, and had slept in a damp bed, and had
caught rheumatic fever, and had come home and died.

His wife joined us at this point.  (He was waiting for her outside a
draper's shop when I met him.)  He explained to her that I was going to
Germany, and she said:

"Oh! take a pillow with you.  They don't give you any pillows--not like
our pillows--and it's _so_ wretched, you'll never get a decent night's
rest if you don't take a pillow."  She said: "You can have a little bag
made for it, and it doesn't look anything."

I met our doctor a few yards further on.  He said:

"Don't forget to take a bottle of brandy with you.  It doesn't take up
much room, and, if you're not used to German cooking, you'll find it
handy in the night."

He added that the brandy you get at foreign hotels was mere poison, and
that it was really unsafe to travel abroad without a bottle of brandy.
He said that a simple thing like a bottle of brandy in your bag might
often save your life.

Coming home, I ran against a literary friend of mine.  He said:

"You'll have a goodish time in the train old fellow.  Are you used to
long railway journeys?"

I said:

"Well, I've travelled down from London into the very heart of Surrey by a
South Eastern express."

"Oh! that's a mere nothing, compared with what you've got before you
now," he answered.  "Look here, I'll tell you a very good idea of how to
pass the time.  You take a chessboard with you and a set of men.  You'll
thank me for telling you that!"

George dropped in during the evening.  He said:

"I'll tell you one thing you'll have to take with you, old man, and
that's a box of cigars and some tobacco."

He said that the German cigar--the better class of German cigar--was of
the brand that is technically known over here as the "Penny
Pickwick--Spring Crop;" and he thought that I should not have time,
during the short stay I contemplated making in the country, to acquire a
taste for its flavour.

My sister-in-law came in later on in the evening (she is a thoughtful
girl), and brought a box with her about the size of a tea-chest.  She
said:

"Now, you slip that in your bag; you'll be glad of that.  There's
everything there for making yourself a cup of tea."

She said that they did not understand tea in Germany, but that with that
I should be independent of them.

She opened the case, and explained its contents to me.  It certainly was
a wonderfully complete arrangement.  It contained a little caddy full of
tea, a little bottle of milk, a box of sugar, a bottle of methylated
spirit, a box of butter, and a tin of biscuits: also, a stove, a kettle,
a teapot, two cups, two saucers, two plates, two knives, and two spoons.
If there had only been a bed in it, one need not have bothered about
hotels at all.

Young Smith, the Secretary of our Photographic Club, called at nine to
ask me to take him a negative of the statue of the dying Gladiator in the
Munich Sculpture Gallery.  I told him that I should be delighted to
oblige him, but that I did not intend to take my camera with me.

"Not take your camera!" he said.  "You are going to Germany--to
Rhineland!  You are going to pass through some of the most picturesque
scenery, and stay at some of the most ancient and famous towns of Europe,
and are going to leave your photographic apparatus behind you, and you
call yourself an artist!"

He said I should never regret a thing more in my life than going without
that camera.

I think it is always right to take other people's advice in matters where
they know more than you do.  It is the experience of those who have gone
before that makes the way smooth for those who follow.  So, after supper,
I got together the things I had been advised to take with me, and
arranged them on the bed, adding a few articles I had thought of all by
myself.

I put up plenty of writing paper and a bottle of ink, along with a
dictionary and a few other books of reference, in case I should feel
inclined to do any work while I was away.  I always like to be prepared
for work; one never knows when one may feel inclined for it.  Sometimes,
when I have been away, and have forgotten to bring any paper and pens and
ink with me, I have felt so inclined for writing; and it has quite upset
me that, in consequence of not having brought any paper and pens and ink
with me, I have been unable to sit down and do a lot of work, but have
been compelled, instead, to lounge about all day with my hands in my
pockets.

Accordingly, I always take plenty of paper and pens and ink with me now,
wherever I go, so that when the desire for work comes to me I need not
check it.

That this craving for work should have troubled me so often, when I had
no paper, pens, and ink by me, and that it never, by any chance, visits
me now, when I am careful to be in a position to gratify it, is a matter
over which I have often puzzled.

But when it does come I shall be ready for it.

I also put on the bed a few volumes of Goethe, because I thought it would
be so pleasant to read him in his own country.  And I decided to take a
sponge, together with a small portable bath, because a cold bath is so
refreshing the first thing in the morning.

B. came in just as I had got everything into a pile.  He stared at the
bed, and asked me what I was doing.  I told him I was packing.

"Great Heavens!" he exclaimed.  "I thought you were moving!  What do you
think we are going to do--camp out?"

"No!" I replied.  "But these are the things I have been advised to take
with me.  What is the use of people giving you advice if you don't take
it?"

He said:

"Oh! take as much advice as you like; that always comes in useful to give
away.  But, for goodness sake, don't get carrying all that stuff about
with you.  People will take us for Gipsies."

I said:

"Now, it's no use your talking nonsense.  Half the things on this bed are
life-preserving things.  If people go into Germany without these things,
they come home and die."

And I related to him what the doctor and the vicar and the other people
had told me, and explained to him how my life depended upon my taking
brandy and blankets and sunshades and plenty of warm clothing with me.

He is a man utterly indifferent to danger and risk--incurred by other
people--is B.  He said:

"Oh, rubbish!  You're not the sort that catches a cold and dies young.
You leave that co-operative stores of yours at home, and pack up a
tooth-brush, a comb, a pair of socks, and a shirt.  That's all you'll
want."

                                * * * * *

I have packed more than that, but not much.  At all events, I have got
everything into one small bag.  I should like to have taken that tea
arrangement--it would have done so nicely to play at shop with in the
train!--but B. would not hear of it.

I hope the weather does not change.




FRIDAY, 23RD


Early Rising.--Ballast should be Stowed Away in the Hold before Putting
to Sea.--Annoying Interference of Providence in Matters that it Does Not
Understand.--A Socialistic Society.--B. Misjudges Me.--An Uninteresting
Anecdote.--We Lay in Ballast.--A Moderate Sailor.--A Playful Boat.

I got up very early this morning.  I do not know why I got up early.  We
do not start till eight o'clock this evening.  But I don't regret it--the
getting up early I mean.  It is a change.  I got everybody else up too,
and we all had breakfast at seven.

I made a very good lunch.  One of those seafaring men said to me once:

"Now, if ever you are going a short passage, and are at all nervous, you
lay in a good load.  It's a good load in the hold what steadies the ship.
It's them half-empty cruisers as goes a-rollin' and a-pitchin' and
a-heavin' all over the place, with their stern up'ards half the time.
You lay in ballast."

It seemed very reasonable advice.

Aunt Emma came in the afternoon.  She said she was so glad she had caught
me.  Something told her to change her mind and come on Friday instead of
Saturday.  It was Providence, she said.

I wish Providence would mind its own business, and not interfere in my
affairs: it does not understand them.

She says she shall stop till I come back, as she wants to see me again
before she goes.  I told her I might not be back for a month.  She said
it didn't matter; she had plenty of time, and would wait for me.

The family entreat me to hurry home.

I ate a very fair dinner--"laid in a good stock of ballast," as my
seafaring friend would have said; wished "Good-bye!" to everybody, and
kissed Aunt Emma; promised to take care of myself--a promise which,
please Heaven, I will faithfully keep, cost me what it may--hailed a cab
and started.

I reached Victoria some time before B.  I secured two corner seats in a
smoking-carriage, and then paced up and down the platform waiting for
him.

When men have nothing else to occupy their minds, they take to thinking.
Having nothing better to do until B. arrived, I fell to musing.

What a wonderful piece of Socialism modern civilisation has become!--not
the Socialism of the so-called Socialists--a system modelled apparently
upon the methods of the convict prison--a system under which each
miserable sinner is to be compelled to labour, like a beast of burden,
for no personal benefit to himself, but only for the good of the
community--a world where there are to be no men, but only numbers--where
there is to be no ambition and no hope and no fear,--but the Socialism of
free men, working side by side in the common workshop, each one for the
wage to which his skill and energy entitle him; the Socialism of
responsible, thinking individuals, not of State-directed automata.

Here was I, in exchange for the result of some of my labour, going to be
taken by Society for a treat, to the middle of Europe and back.  Railway
lines had been laid over the whole 700 or 800 miles to facilitate my
progress; bridges had been built, and tunnels made; an army of engineers,
and guards, and signal-men, and porters, and clerks were waiting to take
charge of me, and to see to my comfort and safety.  All I had to do was
to tell Society (here represented by a railway booking-clerk) where I
wanted to go, and to step into a carriage; all the rest would be done for
me.  Books and papers had been written and printed; so that if I wished
to beguile the journey by reading, I could do so.  At various places on
the route, thoughtful Society had taken care to be ready for me with all
kinds of refreshment (her sandwiches might be a little fresher, but maybe
she thinks new bread injurious for me).  When I am tired of travelling
and want to rest, I find Society waiting for me with dinner and a
comfortable bed, with hot and cold water to wash in and towels to wipe
upon.  Wherever I go, whatever I need, Society, like the enslaved genii
of some Eastern tale, is ready and anxious to help me, to serve me, to do
my bidding, to give me enjoyment and pleasure.  Society will take me to
Ober-Ammergau, will provide for all my wants on the way, and, when I am
there, will show me the Passion Play, which she has arranged and
rehearsed and will play for my instruction; will bring me back any way I
like to come, explaining, by means of her guide-books and histories,
everything upon the way that she thinks can interest me; will, while I am
absent, carry my messages to those I have left behind me in England, and
will bring me theirs in return; will look after me and take care of me
and protect me like a mother--as no mother ever could.

All that she asks in return is, that I shall do the work she has given me
to do.  As a man works, so Society deals by him.

To me Society says: "You sit at your desk and write, that is all I want
you to do.  You are not good for much, but you can spin out yards of what
you and your friends, I suppose, call literature; and some people seem to
enjoy reading it.  Very well: you sit there and write this literature, or
whatever it is, and keep your mind fixed on that.  I will see to
everything else for you.  I will provide you with writing materials, and
books of wit and humour, and paste and scissors, and everything else that
may be necessary to you in your trade; and I will feed you and clothe you
and lodge you, and I will take you about to places that you wish to go
to; and I will see that you have plenty of tobacco and all other things
practicable that you may desire--provided that you work well.  The more
work you do, and the better work you do, the better I shall look after
you.  You write--that is all I want you to do."

"But," I say to Society, "I don't like work; I don't want to work.  Why
should I be a slave and work?"

"All right," answers Society, "don't work.  I'm not forcing you.  All I
say is, that if you don't work for me, I shall not work for you.  No work
from you, no dinner from me--no holidays, no tobacco."

And I decide to be a slave, and work.

Society has no notion of paying all men equally.  Her great object is to
encourage brain.  The man who merely works by his muscles she regards as
very little superior to the horse or the ox, and provides for him just a
little better.  But the moment he begins to use his head, and from the
labourer rises to the artisan, she begins to raise his wages.

Of course hers is a very imperfect method of encouraging thought.  She is
of the world, and takes a worldly standard of cleverness.  To the
shallow, showy writer, I fear, she generally pays far more than to the
deep and brilliant thinker; and clever roguery seems often more to her
liking than honest worth.  But her scheme is a right and sound one; her
aims and intentions are clear; her methods, on the whole, work fairly
well; and every year she grows in judgment.

One day she will arrive at perfect wisdom, and will pay each man
according to his deserts.

But do not be alarmed.  This will not happen in our time.

Turning round, while still musing about Society, I ran against B.
(literally).  He thought I was a clumsy ass at first, and said so; but,
on recognising me, apologised for his mistake.  He had been there for
some time also, waiting for me.  I told him that I had secured two corner
seats in a smoking-carriage, and he replied that he had done so too.  By
a curious coincidence, we had both fixed upon the same carriage.  I had
taken the corner seats near the platform, and he had booked the two
opposite corners.  Four other passengers sat huddled up in the middle.
We kept the seats near the door, and gave the other two away.  One should
always practise generosity.

There was a very talkative man in our carriage.  I never came across a
man with such a fund of utterly uninteresting anecdotes.  He had a friend
with him--at all events, the man was his friend when they started--and he
talked to this friend incessantly, from the moment the train left
Victoria until it arrived at Dover.  First of all he told him a long
story about a dog.  There was no point in the story whatever.  It was
simply a bald narrative of the dog's daily doings.  The dog got up in the
morning and barked at the door, and when they came down and opened the
door there he was, and he stopped all day in the garden; and when his
wife (not the dog's wife, the wife of the man who was telling the story)
went out in the afternoon, he was asleep on the grass, and they brought
him into the house, and he played with the children, and in the evening
he slept in the coal-shed, and next morning there he was again.  And so
on, for about forty minutes.

A very dear chum or near relative of the dog's might doubtless have found
the account enthralling; but what possible interest a stranger--a man who
evidently didn't even know the dog--could be expected to take in the
report, it was difficult to conceive.

The friend at first tried to feel excited, and murmured: "Wonderful!"
"Very strange, indeed!"  "How curious!" and helped the tale along by such
ejaculations as, "No, did he though?"  "And what did you do then?" or,
"Was that on the Monday or the Tuesday, then?"  But as the story
progressed, he appeared to take a positive dislike to the dog, and only
yawned each time that it was mentioned.

Indeed, towards the end, I think, though I trust I am mistaken, I heard
him mutter, "Oh, damn the dog!"

After the dog story, we thought we were going to have a little quiet.
But we were mistaken; for, with the same breath with which he finished
the dog rigmarole, our talkative companion added:

"But I can tell you a funnier thing than that--"

We all felt we could believe that assertion.  If he had boasted that he
could tell a duller, more uninteresting story, we should have doubted
him; but the possibility of his being able to relate something funnier,
we could readily grasp.

But it was not a bit funnier, after all.  It was only longer and more
involved.  It was the history of a man who grew his own celery; and then,
later on, it turned out that his wife was the niece, by the mother's
side, of a man who had made an ottoman out of an old packing-case.

The friend glanced round the carriage apologetically about the middle of
this story, with an expression that said:

"I'm awfully sorry, gentlemen; but it really is not my fault.  You see
the position I'm in.  Don't blame me.  Don't make it worse for me to bear
than it is."

And we each replied with pitying, sympathetic looks that implied:

"That's all right, my dear sir; don't you fret about that.  We see how it
is.  We only wish we could do something to help you."

The poor fellow seemed happier and more resigned after that.

B. and I hurried on board at Dover, and were just in time to secure the
last two berths in the boat; and we were glad that we had managed to do
this because our idea was that we should, after a good supper, turn in
and go comfortably to sleep.

B. said:

"What I like to do, during a sea passage, is to go to sleep, and then
wake up and find that I am there."

We made a very creditable supper.  I explained to B. the ballast
principle held by my seafaring friend, and he agreed with me that the
idea seemed reasonable; and, as there was a fixed price for supper, and
you had as much as you liked, we determined to give the plan a fair
trial.

B. left me after supper somewhat abruptly, as it appeared to me, and I
took a stroll on deck by myself.  I did not feel very comfortable.  I am
what I call a moderate sailor.  I do not go to excess in either
direction.  On ordinary occasions, I can swagger about and smoke my pipe,
and lie about my Channel experiences with the best of them.  But when
there is what the captain calls "a bit of a sea on," I feel sad, and try
to get away from the smell of the engines and the proximity of people who
smoke green cigars.

There was a man smoking a peculiarly mellow and unctuous cigar on deck
when I got there.  I don't believe he smoked it because he enjoyed it.
He did not look as if he enjoyed it.  I believe he smoked it merely to
show how well he was feeling, and to irritate people who were not feeling
very well.

There is something very blatantly offensive about the man who feels well
on board a boat.

I am very objectionable myself, I know, when I am feeling all right.  It
is not enough for me that I am not ill.  I want everybody to see that I
am not ill.  It seems to me that I am wasting myself if I don't let every
human being in the vessel know that I am not ill.  I cannot sit still and
be thankful, like you'd imagine a sensible man would.  I walk about the
ship--smoking, of course--and look at people who are not well with mild
but pitying surprise, as if I wondered what it was like and how they did
it.  It is very foolish of me, I know, but I cannot help it.  I suppose
it is the human nature that exists in even the best of us that makes us
act like this.

I could not get away from this man's cigar; or when I did, I came within
range of the perfume from the engine-room, and felt I wanted to go back
to the cigar.  There seemed to be no neutral ground between the two.

If it had not been that I had paid for saloon, I should have gone fore.
It was much fresher there, and I should have been much happier there
altogether.  But I was not going to pay for first-class and then ride
third--that was not business.  No, I would stick to the swagger part of
the ship, and feel aristocratic and sick.

A mate, or a boatswain, or an admiral, or one of those sort of people--I
could not be sure, in the darkness, which it was--came up to me as I was
leaning with my head against the paddle-box, and asked me what I thought
of the ship.  He said she was a new boat, and that this was her first
voyage.

I said I hoped she would get a bit steadier as she grew older.

He replied: "Yes, she is a bit skittish to-night."

What it seemed to me was, that the ship would try to lie down and go to
sleep on her right side; and then, before she had given that position a
fair trial, would suddenly change her mind, and think she could do it
better on her left.  At the moment the man came up to me she was trying
to stand on her head; and before he had finished speaking she had given
up this attempt, in which, however, she had very nearly succeeded, and
had, apparently, decided to now play at getting out of the water
altogether.

And this is what he called being a "bit skittish!"

Seafaring people talk like this, because they are silly, and do not know
any better.  It is no use being angry with them.

I got a little sleep at last.  Not in the bunk I had been at such pains
to secure: I would not have stopped down in that stuffy saloon, if
anybody had offered me a hundred pounds for doing so.  Not that anybody
did; nor that anybody seemed to want me there at all.  I gathered this
from the fact that the first thing that met my eye, after I had succeeded
in clawing my way down, was a boot.  The air was full of boots.  There
were sixty men sleeping there--or, as regards the majority, I should say
_trying_ to sleep there--some in bunks, some on tables, and some under
tables.  One man _was_ asleep, and was snoring like a hippopotamus--like
a hippopotamus that had caught a cold, and was hoarse; and the other
fifty-nine were sitting up, throwing their boots at him.  It was a snore,
very difficult to locate.  From which particular berth, in that
dimly-lighted, evil-smelling place, it proceeded nobody was quite sure.
At one moment, it appeared to come, wailing and sobbing, from the
larboard, and the next instant it thundered forth, seemingly from the
starboard.  So every man who could reach a boot picked it up, and threw
it promiscuously, silently praying to Providence, as he did so, to guide
it aright and bring it safe to its desired haven.

I watched the weird scene for a minute or two, and then I hauled myself
on deck again, and sat down--and went to sleep on a coil of rope; and was
awakened, in the course of time, by a sailor who wanted that coil of rope
to throw at the head of a man who was standing, doing no harm to anybody,
on the quay at Ostend.




SATURDAY, 24TH


Arrival at Ostend.--Coffee and Rolls.--Difficulty of Making French
Waiters understand German.--Advantages of Possessing a Conscience That
Does Not Get Up Too Early.--Villainy Triumphant.--Virtue Ordered
Outside.--A Homely English Row.

When I say I was "awakened" at Ostend, I do not speak the strict truth.
I was not awakened--not properly.  I was only half-awakened.  I never did
get fairly awake until the afternoon.  During the journey from Ostend to
Cologne I was three-parts asleep and one-part partially awake.

At Ostend, however, I was sufficiently aroused to grasp the idea that we
had got somewhere, and that I must find my luggage and B., and do
something or other; in addition to which, a strange, vague instinct, but
one which I have never yet known deceive me, hovering about my mind, and
telling me that I was in the neighbourhood of something to eat and drink,
spurred me to vigour and action.

I hurried down into the saloon and there found B.  He excused himself for
having left me alone all night--he need not have troubled himself.  I had
not pined for him in the least.  If the only woman I had ever loved had
been on board, I should have sat silent, and let any other fellow talk to
her that wanted to, and that felt equal to it--by explaining that he had
met a friend and that they had been talking.  It appeared to have been a
trying conversation.

I also ran against the talkative man and his companion.  Such a complete
wreck of a once strong man as the latter looked I have never before seen.
Mere sea-sickness, however severe, could never have accounted for the
change in his appearance since, happy and hopeful, he entered the
railway-carriage at Victoria six short hours ago.  His friend, on the
other hand, appeared fresh and cheerful, and was relating an anecdote
about a cow.

We took our bags into the Custom House and opened them, and I sat down on
mine, and immediately went to sleep.

When I awoke, somebody whom I mistook at first for a Field-Marshal, and
from force of habit--I was once a volunteer--saluted, was standing over
me, pointing melodramatically at my bag.  I assured him in picturesque
German that I had nothing to declare.  He did not appear to comprehend
me, which struck me as curious, and took the bag away from me, which left
me nothing to sit upon but the floor.  But I felt too sleepy to be
indignant.

After our luggage had been examined, we went into the buffet.  My
instinct had not misled me: there I found hot coffee, and rolls and
butter.  I ordered two coffees with milk, some bread, and some butter.  I
ordered them in the best German I knew.  As nobody understood me, I went
and got the things for myself.  It saves a deal of argument, that method.
People seem to know what you mean in a moment then.

B. suggested that while we were in Belgium, where everybody spoke French,
while very few indeed knew German, I should stand a better chance of
being understood if I talked less German and more French.

He said:

"It will be easier for you, and less of a strain upon the natives.  You
stick to French," he continued, "as long as ever you can.  You will get
along much better with French.  You will come across people now and
then--smart, intelligent people--who will partially understand your
French, but no human being, except a thought-reader, will ever obtain any
glimmering of what you mean from your German."

"Oh, are we in Belgium," I replied sleepily; "I thought we were in
Germany.  I didn't know."  And then, in a burst of confidence, I added,
feeling that further deceit was useless, "I don't know where I am, you
know."

"No, I thought you didn't," he replied.  "That is exactly the idea you
give anybody.  I wish you'd wake up a bit."

We waited about an hour at Ostend, while our train was made up.  There
was only one carriage labelled for Cologne, and four more passengers
wanted to go there than the compartment would hold.

Not being aware of this, B. and I made no haste to secure places, and, in
consequence, when, having finished our coffee, we leisurely strolled up
and opened the carriage door we saw that every seat was already booked.
A bag was in one space and a rug in another, an umbrella booked a third,
and so on.  Nobody was there, but the seats were gone!

It is the unwritten law among travellers that a man's luggage deposited
upon a seat, shall secure that seat to him until he comes to sit upon it
himself.  This is a good law and a just law, and one that, in my normal
state, I myself would die to uphold and maintain.

But at three o'clock on a chilly morning one's moral sensibilities are
not properly developed.  The average man's conscience does not begin work
till eight or nine o'clock--not till after breakfast, in fact.  At three
a.m. he will do things that at three in the afternoon his soul would
revolt at.

Under ordinary circumstances I should as soon have thought of shifting a
man's bag and appropriating his seat as an ancient Hebrew squatter would
have thought of removing his neighbour's landmark; but at this time in
the morning my better nature was asleep.

I have often read of a man's better nature being suddenly awakened.  The
business is generally accomplished by an organ-grinder or a little child
(I would back the latter, at all events--give it a fair chance--to awaken
anything in this world that was not stone deaf, or that had not been dead
for more than twenty-four hours); and if an organ-grinder or a little
child had been around Ostend station that morning, things might have been
different.

B. and I might have been saved from crime.  Just as we were in the middle
of our villainy, the organ-grinder or the child would have struck up, and
we should have burst into tears, and have rushed from the carriage, and
have fallen upon each other's necks outside on the platform, and have
wept, and waited for the next train.

As it was, after looking carefully round to see that nobody was watching
us, we slipped quickly into the carriage, and, making room for ourselves
among the luggage there, sat down and tried to look innocent and easy.

B. said that the best thing we could do, when the other people came,
would be to pretend to be dead asleep, and too stupid to understand
anything.

I replied that as far as I was concerned, I thought I could convey the
desired impression without stooping to deceit at all, and prepared to
make myself comfortable.

A few seconds later another man got into the carriage.  He also made room
for himself among the luggage and sat down.

"I am afraid that seat's taken, sir," said B. when he had recovered his
surprise at the man's coolness.  "In fact, all the seats in this carriage
are taken."

"I can't help that," replied the ruffian, cynically.  "I've got to get to
Cologne some time to-day, and there seems no other way of doing it that I
can see."

"Yes, but so has the gentleman whose seat you have taken got to get
there," I remonstrated; "what about him?  You are thinking only of
yourself!"

My sense of right and justice was beginning to assert itself, and I felt
quite indignant with the fellow.  Two minutes ago, as I have explained, I
could contemplate the taking of another man's seat with equanimity.  Now,
such an act seemed to me shameful.  The truth is that my better nature
never sleeps for long.  Leave it alone and it wakens of its own accord.
Heaven help me! I am a sinful, worldly man, I know; but there is good at
the bottom of me.  It wants hauling up, but it's there.

This man had aroused it.  I now saw the sinfulness of taking another
passenger's place in a railway-carriage.

But I could not make the other man see it.  I felt that some service was
due from me to Justice, in compensation of the wrong I had done her a few
moments ago, and I argued most eloquently.

My rhetoric was, however, quite thrown away.  "Oh! it's only a
vice-consul," he said; "here's his name on the bag.  There's plenty of
room for him in with the guard."

It was no use my defending the sacred cause of Right before a man who
held sentiments like that; so, having lodged a protest against his
behaviour, and thus eased my conscience, I leant back and dozed the doze
of the just.

Five minutes before the train started, the rightful owners of the
carriage came up and crowded in.  They seemed surprised at finding only
five vacant seats available between seven of them, and commenced to
quarrel vigorously among themselves.

B. and I and the unjust man in the corner tried to calm them, but passion
ran too high at first for the voice of Reason to be heard.  Each
combination of five, possible among them, accused each remaining two of
endeavouring to obtain seats by fraud, and each one more than hinted that
the other six were liars.

What annoyed me was that they quarrelled in English.  They all had
languages of their own,--there were four Belgians, two Frenchmen, and a
German,--but no language was good enough for them to insult each other in
but English.

Finding that there seemed to be no chance of their ever agreeing among
themselves, they appealed to us.  We unhesitatingly decided in favour of
the five thinnest, who, thereupon, evidently regarding the matter as
finally settled, sat down, and told the other two to get out.

These two stout ones, however--the German and one of the Belgians--seemed
inclined to dispute the award, and called up the station-master.

The station-master did not wait to listen to what they had to say, but at
once began abusing them for being in the carriage at all.  He told them
they ought to be ashamed of themselves for forcing their way into a
compartment that was already more than full, and inconveniencing the
people already there.

He also used English to explain this to them, and they got out on the
platform and answered him back in English.

English seems to be the popular language for quarrelling in, among
foreigners.  I suppose they find it more expressive.

We all watched the group from the window.  We were amused and interested.
In the middle of the argument an early gendarme arrived on the scene.
The gendarme naturally supported the station-master.  One man in uniform
always supports another man in uniform, no matter what the row is about,
or who may be in the right--that does not trouble him.  It is a fixed
tenet of belief among uniform circles that a uniform can do no wrong.  If
burglars wore uniform, the police would be instructed to render them
every assistance in their power, and to take into custody any householder
attempting to interfere with them in the execution of their business.
The gendarme assisted the station-master to abuse the two stout
passengers, and he also abused them in English.  It was not good English
in any sense of the word.  The man would probably have been able to give
his feelings much greater variety and play in French or Flemish, but that
was not his object.  His ambition, like every other foreigner's, was to
become an accomplished English quarreller, and this was practice for him.

A Customs House clerk came out and joined in the babel.  He took the part
of the passengers, and abused the station-master and the gendarme, and
_he_ abused _them_ in English.

B. said he thought it very pleasant here, far from our native shores, in
the land of the stranger, to come across a little homely English row like
this.




SATURDAY, 24TH--CONTINUED


A Man of Family.--An Eccentric Train.--Outrage on an Englishman.--Alone
in Europe.--Difficulty of Making German Waiters Understand
Scandinavian.--Danger of Knowing Too Many Languages.--A Wearisome
Journey.--Cologne, Ahoy!

There was a very well-informed Belgian in the carriage, and he told us
something interesting about nearly every town through which we passed.  I
felt that if I could have kept awake, and have listened to that man, and
remembered what he said, and not mixed things up, I should have learnt a
good deal about the country between Ostend and Cologne.

He had relations in nearly every town, had this man.  I suppose there
have been, and are, families as large and as extensive as his; but I
never heard of any other family that made such a show.  They seemed to
have been planted out with great judgment, and were now all over the
country.  Every time I awoke, I caught some such scattered remark as:

"Bruges--you can see the belfry from this side--plays a polka by Haydn
every hour.  My aunt lives here."  "Ghent--Hotel de Ville, some say
finest specimen of Gothic architecture in Europe--where my mother lives.
You could see the house if that church wasn't there."  "Just passed
Alost--great hop centre.  My grandfather used to live there; he's dead
now."  "There's the Royal chateau--here, just on this side.  My sister is
married to a man who lives there--not in the palace, I don't mean, but in
Laeken."  "That's the dome of the Palais de Justice--they call Brussels
'Paris in little'--I like it better than Paris, myself--not so crowded.
I live in Brussels."  "Louvain--there's Van de Weyer's statue, the 1830
revolutionist.  My wife's mother lives in Louvain.  She wants us to come
and live there.  She says we are too far away from her at Brussels, but I
don't think so."  "Leige--see the citadel?  Got some cousins at
Leige--only second ones.  Most of my first ones live at Maestricht"; and
so on all the way to Cologne.

I do not believe we passed a single town or village that did not possess
one or more specimens of this man's relatives.  Our journey seemed, not
so much like a tour through Belgium and part of Northern Germany, as a
visit to the neighbourhood where this man's family resided.

I was careful to take a seat facing the engine at Ostend.  I prefer to
travel that way.  But when I awoke a little later on, I found myself
going backwards.

I naturally felt indignant.  I said:

"Who's put me over here?  I was over there, you know.  You've no right to
do that!"

They assured me, however, that nobody had shifted me, but that the train
had turned round at Ghent.

I was annoyed at this.  It seemed to me a mean trick for a train to start
off in one direction, and thus lure you into taking your seat (or
somebody else's seat, as the case might be) under the impression that you
were going to travel that way, and then, afterwards, turn round and go
the other way.  I felt very doubtful, in my own mind, as to whether the
train knew where it was going at all.

At Brussels we got out and had some more coffee and rolls.  I forget what
language I talked at Brussels, but nobody understood me.  When I next
awoke, after leaving Brussels, I found myself going forwards again.  The
engine had apparently changed its mind for the second time, and was
pulling the carriages the other way now.  I began to get thoroughly
alarmed.  This train was simply doing what it liked.  There was no
reliance to be placed upon it whatever.  The next thing it would do would
be to go sideways.  It seemed to me that I ought to get up and see into
this matter; but, while pondering the business, I fell asleep again.

I was very sleepy indeed when they routed us out at Herbesthal, to
examine our luggage for Germany.  I had a vague idea that we were
travelling in Turkey, and had been stopped by brigands.  When they told
me to open my bag, I said, "Never!" and remarked that I was an
Englishman, and that they had better be careful.  I also told them that
they could dismiss any idea of ransom from their minds at once, unless
they were prepared to take I.O.U.'s, as it was against the principles of
our family to pay cash for anything--certainly not for relatives.

They took no notice of my warning, and caught hold of my Gladstone.  I
resisted feebly, but was over-powered, and went to sleep again.

On awakening, I discovered myself in the buffet.  I have no recollection
of going there.  My instinct must have guided me there during my sleep.

I ordered my usual repast of coffee and rolls.  (I must have been full of
coffee and rolls by this time.)  I had got the idea into my head now that
I was in Norway, and so I ordered them in broken Scandinavian, a few
words of which I had picked up during a trip through the fiords last
summer.

Of course, the man did not understand; but I am accustomed to witnessing
the confusion of foreigners when addressed in their native tongue, and so
forgave him--especially as, the victuals being well within reach,
language was a matter of secondary importance.

I took two cups of coffee, as usual--one for B., and one for myself--and,
bringing them to the table, looked round for B.  I could not see him
anywhere.  What had become of him?  I had not seen him, that I could
recollect, for hours.  I did not know where I was, or what I was doing.
I had a hazy knowledge that B. and I had started off together--whether
yesterday or six months ago, I could not have said to save my life--with
the intention, if I was not mistaken, of going somewhere and seeing
something.  We were now somewhere abroad--somewhere in Norway was my
idea; though why I had fixed on Norway is a mystery to me to this
day--and I had lost him!

How on earth were we ever to find each other again?  A horrible picture
presented itself to my mind of our both wandering distractedly up and
down Europe, perhaps for years, vainly seeking each other.  The touching
story of Evangeline recurred to me with terrible vividness.

Something must be done, and that immediately.  Somehow or another I must
find B.  I roused myself, and summoned to my aid every word of
Scandinavian that I knew.

It was no good these people pretending that they did not understand their
own language, and putting me off that way.  They had got to understand it
this time.  This was no mere question of coffee and rolls; this was a
serious business.  I would make that waiter understand my Scandinavian,
if I had to hammer it into his head with his own coffee-pot!

I seized him by the arm, and, in Scandinavian that must have been quite
pathetic in its tragic fervour, I asked him if he had seen my friend--my
friend B.

The man only stared.

I grew desperate.  I shook him.  I said:

"My friend--big, great, tall, large--is he where?  Have you him to see
where?  Here?"

(I had to put it that way because Scandinavian grammar is not a strong
point with me, and my knowledge of the verbs is as yet limited to the
present tense of the infinitive mood.  Besides, this was no time to worry
about grace of style.)

A crowd gathered round us, attracted by the man's terrified expression.
I appealed to them generally.  I said:

"My friend B.--head, red--boots, yellow, brown, gold--coat, little
squares--nose, much, large!  Is he where?  Him to see--anybody--where?"

Not a soul moved a hand to help me.  There they stood and gaped!

I repeated it all over again louder, in case anybody on the outskirts of
the mob had not heard it; and I repeated it in an entirely new accent.  I
gave them every chance I could.

They chatted excitedly among themselves, and, then a bright idea seemed
to strike one of them, a little more intelligent-looking than the rest,
and he rushed outside and began running up and down, calling out
something very loudly, in which the word "Norwegian" kept on occurring.

He returned in a few seconds, evidently exceedingly pleased with himself,
accompanied by a kindly-looking old gentleman in a white hat.

Way was made in the crowd, and the old gentleman pressed forward.  When
he got near, he smiled at me, and then proceeded to address to me a
lengthy, but no doubt kindly meant, speech in Scandinavian.

Of course, it was all utterly unintelligible to me from beginning to end,
and my face clearly showed this.  I can grasp a word or two of
Scandinavian here and there, if pronounced slowly and distinctly; but
that is all.

The old gentleman regarded me with great surprise.  He said (in
Scandinavian, of course):

"You speak Norwegian?"

I replied, in the same tongue:

"A little, a very little--_very_."

He seemed not only disappointed, but indignant.  He explained the matter
to the crowd, and they all seemed indignant.

_Why_ everybody should be indignant with me I could not comprehend.
There are plenty of people who do not understand Scandinavian.  It was
absurd to be vexed with me because _I_ did not.  I do know a little, and
that is more than some people do.

I inquired of the old gentleman about B.  He did understand me.  I must
give him credit for that.  But beyond understanding me, he was of no more
use than the others; and why they had taken so much trouble to fetch him,
I could not imagine.

What would have happened if the difficulty had continued much longer (for
I was getting thoroughly wild with the lot of them) I cannot say.
Fortunately, at this moment I caught sight of B. himself, who had just
entered the room.

I could not have greeted him more heartily if I had wanted to borrow
money of him.

"Well, I _am_ glad to see you again!" I cried.  "Well, this _is_
pleasant!  I thought I had lost you!"

"Why, you are English!" cried out the old gentleman in the white hat, in
very good Saxon, on hearing me speak to B.

"Well, I know that," I replied, "and I'm proud of it.  Have you any
objection to my being English?"

"Not in the least," he answered, "if you'd only talk English instead of
Norwegian.  I'm English myself;" and he walked away, evidently much
puzzled.

B. said to me as we sat down:

"I'll tell you what's the matter with you, J.--you know too many
languages for this continent.  Your linguistic powers will be the ruin of
us if you don't hold them in a bit.  You don't know any Sanscrit or
Chaldean, do you?"

I replied that I did not.

"Any Hebrew or Chinese?"

"Not a word."

"Sure?"

"Not so much as a full stop in any of them."

"That's a blessing," said B., much relieved.  "You would be trying to
palm off one or other of them on some simple-minded peasant for German,
if you did!"

It is a wearisome journey, through the long, hot hours of the morning, to
Cologne.  The carriage is stifling.  Railway travellers, I have always
noticed, regard fresh air as poison.  They like to live on the refuse of
each other's breath, and close up every window and ventilator tight.  The
sun pours down through glass and blind and scorches our limbs.  Our heads
and our bodies ache.  The dust and soot drift in and settle on our
clothes, and grime our hands and face.  We all doze and wake up with a
start, and fall to sleep again upon each other.  I wake, and find my
neighbour with his head upon my shoulder.  It seems a shame to cast him
off; he looks so trustful.  But he is heavy.  I push him on to the man
the other side.  He is just as happy there.  We roll about; and when the
train jerks, we butt each other with our heads.  Things fall from the
rack upon us.  We look up surprised, and go to sleep again.  My bag
tumbles down upon the head of the unjust man in the corner.  (Is it
retribution?)  He starts up, begs my pardon, and sinks back into
oblivion.  I am too sleepy to pick up the bag.  It lies there on the
floor.  The unjust man uses it for a footstool.

We look out, through half-closed eyes, upon the parched, level, treeless
land; upon the little patchwork farms of corn and beetroot, oats and
fruit, growing undivided, side by side, each looking like a little garden
dropped down into the plain; upon the little dull stone houses.

A steeple appears far away upon the horizon.  (The first thing that we
ask of men is their faith: "What do you believe?"  The first thing that
they show us is their church: "_This_ we believe.")  Then a tall chimney
ranges itself alongside.  (First faith, then works.)  Then a confused
jumble of roofs, out of which, at last, stand forth individual houses,
factories, streets, and we draw up in a sleeping town.

People open the carriage door, and look in upon us.  They do not appear
to think much of us, and close the door again quickly, with a bang, and
we sleep once more.

As we rumble on, the country slowly wakes.  Rude V-shaped carts, drawn by
yoked oxen, and even sometimes by cows, wait patiently while we cross the
long, straight roads stretching bare for many a mile across the plain.
Peasants trudge along the fields to work.  Smoke rises from the villages
and farm-houses.  Passengers are waiting at the wayside stations.

Towards mid-day, on looking out, we see two tiny spires standing side by
side against the sky.  They seem to be twins, and grow taller as we
approach.  I describe them to B., and he says they are the steeples of
Cologne Cathedral; and we all begin to yawn and stretch, and to collect
our bags and coats and umbrellas.




HALF OF SATURDAY 24TH, AND SOME OF SUNDAY, 25TH


Difficulty of Keeping this Diary.--A Big Wash.--The German Bed.--Its
Goings On.--Manners and Customs of the German Army.--B.'s Besetting
Sin.--Cologne Cathedral.--Thoughts Without Words.--A Curious Custom.

This diary is getting mixed.  The truth is, I am not living as a man who
keeps a diary should live.  I ought, of course, to sit down in front of
this diary at eleven o'clock at night, and write down all that has
occurred to me during the day.  But at eleven o'clock at night, I am in
the middle of a long railway journey, or have just got up, or am just
going to bed for a couple of hours.  We go to bed at odd moments, when we
happen to come across a bed, and have a few minutes to spare.  We have
been to bed this afternoon, and are now having another breakfast; and I
am not quite sure whether it is yesterday or to-morrow, or what day it
is.

I shall not attempt to write up this diary in the orthodox manner,
therefore; but shall fix in a few lines whenever I have half-an-hour with
nothing better to do.

We washed ourselves in the Rhine at Cologne (we had not had a wash since
we had left our happy home in England).  We started with the idea of
washing ourselves at the hotel; but on seeing the basin and water and
towel provided, I decided not to waste my time playing with them.  As
well might Hercules have attempted to tidy up the Augean stables with a
squirt.

We appealed to the chambermaid.  We explained to her that we wanted to
wash--to clean ourselves--not to blow bubbles.  Could we not have bigger
basins and more water and more extensive towels?  The chambermaid (a
staid old lady of about fifty) did not think that anything better could
be done for us by the hotel fraternity of Cologne, and seemed to think
that the river was more what we wanted.

I fancied that the old soul was speaking sarcastically, but B. said "No;"
she was thinking of the baths alongside the river, and suggested that we
should go there.  I agreed.  It seemed to me that the river--the
Rhine--would, if anything could, meet the case.  There ought to be plenty
of water in it now, after the heavy spring rains.

When I saw it, I felt satisfied.  I said to B.:

"That's all right, old man; that's the sort of thing we need.  That is
just the sized river I feel I can get myself clean in this afternoon."

I have heard a good deal in praise of the Rhine, and I am glad to be able
to speak well of it myself.  I found it most refreshing.

I was, however, sorry that we had washed in it afterwards.  I have heard
from friends who have travelled since in Germany that we completely
spoiled that river for the rest of the season.  Not for business
purposes, I do not mean.  The barge traffic has been, comparatively
speaking, uninterfered with.  But the tourist trade has suffered
terribly.  Parties who usually go up the Rhine by steamer have, after
looking at the river, gone by train this year.  The boat agents have
tried to persuade them that the Rhine is always that colour: that it gets
like that owing to the dirt and refuse washed down into it during its
course among the mountains.

But the tourists have refused to accept this explanation.  They have
said:

"No.  Mountains will account for a good deal, we admit, but not for all
_that_.  We are acquainted with the ordinary condition of the Rhine, and
although muddy, and at times unpleasant, it is passable.  As it is this
summer, however, we would prefer not to travel upon it.  We will wait
until after next year's spring-floods."

We went to bed after our wash.  To the _blase_ English bed-goer,
accustomed all his life to the same old hackneyed style of bed night
after night, there is something very pleasantly piquant about the
experience of trying to sleep in a German bed.  He does not know it is a
bed at first.  He thinks that someone has been going round the room,
collecting all the sacks and cushions and antimacassars and such articles
that he has happened to find about, and has piled them up on a wooden
tray ready for moving.  He rings for the chambermaid, and explains to her
that she has shown him into the wrong room.  He wanted a bedroom.

She says: "This _is_ a bedroom."

He says: "Where's the bed?"

"There!" she says, pointing to the box on which the sacks and
antimacassars and cushions lie piled.

"That!" he cries.  "How am I going to sleep in that?"

The chambermaid does not know how he is going to sleep there, never
having seen a gentleman go to sleep anywhere, and not knowing how they
set about it; but suggests that he might try lying down flat, and
shutting his eyes.

"But it is not long enough," he says.

The chambermaid thinks he will be able to manage, if he tucks his legs
up.

He sees that he will not get anything better, and that he must put up
with it.

"Oh, very well!" he says.  "Look sharp and get it made, then."

She says: "It is made."

He turns and regards the girl sternly.  Is she taking advantage of his
being a lonely stranger, far from home and friends, to mock him?  He goes
over to what she calls the bed, and snatching off the top-most sack from
the pile and holding it up, says:

"Perhaps you'll tell me what this is, then?"

"That," says the girl, "that's the bed!"

He is somewhat nonplussed at the unexpected reply.

"Oh!" he says.  "Oh! the bed, is it?  I thought it was a pincushion!
Well, if it is the bed, then what is it doing out here, on the top of
everything else?  You think that because I'm only a man, I don't
understand a bed!"

"That's the proper place for it," responds the chambermaid.

"What! on top?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, then where are the clothes?"

"Underneath, sir."

"Look here, my good girl," he says; "you don't understand me, or I don't
understand you, one or the other.  When I go to sleep, I lie on a bed and
pull the clothes over me.  I don't want to lie on the clothes, and cover
myself with the bed.  This isn't a comic ballet, you know!"

The girl assures him that there is no mistake about the matter at all.
There is the bed, made according to German notions of how a bed should be
made.  He can make the best of it and try to go to sleep upon it, or he
can be sulky and go to sleep on the floor.

He is very much surprised.  It looks to him the sort of bed that a man
would make for himself on coming home late from a party.  But it is no
use arguing the matter with the girl.

"All right," he says; "bring me a pillow, and I'll risk it!"

The chambermaid explains that there are two pillows on the bed already,
indicating, as she does so, two flat cushions, each one a yard square,
placed one on top of the other at one end of the mixture.

"These!" exclaims the weary traveller, beginning to feel that he does not
want to go to bed at all.  "These are not pillows!  I want something to
put my head on; not a thing that comes down to the middle of my back!
Don't tell me that I've got to sleep on these things!"

But the girl does tell him so, and also implies that she has something
else to do than to stand there all day talking bed-gossip with him.

"Well, just show me how to start," he says, "which way you get into it,
and then I won't keep you any longer; I'll puzzle out the rest for
myself."

She explains the trick to him and leaves, and he undresses and crawls in.

The pillows give him a good deal of worry.  He does not know whether he
is meant to sit on them or merely to lean up against them.  In
experimenting upon this point, he bumps his head against the top board of
the bedstead.  At this, he says, "Oh!" and shoots himself down to the
bottom of the bed.  Here all his ten toes simultaneously come into sharp
contact with the board at the bottom.

Nothing irritates a man more than being rapped over the toes, especially
if he feels that he has done nothing to deserve it.  He says, "Oh, damn!"
this time, and spasmodically doubles up his legs, thus giving his knees a
violent blow against the board at the side of the bed.  (The German
bedstead, be it remembered, is built in the form of a shallow, open box,
and the victim is thus completely surrounded by solid pieces of wood with
sharp edges.  I do not know what species of wood it is that is employed.
It is extremely hard, and gives forth a curious musical sound when struck
sharply with a bone.)

After this he lies perfectly still for a while, wondering where he is
going to be hit next.  Finding that nothing happens, he begins to regain
confidence, and ventures to gently feel around with his left leg and take
stock of his position.

For clothes, he has only a very thin blanket and sheet, and beneath these
he feels decidedly chilly.  The bed is warm enough, so far as it goes,
but there is not enough of it.  He draws it up round his chin, and then
his feet begin to freeze.  He pushes it down over his feet, and then all
the top part of him shivers.

He tries to roll up into a ball, so as to get the whole of himself
underneath it, but does not succeed; there is always some of him left
outside in the cold.

He reflects that a "boneless wonder" or a "man serpent" would be
comfortable enough in this bed, and wishes that he had been brought up as
a contortionist.  If he could only tie his legs round his neck, and tuck
his head in under his arm, all would yet be well.

Never having been taught to do any really useful tricks such as these,
however, he has to be content to remain spread out, warming a bit of
himself at a time.

It is, perhaps, foolish of him, amid so many real troubles, to allow a
mere aesthetical consideration to worry him, but as he lies there on his
back, looking down at himself, the sight that he presents to himself
considerably annoys him.  The puffed-up bed, resting on the middle of
him, gives him the appearance of a man suffering from some monstrous
swelling, or else of some exceptionally well-developed frog that has been
turned up the wrong way and does not know how to get on to its legs
again.

Another vexation that he has to contend with is, that every time he moves
a limb or breathes extra hard, the bed (which is only of down) tumbles
off on to the floor.

You cannot lean out of a German bed to pick up anything off the floor,
owing to its box-like formation; so he has to scramble out after it, and
of course every time he does this he barks both his shins twice against
the sides of the bed.

When he has performed this feat for about the tenth time, he concludes
that it was madness for him, a mere raw amateur at the business, to think
that he could manage a complicated, tricky bed of this sort, that must
take even an experienced man all he knows to sleep in it; and gets out
and camps on the floor.

At least, that is what I did.  B. is accustomed to German beds, and
doubled himself up and went off to sleep without the slightest
difficulty.

We slept for two hours, and then got up and went back to the
railway-station, where we dined.  The railway refreshment-room in German
towns appears to be as much patronised by the inhabitants of the town as
by the travellers passing through.  It is regarded as an ordinary
restaurant, and used as such by the citizens.  We found the dining-room
at Cologne station crowded with Cologneists.

All classes of citizens were there, but especially soldiers.  There were
all sorts of soldiers--soldiers of rank, and soldiers of rank and file;
attached soldiers (very much attached, apparently) and soldiers
unattached; stout soldiers, thin soldiers; old soldiers, young soldiers.
Four very young soldiers sat opposite us, drinking beer.  I never saw
such young soldiers out by themselves before.  They each looked about
twelve years old, but may have been thirteen; and they each looked, also,
ready and willing to storm a battery, if the order were given to them to
do it.  There they sat, raising and lowering their huge mugs of beer,
discussing military matters, and rising every now and again to gravely
salute some officer as he passed, and to receive as gravely his grave
salute in return.

There seemed to be a deal of saluting to be gone through.  Officers kept
entering and passing through the room in an almost continual stream, and
every time one came in sight all the military drinkers and eaters rose
and saluted, and remained at the salute until the officer had passed.

One young soldier, who was trying to eat a plate of soup near us, I felt
quite sorry for.  Every time he got the spoon near his mouth an officer
invariably hove in view, and down would have to go the spoon, soup and
all, and up he would have to rise.  It never seemed to occur to the silly
fellow to get under the table and finish his dinner there.

We had half-an-hour to spare between dinner and the starting of our
train, and B. suggested that we should go into the cathedral.  That is
B.'s one weakness, churches.  I have the greatest difficulty in getting
him past a church-door.  We are walking along a street, arm in arm,
talking as rationally and even as virtuously as need be, when all at once
I find that B. has become silent and abstracted.

I know what it is; he has caught sight of a church.  I pretend not to
notice any change in him, and endeavour to hurry him on.  He lags more
and more behind, however, and at last stops altogether.

"Come, come," I say to him, encouragingly, "pull yourself together, and
be a man.  Don't think about it.  Put it behind you, and determine that
you _won't_ be conquered.  Come, we shall be round the corner in another
minute, where you won't be able to see it.  Take my hand, and let's run!"

He makes a few feeble steps forward with me, and then stops again.

"It's no good, old man," he says, with a sickly smile, so full of pathos
that it is impossible to find it in one's heart to feel anything but pity
for him.  "I can't help it.  I have given way to this sort of thing too
long.  It is too late to reform now.  You go on and get a drink
somewhere; I'll join you again in a few minutes.  Don't worry about me;
it's no good."

And back he goes with tottering steps, while I sadly pass on into the
nearest cafe, and, over a glass of absinthe or cognac, thank Providence
that I learnt to control my craving for churches in early youth, and so
am not now like this poor B.

In a little while he comes in, and sits down beside me.  There is a wild,
unhealthy excitement in his eye, and, under a defiant air of unnatural
gaiety, he attempts to hide his consciousness of guilt.

"It was a lovely altar-cloth," he whispers to me, with an enthusiasm that
only makes one sorrow for him the more, so utterly impossible does it
cause all hope of cure to seem.  "And they've got a coffin in the north
crypt that is simply a poem.  I never enjoyed a sarcophagus more in all
my life."

I do not say much at the time; it would be useless.  But after the day is
done, and we are standing beside our little beds, and all around is as
silent as one can expect it to be in an hotel where people seem to be
arriving all night long with heavy luggage, and to be all, more or less,
in trouble, I argue with him, and gently reprove him.  To avoid the
appearance of sermonising as much as possible, I put it on mere grounds
of expediency.

"How are we to find time," I say, "to go to all the places that we really
ought to go to--to all the cafes and theatres and music-halls and
beer-gardens and dancing-saloons that we want to visit--if you waste half
the precious day loafing about churches and cathedrals?"

He is deeply moved, and promises to swear off.  He vows, with tears in
his voice, that he will never enter a church-door again.  But next
morning, when the temptation comes, all his good resolutions are swept
away, and again he yields.  It is no good being angry with him, because
he evidently does really try; but there is something about the mere odour
of a church that he simply cannot withstand.

Not knowing, then, that this weakness of his for churches was so strong,
I made no objection to the proposed visit to Cologne Cathedral, and,
accordingly, towards it we wended our way.  B. has seen it before, and
knows all about it.  He tells me it was begun about the middle of the
thirteenth century, and was only completed ten years ago.  It seems to me
that there must have been gross delay on the part of the builder.  Why, a
plumber would be ashamed to take as long as that over a job!

B. also asserts that the two towers are the highest church towers in the
world.  I dispute this, and deprecate the towers generally.  B. warmly
defends them.  He says they are higher than any building in Europe,
except the Eiffel Tower.

"Oh, dear no!" I say, "there are many buildings higher than they in
Europe--to say nothing of Asia and America."

I have no authority for making this assertion.  As a matter of fact, I
know nothing whatever about the matter.  I merely say it to irritate B.
He appears to take a sort of personal interest in the building, and
enlarges upon its beauties and advantages with as much fervour as if he
were an auctioneer trying to sell the place.

He retorts that the towers are 512 feet high.

I say:

"Nonsense!  Somebody has imposed upon you, because they see you are a
foreigner."

He becomes quite angry at this, and says he can show me the figures in
the guide-book.

"The guide-book!" I reply, scornfully.  "You'll believe a newspaper
next!"

B. asks me, indignantly, what height I should say they are, then.  I
examine them critically for a few minutes, and then give it as my opinion
that they do not exceed 510 feet at the very outside.  B. seems annoyed
with me, and we enter the church in silence.

There is little to be said about a cathedral.  Except to the professional
sightseer, one is very much like another.  Their beauty to me lies, not
in the paintings and sculpture they give houseroom to, nor in the bones
and bric-a-brac piled up in their cellars, but in themselves--their
echoing vastness, their deep silence.

Above the little homes of men, above the noisy teeming streets, they rise
like some soft strain of perfect music, cleaving its way amid the jangle
of discordant notes.  Here, where the voices of the world sound faint;
here, where the city's glamour comes not in, it is good to rest for a
while--if only the pestering guides would leave one alone--and think.

There is much help in Silence.  From its touch we gain renewed life.
Silence is to the Soul what his Mother Earth was to Briareus.  From
contact with it we rise healed of our hurts and strengthened for the
fight.

Amid the babel of the schools we stand bewildered and affrighted.
Silence gives us peace and hope.  Silence teaches us no creed, only that
God's arms are around the universe.

How small and unimportant seem all our fretful troubles and ambitions
when we stand with them in our hand before the great calm face of
Silence!  We smile at them ourselves, and are ashamed.

Silence teaches us how little we are--how great we are.  In the world's
market-places we are tinkers, tailors, apothecaries, thieves--respectable
or otherwise, as the case may be--mere atoms of a mighty machine--mere
insects in a vast hive.

It is only in Silence that it comes home to us that we are something much
greater than this--that we are _men_, with all the universe and all
eternity before us.

It is in Silence we hear the voice of Truth.  The temples and the marts
of men echo all night and day to the clamour of lies and shams and
quackeries.  But in Silence falsehood cannot live.  You cannot float a
lie on Silence.  A lie has to be puffed aloft, and kept from falling by
men's breath.  Leave a lie on the bosom of Silence, and it sinks.  A
truth floats there fair and stately, like some stout ship upon a deep
ocean.  Silence buoys her up lovingly for all men to see.  Not until she
has grown worn-out and rotten, and is no longer a truth, will the waters
of Silence close over her.

Silence is the only real thing we can lay hold of in this world of
passing dreams.  Time is a shadow that will vanish with the twilight of
humanity; but Silence is a part of the eternal.  All things that are true
and lasting have been taught to men's hearts by Silence.

Among all nations, there should be vast temples raised where the people
might worship Silence and listen to it, for it is the voice of God.

These fair churches and cathedrals that men have reared around them
throughout the world, have been built as homes for mere creeds--this one
for Protestantism, that one for Romanism, another for Mahomedanism.  But
God's Silence dwells in all alike, only driven forth at times by the
tinkling of bells and the mumbling of prayers; and, in them, it is good
to sit awhile and have communion with her.

We strolled round, before we came out.  Just by the entrance to the choir
an official stopped me, and asked me if I wanted to go and see a lot of
fal-lal things he had got on show--relics and bones, and old masters, and
such-like Wardour-street rubbish.

I told him, "No"; and attempted to pass on, but he said:

"No, no!  You don't pay, you don't go in there," and shut the gate.

He said this sentence in English; and the precision and fluency with
which he delivered it rather suggested the idea that it was a phrase much
in request, and one that he had had a good deal of practice in.

It is very prevalent throughout Germany, this custom of not allowing you
to go in to see a thing unless you pay.




END OF SATURDAY, 24TH, AND BEGINNING OF SUNDAY, 25TH--CONTINUED


The Rhine!--How History is Written.--Complicated Villages.--How a
Peaceful Community Was Very Much Upset.--The German Railway Guard.--His
Passion for Tickets.--We Diffuse Comfort and Joy Wherever We Go,
Gladdening the Weary, and Bringing Smiles to Them that Weep.--"Tickets,
Please."--Hunting Experiences.--A Natural Mistake.--Free Acrobatic
Performance by the Guard.--The Railway Authorities' Little Joke.--Why We
Should Think of the Sorrows of Others.

We returned to the station just in time to secure comfortable seats, and
at 5.10 steamed out upon our fifteen hours' run to Munich.  From Bonn to
Mayence the line keeps by the side of the Rhine nearly the whole of the
way, and we had a splendid view of the river, with the old-world towns
and villages that cluster round its bank, the misty mountains that make
early twilight upon its swiftly rolling waves, the castled crags and
precipices that rise up sheer and majestic from its margin, the wooded
rocks that hang with threatening frown above its sombre depths, the
ruined towers and turrets that cap each point along its shores, the
pleasant isles that stud like gems its broad expanse of waters.

Few things in this world come up to expectation, especially those things
of which one has been led to expect much, and about which one has heard a
good deal.  With this philosophy running in my head, I was prepared to
find the Rhine a much over-rated river.

I was pleasantly disappointed.  The panorama which unfolded itself before
our eyes, as we sped along through the quiet twilight that was deepening
into starry night, was wonderfully beautiful, entrancing and expressive.

I do not intend to describe it to you.  To do justice to the theme, I
should have to be even a more brilliant and powerful writer than I am.
To attempt the subject, without doing it justice, would be a waste of
your time, sweet reader, and of mine--a still more important matter.

I confess it was not my original intention to let you off so easily.  I
started with the idea of giving you a rapid but glowing and eloquent
word-picture of the valley of the Rhine from Cologne to Mayence.  For
background, I thought I would sketch in the historical and legendary
events connected with the district, and against this, for a foreground, I
would draw, in vivid colours, the modern aspect of the scene, with
remarks and observations thereon.

Here are my rough notes, made for the purpose:--

Mems. for Chapter on Rhine: "Constantine the Great used to come here--so
did Agrippa.  (N.B.--Try and find out something about Agrippa.)  Caesar
had a good deal to do with the Rhine--also Nero's mother."

(To the reader.--The brevity of these memoranda renders their import, at
times, confusing.  For instance, this means that Caesar and Nero's mother
both had a good deal to do with the Rhine; not that Caesar had a good
deal to do with Nero's mother.  I explain this because I should be sorry
to convey any false impression concerning either the lady or Caesar.
Scandal is a thing abhorrent to my nature.)

Notes continued: "The Ubii did something on the right bank of the Rhine
at an early period, and afterwards were found on the other side.  (Expect
the Ubii were a tribe; but make sure of this, as they might be something
in the fossil line.)  Cologne was the cradle of German art.  Talk about
art and the old masters.  Treat them in a kindly and gentle spirit.  They
are dead now.  Saint Ursula was murdered at Cologne, with eleven thousand
virgin attendants.  There must have been quite a party of them.  Draw
powerful and pathetic imaginary picture of the slaughter.  (N.B.--Find
out who murdered them all.)  Say something about the Emperor Maximilian.
Call him 'the mighty Maximilian.'  Mention Charlemagne (a good deal
should be made out of Charlemagne) and the Franks.  (Find out all about
the Franks, and where they lived, and what has become of them.)  Sketch
the various contests between the Romans and the Goths.  (Read up 'Gibbon'
for this, unless you can get enough out of _Mangnall's Questions_.)  Give
picturesque account--with comments--of the battles between the citizens
of Cologne and their haughty archbishops.  (N.B.--Let them fight on a
bridge over the Rhine, unless it is distinctly stated somewhere that they
didn't.)  Bring in the Minne-singers, especially Walter von Vogelweid;
make him sing under a castle-wall somewhere, and let the girl die.  Talk
about Albert Durer.  Criticise his style.  Say it's flat.  (If possible,
find out if it _is_ flat.)  "The rat tower on the Rhine," near Bingen.
Describe the place and tell the whole story.  Don't spin it out too long,
because everybody knows it.  "The Brothers of Bornhofen," story connected
with the twin castles of Sterrenberg and Liebenstein, Conrad and
Heinrich--brothers--both love Hildegarde.  She was very beautiful.
Heinrich generously refuses to marry the beautiful Hildegarde, and goes
away to the Crusades, leaving her to his brother Conrad.  Conrad
considers over the matter for a year or two, and then _he_ decides that
he won't marry her either, but will leave her for his brother Heinrich,
and _he_ goes off to the Crusades, from whence he returns, a few years
later on, with a Grecian bride.  The beautiful H., muddled up between the
pair of them, and the victim of too much generosity, gets sulky (don't
blame her), and shuts herself up in a lonely part of the castle, and
won't see anybody for years.  Chivalrous Heinrich returns, and is wild
that his brother C. has not married the beautiful H.  It does not occur
to him to marry the girl even then.  The feverish yearning displayed by
each of these two brothers, that the other one should marry the beloved
Hildegarde, is very touching.  Heinrich draws his sword, and throws
himself upon his brother C. to kill him.  The beautiful Hildegarde,
however, throws herself between them and reconciliates them, and then,
convinced that neither of them means business, and naturally disgusted
with the whole affair, retires into a nunnery.  Conrad's Grecian bride
subsequently throws herself away on another man, upon which Conrad throws
himself on his brother H.'s breast, and they swear eternal friendship.
(Make it pathetic.  Pretend you have sat amid the ruins in the moonlight,
and give the scene--with ghosts.)  "Rolandseck," near Bonn.  Tell the
story of Roland and Hildegunde (see _Baedeker_, p. 66).  Don't make it
too long, because it is so much like the other.  Describe the funeral?
The "Watch Tower on the Rhine" below Audernach.  Query, isn't there a
song about this?  If so, put it in.  Coblentz and Ehrenbreitstein.  Great
fortresses.  Call them "the Frowning Sentinels of the State."  Make
reflections on the German army, also on war generally.  Chat about
Frederick the Great.  (Read Carlyle's history of him, and pick out the
interesting bits.)  The Drachenfels.  Quote Byron.  Moralise about ruined
castles generally, and describe the middle ages, with your views and
opinions on same."

There is much more of it, but that is sufficient to let you see the
scheme I had in my head.  I have not carried out my scheme, because, when
I came to reflect upon the matter, it seemed to me that the idea would
develop into something that would be more in the nature of a history of
Europe than a chapter in a tourist's diary, and I determined not to waste
my time upon it, until there arose a greater public demand for a new
History of Europe than there appears to exist at present.

"Besides," I argued to myself, "such a work would be just the very thing
with which to beguile the tedium of a long imprisonment.  At some future
time I may be glad of a labour of this magnitude to occupy a period of
involuntary inaction."

"This is the sort of thing," I said to myself, "to save up for Holloway
or Pentonville."

It would have been a very enjoyable ride altogether, that evening's spin
along the banks of the Rhine, if I had not been haunted at the time by
the idea that I should have to write an account of it next day in my
diary.  As it was, I enjoyed it as a man enjoys a dinner when he has got
to make a speech after it, or as a critic enjoys a play.

We passed such odd little villages every here and there.  Little places
so crowded up between the railway and the river that there was no room in
them for any streets.  All the houses were jumbled up together just
anyhow, and how any man who lived in the middle could get home without
climbing over half the other houses in the place I could not make out.
They were the sort of villages where a man's mother-in-law, coming to pay
him a visit, might wander around all day, hearing him, and even now and
then seeing him, yet never being able to get at him in consequence of not
knowing the way in.

A drunken man, living in one of these villages, could never hope to get
home.  He would have to sit down outside, and wait till his head was
clear.

We witnessed the opening scenes of a very amusing little comedy at one of
the towns where the train drew up.  The chief characters were played by
an active young goat, a small boy, an elderly man and a woman, parents of
the small boy and owners of the goat, and a dog.

First we heard a yell, and then, from out a cottage opposite the station,
bounded an innocent and happy goat, and gambolled around.  A long rope,
one end of which was fastened to his neck, trailed behind him.  After the
goat (in the double sense of the phrase) came a child.  The child tried
to catch the goat by means of the rope, caught itself in the rope
instead, and went down with a bump and a screech.  Whereupon a stout
woman, the boy's mother apparently, ran out from the cottage, and also
made for the goat.  The goat flew down the road, and the woman flew after
it.  At the first corner, the woman trod on the rope, and then _she_ went
down with a bump and a screech.  Then the goat turned and ran up the
street, and, as it passed the cottage, the father ran out and tried to
stop it.  He was an old man, but still seemed to have plenty of vigour in
him.  He evidently guessed how his wife and child had gone down, and he
endeavoured to avoid the rope and to skip over it when it came near him.
But the goat's movements were too erratic for him.  His turn came, and he
trod on the rope, and went down in the middle of the road, opposite his
own door, with a thud that shook us all up against each other as we stood
looking out of the carriage-window, and sat there and cursed the goat.
Then out ran a dog, barking furiously, and he went for the goat, and got
the end of the rope in his teeth and held on to it like grim death.  Away
went the goat, at his end of the rope, and, with him, the dog at the
other end.  Between them, they kept the rope about six inches above the
ground, and with it they remorselessly mowed down every living thing they
came across in that once peaceful village.  In the course of less than
half a minute we counted fourteen persons sitting down in the middle of
the road.  Eight of them were cursing the goat, four were cursing the
dog, and two of them were cursing the old man for keeping the goat, one
of these two, and the more violent one, being the man's own wife.

The train left at this juncture.  We entreated the railway officials to
let us stop and see the show out.  The play was becoming quite
interesting.  It was so full of movement.  But they said that we were
half-an-hour late as it was, and that they dared not.

We leaned out of the window, and watched for as long as we could; and
after the village was lost to view in the distance, we could still, by
listening carefully, hear the thuds, as one after another of the
inhabitants sat down and began to swear.

At about eleven o'clock we had some beer--you can generally obtain such
light refreshment as bottled beer and coffee and rolls from the guard on
a through long-distance train in Germany--took off our boots, and saying
"Good-night" to each other, made a great show of going to sleep.  But we
never succeeded in getting there.  They wanted to see one's ticket too
often for one to get fairly off.

Every few minutes, so it seemed to me, though in reality the intervals
may perhaps have been longer, a ghostly face would appear at the
carriage-window, and ask to see our tickets.

Whenever a German railway-guard feels lonesome, and does not know what
else to do with himself, he takes a walk round the train, and gets the
passengers to show him their tickets, after which he returns to his box
cheered and refreshed.  Some people rave about sunsets and mountains and
old masters; but to the German railway-guard the world can show nothing
more satisfying, more inspiring, than the sight of a railway-ticket.

Nearly all the German railway officials have this same craving for
tickets.  If only they get somebody to show them a railway-ticket, they
are happy.  It seemed a harmless weakness of theirs, and B. and I decided
that it would be only kind to humour them in it during our stay.

Accordingly, whenever we saw a German railway official standing about,
looking sad and weary, we went up to him and showed him our tickets.  The
sight was like a ray of sunshine to him; and all his care was immediately
forgotten.  If we had not a ticket with us at the time, we went and
bought one.  A mere single third to the next station would gladden him
sufficiently in most cases; but if the poor fellow appeared very
woe-begone, and as if he wanted more than ordinary cheering up, we got
him a second-class return.

For the purpose of our journey to Ober-Ammergau and back, we each carried
with us a folio containing some ten or twelve first-class tickets between
different towns, covering in all a distance of some thousand miles; and
one afternoon, at Munich, seeing a railway official, a cloak-room keeper,
who they told us had lately lost his aunt, and who looked exceptionally
dejected, I proposed to B. that we should take this man into a quiet
corner, and both of us show him all our tickets at once--the whole twenty
or twenty-four of them--and let him take them in his hand and look at
them for as long as he liked.  I wanted to comfort him.

B., however, advised against the suggestion.  He said that even if it did
not turn the man's head (and it was more than probable that it would), so
much jealousy would be created against him among the other railway people
throughout Germany, that his life would be made a misery to him.

So we bought and showed him a first-class return to the next station but
one; and it was quite pathetic to watch the poor fellow's face brighten
up at the sight, and to see the faint smile creep back to the lips from
which it had so long been absent.

But at times, one wishes that the German railway official would control
his passion for tickets--or, at least, keep it within due bounds.

Even the most kindly-hearted man grows tired of showing his ticket all
day and night long, and the middle of a wearisome journey is not the
proper time for a man to come to the carriage-window and clamour to see
your "billet."

You are weary and sleepy.  You do not know where your ticket is.  You are
not quite sure that you have got a ticket; or if you ever had one,
somebody has taken it away from you.  You have put it by very carefully,
thinking that it would not be wanted for hours, and have forgotten where.

There are eleven pockets in the suit you have on, and five more in the
overcoat on the rack.  Maybe, it is in one of those pockets.  If not, it
is possibly in one of the bags--somewhere, or in your pocket-book, if you
only knew where that was, or your purse.

You begin a search.  You stand up and shake yourself.  Then you have
another feel all over.  You look round in the course of the proceedings;
and the sight of the crowd of curious faces watching you, and of the man
in uniform waiting with his eye fixed severely upon you, convey to you,
in your then state of confusion, the momentary idea that this is a
police-court scene, and that if the ticket is found upon you, you will
probably get five years.

Upon this you vehemently protest your innocence.

"I tell you I haven't got it!" you exclaim;--"never seen the gentleman's
ticket.  You let me go!  I--"

Here the surprise of your fellow-passengers recalls you to yourself, and
you proceed on your exploration.  You overhaul the bags, turning
everything out on to the floor, muttering curses on the whole railway
system of Germany as you do so.  Then you feel in your boots.  You make
everybody near you stand up to see if they are sitting upon it, and you
go down on your knees and grovel for it under the seat.

"You didn't throw it out of the window with your sandwiches, did you?"
asks your friend.

"No!  Do you think I'm a fool?" you answer, irritably.  "What should I
want to do that for?"

On going systematically over yourself for about the twentieth time, you
discover it in your waistcoat pocket, and for the next half-hour you sit
and wonder how you came to miss it on the previous nineteen occasions.

Meanwhile, during this trying scene, the conduct of the guard has
certainly not tended to allay your anxiety and nervousness.  All the time
that you have been looking for your ticket, he has been doing silly
tricks on the step outside, imperilling his life by every means that
experience and ingenuity can suggest.

The train is going at the rate of thirty miles an hour, the express speed
in Germany, and a bridge comes in sight crossing over the line.  On
seeing this bridge, the guard, holding on by the window, leans his body
as far back as ever it will go.  You look at him, and then at the
rapidly-nearing bridge, and calculate that the arch will just take his
head off without injuring any other part of him whatever, and you wonder
whether the head will be jerked into the carriage or will fall outside.

When he is three inches off the bridge, he pulls himself up straight, and
the brickwork, as the train dashes through, kills a fly that was
trespassing on the upper part of his right ear.

Then, when the bridge is passed, and the train is skirting the very edge
of a precipice, so that a stone dropped just outside the window would
tumble straight down 300 feet, he suddenly lets go, and, balancing
himself on the foot-board without holding on to anything, commences to
dance a sort of Teutonic cellar-flap, and to warm his body by flinging
his arms about in the manner of cabmen on a cold day.

The first essential to comfortable railway travelling in Germany is to
make up your mind not to care a rap whether the guard gets killed in the
course of the journey or not.  Any tender feeling towards the guard makes
railway travelling in the Fatherland a simple torture.

At five a.m. (how fair and sweet and fresh the earth looks in the early
morning!  Those lazy people who lie in bed till eight or nine miss half
the beauty of the day, if they but knew it.  It is only we who rise early
that really enjoy Nature properly) I gave up trying to get to sleep, and
made my way to the dressing-room at the end of the car, and had a wash.

It is difficult to wash in these little places, because the cars shake
so; and when you have got both your hands and half your head in the
basin, and are unable to protect yourself, the sides of the room, and the
water-tap and the soap-dish, and other cowardly things, take a mean
advantage of your helplessness to punch you as hard as ever they can; and
when you back away from these, the door swings open and slaps you from
behind.

I succeeded, however, in getting myself fairly wet all over, even if I
did nothing else, and then I looked about for a towel.  Of course, there
was no towel.  That is the trick.  The idea of the railway authorities is
to lure the passenger, by providing him with soap and water and a basin,
into getting himself thoroughly soaked, and then to let it dawn upon him
that there is no towel.  That is their notion of fun!

I thought of the handkerchiefs in my bag, but to get to them I should
have to pass compartments containing ladies, and I was only in early
morning dress.

So I had to wipe myself with a newspaper which I happened to have in my
pocket, and a more unsatisfactory thing to dry oneself upon I cannot
conceive.

I woke up B. when I got back to the carriage, and persuaded him to go and
have a wash; and in listening to the distant sound of his remarks when he
likewise discovered that there was no towel, the recollection of my own
discomfiture passed gently away.

Ah! how true it is, as good people tell us, that in thinking of the
sorrows of others, we learn to forget our own!

For fifty miles before one reaches Munich, the land is flat, stale, and
apparently very unprofitable, and there is little to interest the
looker-out.  He sits straining his eyes towards the horizon, eagerly
longing for some sign of the city to come in sight.

It lies very low, however, and does all it can to escape observation; and
it is not until he is almost within its streets that he discovers it.




THE REST OF SUNDAY, THE 25TH


We Seek Breakfast.--I Air My German.--The Art of Gesture.--The
Intelligence of the Premiere Danseuse.--Performance of English Pantomime
in the Pyrenees.--Sad Result Therefrom.--The "German Conversation"
Book.--Its Narrow-minded View of Human Wants and Aspirations.--Sunday in
Munich.--Hans and Gretchen.--High Life v. Low Life.--"A Beer-Cellar."

At Munich we left our luggage at the station, and went in search of
breakfast.  Of course, at eight o'clock in the morning none of the big
cafes were open; but at length, beside some gardens, we found an
old-fashioned looking restaurant, from which came a pleasant odour of
coffee and hot onions; and walking through and seating ourselves at one
of the little tables, placed out under the trees, we took the bill of
fare in our hands, and summoned the waiter to our side.

I ordered the breakfast.  I thought it would be a good opportunity for me
to try my German.  I ordered coffee and rolls as a groundwork.  I got
over that part of my task very easily.  With the practice I had had
during the last two days, I could have ordered coffee and rolls for
forty.  Then I foraged round for luxuries, and ordered a green salad.  I
had some difficulty at first in convincing the man that it was not a
boiled cabbage that I wanted, but succeeded eventually in getting that
silly notion out of his head.

I still had a little German left, even after that.  So I ordered an
omelette also.

"Tell him a savoury one," said B., "or he will be bringing us something
full of hot jam and chocolate-creams.  You know their style."

"Oh, yes," I answered.  "Of course.  Yes.  Let me see.  What is the
German for savoury?"

"Savoury?" mused B.  "Oh! ah! hum!  Bothered if I know!  Confound the
thing--I can't think of it!"

I could not think of it either.  As a matter of fact, I never knew it.
We tried the man with French.  We said:

"_Une omelette aux fines herbes_."

As he did not appear to understand that, we gave it him in bad English.
We twisted and turned the unfortunate word "savoury" into sounds so
quaint, so sad, so unearthly, that you would have thought they might have
touched the heart of a savage.  This stoical Teuton, however, remained
unmoved.  Then we tried pantomime.

Pantomime is to language what marmalade, according to the label on the
pot, is to butter, "an excellent (occasional) substitute."  But its
powers as an interpreter of thought are limited.  At least, in real life
they are so.  As regards a ballet, it is difficult to say what is not
explainable by pantomime.  I have seen the bad man in a ballet convey to
the _premiere danseuse_ by a subtle movement of the left leg, together
with some slight assistance from the drum, the heartrending intelligence
that the lady she had been brought up to believe was her mother was in
reality only her aunt by marriage.  But then it must be borne in mind
that the _premiere danseuse_ is a lady whose quickness of perception is
altogether unique.  The _premiere danseuse_ knows precisely what a
gentleman means when he twirls round forty-seven times on one leg, and
then stands on his head.  The average foreigner would, in all
probability, completely misunderstand the man.

A friend of mine once, during a tour in the Pyrenees, tried to express
gratitude by means of pantomime.  He arrived late one evening at a little
mountain inn, where the people made him very welcome, and set before him
their best; and he, being hungry, appreciated their kindness, and ate a
most excellent supper.

Indeed, so excellent a meal did he make, and so kind and attentive were
his hosts to him, that, after supper, he felt he wanted to thank them,
and to convey to them some idea of how pleased and satisfied he was.

He could not explain himself in language.  He only knew enough Spanish to
just ask for what he wanted--and even to do that he had to be careful not
to want much.  He had not got as far as sentiment and emotion at that
time.  Accordingly he started to express himself in action.  He stood up
and pointed to the empty table where the supper had been, then opened his
mouth and pointed down his throat.  Then he patted that region of his
anatomy where, so scientific people tell us, supper goes to, and smiled.

He has a rather curious smile, has my friend.  He himself is under the
impression that there is something very winning in it, though, also, as
he admits, a touch of sadness.  They use it in his family for keeping the
children in order.

The people of the inn seemed rather astonished at his behaviour.  They
regarded him, with troubled looks, and then gathered together among
themselves and consulted in whispers.

"I evidently have not made myself sufficiently clear to these simple
peasants," said my friend to himself.  "I must put more vigour into this
show."

Accordingly he rubbed and patted that part of himself to which I have
previously alluded--and which, being a modest and properly brought-up
young man, nothing on earth shall induce me to mention more
explicitly--with greater energy than ever, and added another inch or two
of smile; and he also made various graceful movements indicative, as he
thought, of friendly feeling and contentment.

At length a ray of intelligence burst upon the faces of his hosts, and
they rushed to a cupboard and brought out a small black bottle.

"Ah! that's done it," thought my friend.  "Now they have grasped my
meaning.  And they are pleased that I am pleased, and are going to insist
on my drinking a final friendly bumper of wine with them, the good old
souls!"

They brought the bottle over, and poured out a wineglassful, and handed
it to him, making signs that he should drink it off quickly.

"Ah!" said my friend to himself, as he took the glass and raised it to
the light, and winked at it wickedly, "this is some rare old spirit
peculiar to the district--some old heirloom kept specially for the
favoured guest."

And he held the glass aloft and made a speech, in which he wished long
life and many grand-children to the old couple, and a handsome husband to
the daughter, and prosperity to the whole village.  They could not
understand him, he knew; but he thought there might be that in his tones
and gestures from which they would gather the sense of what he was
saying, and understand how kindly he felt towards them all.  When he had
finished, he put his hand upon his heart and smiled some more, and then
tossed the liquor off at a gulp.

Three seconds later he discovered that it was a stringent and trustworthy
emetic that he had swallowed.  His audience had mistaken his signs of
gratitude for efforts on his part to explain to them that he was
poisoned, or, at all events, was suffering from acute and agonising
indigestion, and had done what they could to comfort him.

The drug that they had given him was not one of those common, cheap
medicines that lose their effect before they have been in the system
half-an-hour.  He felt that it would be useless to begin another supper
then, even if he could get one, and so he went to bed a good deal
hungrier and a good deal less refreshed than when he arrived at the inn.

Gratitude is undoubtedly a thing that should not be attempted by the
amateur pantomimist.

"Savoury" is another.  B. and I very nearly did ourselves a serious
internal injury, trying to express it.  We slaved like cab-horses at
it--for about five minutes, and succeeded in conveying to the mind of the
waiter that we wanted to have a game at dominoes.

Then, like a beam of sunlight to a man lost in some dark, winding cave,
came to me the reflection that I had in my pocket a German conversation
book.

How stupid of me not to have thought of it before.  Here had we been
racking our brains and our bodies, trying to explain our wants to an
uneducated German, while, all the time, there lay to our hands a book
specially written and prepared to assist people out of the very
difficulty into which we had fallen--a book carefully compiled with the
express object of enabling English travellers who, like ourselves, only
spoke German in a dilettante fashion, to make their modest requirements
known throughout the Fatherland, and to get out of the country alive and
uninjured.

I hastily snatched the book from my pocket, and commenced to search for
dialogues dealing with the great food question.  There were none!

There were lengthy and passionate "Conversations with a laundress" about
articles that I blush to remember.  Some twenty pages of the volume were
devoted to silly dialogues between an extraordinarily patient shoemaker
and one of the most irritating and constitutionally dissatisfied
customers that an unfortunate shop-keeper could possibly be cursed with;
a customer who, after twaddling for about forty minutes, and trying on,
apparently, every pair of boots in the place, calmly walks out with:

"Ah! well, I shall not purchase anything to-day.  Good-morning!"

The shopkeeper's reply, by-the-by, is not given.  It probably took the
form of a boot-jack, accompanied by phrases deemed useless for the
purposes of the Christian tourist.

There was really something remarkable about the exhaustiveness of this
"conversation at the shoemaker's."  I should think the book must have
been written by someone who suffered from corns.  I could have gone to a
German shoemaker with this book and have talked the man's head off.

Then there were two pages of watery chatter "on meeting a friend in the
street"--"Good-morning, sir (or madam)."  "I wish you a merry Christmas."
"How is your mother?"  As if a man who hardly knew enough German to keep
body and soul together, would want to go about asking after the health of
a foreign person's mother.

There were also "conversations in the railway carriage," conversations
between travelling lunatics, apparently, and dialogues "during the
passage."  "How do you feel now?"  "Pretty well as yet; but I cannot say
how long it will last."  "Oh, what waves!  I now feel very unwell and
shall go below.  Ask for a basin for me."  Imagine a person who felt like
that wanting to know the German for it.

At the end of the book were German proverbs and "Idiomatic Phrases," by
which latter would appear to be meant in all languages, "phrases for the
use of idiots":--"A sparrow in the hand is better than a pigeon on the
roof."--"Time brings roses."--"The eagle does not catch flies."--"One
should not buy a cat in a sack,"--as if there were a large class of
consumers who habitually did purchase their cats in that way, thus
enabling unscrupulous dealers to palm off upon them an inferior cat, and
whom it was accordingly necessary to advise against the custom.

I skimmed through all this nonsense, but not a word could I discover
anywhere about a savoury omelette.  Under the head of "Eating and
Drinking," I found a short vocabulary; but it was mainly concerned with
"raspberries" and "figs" and "medlars" (whatever they may be; I never
heard of them myself), and "chestnuts," and such like things that a man
hardly ever wants, even when he is in his own country.  There was plenty
of oil and vinegar, and pepper and salt and mustard in the list, but
nothing to put them on.  I could have had a hard-boiled egg, or a slice
of ham; but I did not want a hard-boiled egg, or a slice of ham.  I
wanted a savoury omelette; and that was an article of diet that the
authors of this "Handy Little Guide," as they termed it in their preface,
had evidently never heard of.

Since my return home, I have, out of curiosity, obtained three or four
"English-German Dialogues" and "Conversation Books," intended to assist
the English traveller in his efforts to make himself understood by the
German people, and I have come to the conclusion that the work I took out
with me was the most sensible and practical of the lot.

Finding it utterly hopeless to explain ourselves to the waiter, we let
the thing go, and trusted to Providence; and in about ten minutes the man
brought us a steaming omelette, with about a pound of strawberry jam
inside, and powdered sugar all over the outside.  We put a deal of pepper
and salt on it to try and counteract the flavour of the sweets, but we
did not really enjoy it even then.

After breakfast we got a time-table, and looked out for a train to
Ober-Ammergau.  I found one which started at 3.10.  It seemed a very nice
train indeed; it did not stop anywhere.  The railway authorities
themselves were evidently very proud of it, and had printed particulars
of it in extra thick type.  We decided to patronise it.

To pass away the time, we strolled about the city.  Munich is a fine,
handsome, open town, full of noble streets and splendid buildings; but in
spite of this and of its hundred and seventy thousand inhabitants, an
atmosphere of quiet and provincialism hovers over it.  There is but
little traffic on ordinary occasions along its broad ways, and customers
in its well-stocked shops are few and far between.  This day being
Sunday, it was busier than usual, and its promenades were thronged with
citizens and country folk in holiday attire, among whom the Southern
peasants, wearing their quaint, centuries-old costume, stood out in
picturesque relief.  Fashion, in its world-wide crusade against variety
and its bitter contest with form and colour, has recoiled, defeated for
the present from the mountain fastnesses of Bavaria.  Still, as Sunday or
gala-day comes round, the broad-shouldered, sunburnt shepherd of the
Oberland dons his gay green-embroidered jacket over his snowy shirt,
fastens his short knee-breeches with a girdle round his waist, claps his
high, feather-crowned hat upon his waving curls, and with bare legs, shod
in mighty boots, strides over the hill-sides to his Gretchen's door.

She is waiting for him, you may be sure, ready dressed; and a very sweet,
old-world picture she makes, standing beneath the great overhanging
gables of the wooden chalet.  She, too, favours the national green; but,
as relief, there is no lack of bonny red ribbons, to flutter in the wind,
and, underneath the ornamented skirt, peeps out a bright-hued petticoat.
Around her ample breast she wears a dark tight-fitting bodice, laced down
the front.  (I think this garment is called a stomacher, but I am not
sure, as I have never liked to ask.)  Her square shoulders are covered
with the whitest of white linen.  Her sleeves are also white; and being
very full, and of some soft lawnlike material, suggest the idea of folded
wings.  Upon her flaxen hair is perched a saucy round green hat.  The
buckles of her dainty shoes, the big eyes in her pretty face, are all
four very bright.  One feels one would like much to change places for the
day with Hans.

Arm-in-arm, looking like some china, but exceedingly substantial china,
shepherd and shepherdess, they descend upon the town.  One rubs one's
eyes and stares after them as they pass.  They seem to have stepped from
the pictured pages of one of those old story-books that we learnt to
love, sitting beside the high brass guard that kept ourselves and the
nursery-fire from doing each other any serious injury, in the days when
the world was much bigger than it is now, and much more real and
interesting.

Munich and the country round about it make a great exchange of peoples
every Sunday.  In the morning, trainload after trainload of villagers and
mountaineers pour into the town, and trainload after trainload of good
and other citizens steam out to spend the day in wood and valley, and
upon lake and mountain-side.

We went into one or two of the beer-halls--not into the swell cafes,
crowded with tourists and Munich masherdom, but into the low-ceilinged,
smoke-grimed cellars where the life of the people is to be seen.

The ungenteel people in a country are so much more interesting than the
gentlefolks.  One lady or gentleman is painfully like every other lady or
gentleman.  There is so little individuality, so little character, among
the upper circles of the world.  They talk like each other, they think
and act like each other, they dress like each other, and look very much
like each other.  We gentlefolks only play at living.  We have our rules
and regulations for the game, which must not be infringed.  Our unwritten
guide-books direct us what to do and what to say at each turn of the
meaningless sport.

To those at the bottom of the social pyramid, however, who stand with
their feet upon the earth, Nature is not a curious phenomenon to be
looked down at and studied, but a living force to be obeyed.  They front
grim, naked Life, face to face, and wrestle with it through the darkness;
and, as did the angel that strove with Jacob, it leaves its stamp upon
them.

There is only one type of a gentleman.  There are five hundred types of
men and women.  That is why I always seek out and frequent the places
where the common people congregate, in preference to the haunts of
respectability.  I have to be continually explaining all this to my
friends, to account to them for what they call my love of low life.

With a mug of beer before me, and a pipe in my mouth, I could sit for
hours contentedly, and watch the life that ebbs and flows into and out of
these old ale-kitchens.

The brawny peasant lads bring in their lasses to treat them to the
beloved nectar of Munich, together with a huge onion.  How they enjoy
themselves!  What splendid jokes they have!  How they laugh and roar and
sing!  At one table sit four old fellows, playing cards.  How full of
character is each gnarled face.  One is eager, quick, vehement.  How his
eyes dance!  You can read his every thought upon his face.  You know when
he is going to dash down the king with a shout of triumph on the queen.
His neighbour looks calm, slow, and dogged, but wears a confident
expression.  The game proceeds, and you watch and wait for him to play
the winning cards that you feel sure he holds.  He must intend to win.
Victory is written in his face.  No! he loses.  A seven was the highest
card in his hand.  Everyone turns to him, surprised.  He laughs--A
difficult man to deal with, that, in other matters besides cards.  A man
whose thoughts lie a good deal below his skin.

Opposite, a cross-looking old woman clamours for sausages, gets them, and
seems crosser than ever.  She scowls round on everyone, with a malignant
expression that is quite terrifying.  A small dog comes and sits down in
front of her, and grins at her.  Still, with the same savage expression
of hatred towards all living things, she feeds him with sausage at the
end of a fork, regarding him all the while with an aspect of such
concentrated dislike, that one wonders it does not interfere with his
digestion.  In a corner, a stout old woman talks incessantly to a
solemn-looking man, who sits silent and drinks steadily.  It is evident
that he can stand her conversation just so long as he has a mug of beer
in front of him.  He has brought her in here to give her a treat.  He
will let her have her talk out while he drinks.  Heavens! how she does
talk!  She talks without movement, without expression; her voice never
varies, it flows on, and on, and on, like a great resistless river.  Four
young artisans come clamping along in their hob-nailed boots, and seating
themselves at one of the rude wooden tables, call for beer.  With their
arms round the waist of the utterly indifferent Fraulein, they shout and
laugh and sing.  Nearly all the young folks here are laughing--looking
forward to life.  All the old folks are talking, remembering it.

What grand pictures some of these old, seared faces round us would make,
if a man could only paint them--paint all that is in them, all the
tragedy--and comedy that the great playwright, Life, has written upon the
withered skins!  Joys and sorrows, sordid hopes and fears, child-like
strivings to be good, mean selfishness and grand unselfishness, have
helped to fashion these old wrinkled faces.  The curves of cunning and
kindliness lurk round these fading eyes.  The lines of greed hover about
these bloodless lips, that have so often been tight-pressed in patient
heroism.




SUNDAY, 25TH--CONTINUED


We Dine.--A Curious Dish.--"A Feeling of Sadness Comes O'er Me."--The
German Cigar.--The Handsomest Match in Europe.--"How Easy 'tis for
Friends to Drift Apart," especially in a place like Munich Railway
Station.--The Victim of Fate.--A Faithful Bradshaw.--Among the
Mountains.--Prince and Pauper.--A Modern Romance.--Arrival at
Oberau.--Wise and Foolish Pilgrims.--An Interesting Drive.--Ettal and its
Monastery.--We Reach the Goal of our Pilgrimage.

At one o'clock we turned into a restaurant for dinner.  The Germans
themselves always dine in the middle of the day, and a very substantial
meal they make of it.  At the hotels frequented by tourists _table
d'hote_ is, during the season, fixed for about six or seven, but this is
only done to meet the views of foreign customers.

I mention that we had dinner, not because I think that the information
will prove exciting to the reader, but because I wish to warn my
countrymen, travelling in Germany, against undue indulgence in Liptauer
cheese.

I am fond of cheese, and of trying new varieties of cheese; so that when
I looked down the cheese department of the bill of fare, and came across
"liptauer garnit," an article of diet I had never before heard of, I
determined to sample it.

It was not a tempting-looking cheese.  It was an unhealthy, sad-looking
cheese.  It looked like a cheese that had seen trouble.  In appearance it
resembled putty more than anything else.  It even tasted like putty--at
least, like I should imagine putty would taste.  To this hour I am not
positive that it was not putty.  The garnishing was even more remarkable
than the cheese.  All the way round the plate were piled articles that I
had never before seen at a dinner, and that I do not ever want to see
there again.  There was a little heap of split-peas, three or four
remarkably small potatoes--at least, I suppose they were potatoes; if
not, they were pea-nuts boiled soft,--some caraway-seeds, a very
young-looking fish, apparently of the stickleback breed, and some red
paint.  It was quite a little dinner all to itself.

What the red paint was for, I could not understand.  B. thought that it
was put there for suicidal purposes.  His idea was that the customer,
after eating all the other things in the plate, would wish he were dead,
and that the restaurant people, knowing this, had thoughtfully provided
him with red paint for one, so that he could poison himself off and get
out of his misery.

I thought, after swallowing the first mouthful, that I would not eat any
more of this cheese.  Then it occurred to me that it was a pity to waste
it after having ordered it, and, besides, I might get to like it before I
had finished.  The taste for most of the good things of this world has to
be acquired.  _I_ can remember the time when I did not like beer.

So I mixed up everything on the plate all together--made a sort of salad
of it, in fact--and ate it with a spoon.  A more disagreeable dish I have
never tasted since the days when I used to do Willie Evans's "dags," by
walking twice through a sewer, and was subsequently, on returning home,
promptly put to bed, and made to eat brimstone and treacle.

I felt very sad after dinner.  All the things I have done in my life that
I should not have done recurred to me with painful vividness.  (There
seemed to be a goodish number of them, too.)  I thought of all the
disappointments and reverses I had experienced during my career; of all
the injustice that I had suffered, and of all the unkind things that had
been said and done to me.  I thought of all the people I had known who
were now dead, and whom I should never see again, of all the girls that I
had loved, who were now married to other fellows, while I did not even
know their present addresses.  I pondered upon our earthly existence,
upon how hollow, false, and transient it is, and how full of sorrow.  I
mused upon the wickedness of the world and of everybody in it, and the
general cussedness of all things.

I thought how foolish it was for B. and myself to be wasting our time,
gadding about Europe in this silly way.  What earthly enjoyment was there
in travelling--being jolted about in stuffy trains, and overcharged at
uncomfortable hotels?

B. was cheerful and frivolously inclined at the beginning of our walk (we
were strolling down the Maximilian Strasse, after dinner); but as I
talked to him, I was glad to notice that he gradually grew more serious
and subdued.  He is not really bad, you know, only thoughtless.

B. bought some cigars and offered me one.  I did not want to smoke.
Smoking seemed to me, just then, a foolish waste of time and money.  As I
said to B.:

"In a few more years, perhaps before this very month is gone, we shall be
lying in the silent tomb, with the worms feeding on us.  Of what
advantage will it be to us then that we smoked these cigars to-day?"

B. said:

"Well, the advantage it will be to me now is, that if you have a cigar in
your mouth I shan't get quite so much of your chatty conversation.  Take
one, for my sake."

To humour him, I lit up.

I do not admire the German cigar.  B. says that when you consider they
only cost a penny, you cannot grumble.  But what I say is, that when you
consider they are dear at six a half-penny, you can grumble.  Well
boiled, they might serve for greens; but as smoking material they are not
worth the match with which you light them, especially not if the match be
a German one.  The German match is quite a high art work.  It has a
yellow head and a magenta or green stem, and can certainly lay claim to
being the handsomest match in Europe.

We smoked a good many penny cigars during our stay in Germany, and that
we were none the worse for doing so I consider as proof of our splendid
physique and constitution.  I think the German cigar test might, with
reason, be adopted by life insurance offices.--Question: "Are you at
present, and have you always been, of robust health?"  Answer: "I have
smoked a German cigar, and still live."  Life accepted.

Towards three o'clock we worked our way round to the station, and began
looking for our train.  We hunted all over the place, but could not find
it anywhere.  The central station at Munich is an enormous building, and
a perfect maze of passages and halls and corridors.  It is much easier to
lose oneself in it, than to find anything in it one may happen to want.
Together and separately B. and I lost ourselves and each other some
twenty-four times.  For about half an hour we seemed to be doing nothing
else but rushing up and down the station looking for each other, suddenly
finding each other, and saying, "Why, where the dickens have you been?  I
have been hunting for you everywhere.  Don't go away like that," and then
immediately losing each other again.

And what was so extraordinary about the matter was that every time, after
losing each other, we invariably met again--when we did meet--outside the
door of the third-class refreshment room.

We came at length to regard the door of the third-class refreshment room
as "home," and to feel a thrill of joy when, in the course of our weary
wanderings through far-off waiting-rooms and lost-luggage bureaus and
lamp depots, we saw its old familiar handle shining in the distance, and
knew that there, beside it, we should find our loved and lost one.

When any very long time elapsed without our coming across it, we would go
up to one of the officials, and ask to be directed to it.

"Please can you tell me," we would say, "the nearest way to the door of
the third-class refreshment room?"

When three o'clock came, and still we had not found the 3.10 train, we
became quite anxious about the poor thing, and made inquiries concerning
it.

"The 3.10 train to Ober-Ammergau," they said.  "Oh, we've not thought
about that yet."

"Haven't thought about it!" we exclaimed indignantly.  "Well, do for
heaven's sake wake up a bit.  It is 3.5 now!"

"Yes," they answered, "3.5 in the afternoon; the 3.10 is a night train.
Don't you see it's printed in thick type?  All the trains between six in
the evening and six in the morning are printed in fat figures, and the
day trains in thin.  You have got plenty of time.  Look around after
supper."

I do believe I am the most unfortunate man at a time-table that ever was
born.  I do not think it can be stupidity; for if it were mere stupidity,
I should occasionally, now and then when I was feeling well, not make a
mistake.  It must be fate.

If there is one train out of forty that goes on "Saturdays only" to some
place I want to get to, that is the train I select to travel by on a
Friday.  On Saturday morning I get up at six, swallow a hasty breakfast,
and rush off to catch a return train that goes on every day in the week
"except Saturdays."

I go to London, Brighton and South Coast Railway-stations and clamour for
South-Eastern trains.  On Bank Holidays I forget it is Bank Holiday, and
go and sit on draughty platforms for hours, waiting for trains that do
not run on Bank Holidays.

To add to my misfortunes, I am the miserable possessor of a demon
time-table that I cannot get rid of, a Bradshaw for August, 1887.
Regularly, on the first of each month, I buy and bring home with me a new
Bradshaw and a new A.B.C.  What becomes of them after the second of the
month, I do not know.  After the second of the month, I never see either
of them again.  What their fate is, I can only guess.  In their place is
left, to mislead me, this wretched old 1887 corpse.

For three years I have been trying to escape from it, but it will not
leave me.

I have thrown it out of the window, and it has fallen on people's heads,
and those people have picked it up and smoothed it out, and brought it
back to the house, and members of my family--"friends" they call
themselves--people of my own flesh and blood--have thanked them and taken
it in again!

I have kicked it into a dozen pieces, and kicked the pieces all the way
downstairs and out into the garden, and persons--persons, mind you, who
will not sew a button on the back of my shirt to save me from
madness--have collected the pieces and stitched them carefully together,
and made the book look as good as new, and put it back in my study!

It has acquired the secret of perpetual youth, has this time-table.
Other time-tables that I buy become dissipated-looking wrecks in about a
week.  This book looks as fresh and new and clean as it did on the day
when it first lured me into purchasing it.  There is nothing about its
appearance to suggest to the casual observer that it is not this month's
Bradshaw.  Its evident aim and object in life is to deceive people into
the idea that it is this month's Bradshaw.

It is undermining my moral character, this book is.  It is responsible
for at least ten per cent. of the bad language that I use every year.  It
leads me into drink and gambling.  I am continually finding myself with
some three or four hours to wait at dismal provincial railway stations.
I read all the advertisements on both platforms, and then I get wild and
reckless, and plunge into the railway hotel and play billiards with the
landlord for threes of Scotch.

I intend to have that Bradshaw put into my coffin with me when I am
buried, so that I can show it to the recording angel and explain matters.
I expect to obtain a discount of at least five-and-twenty per cent. off
my bill of crimes for that Bradshaw.

The 3.10 train in the morning was, of course, too late for us.  It would
not get us to Ober-Ammergau until about 9 a.m.  There was a train leaving
at 7.30 (I let B. find out this) by which we might reach the village some
time during the night, if only we could get a conveyance from Oberau, the
nearest railway-station.  Accordingly, we telegraphed to Cook's agent,
who was at Ober-Ammergau (we all of us sneer at Mr. Cook and Mr. Gaze,
and such-like gentlemen, who kindly conduct travellers that cannot
conduct themselves properly, when we are at home; but I notice most of us
appeal, on the quiet, to one or the other of them the moment we want to
move abroad), to try and send a carriage to meet us by that train; and
then went to an hotel, and turned into bed until it was time to start.

We had another grand railway-ride from Munich to Oberau.  We passed by
the beautiful lake of Starnberg just as the sun was setting and gilding
with gold the little villages and pleasant villas that lie around its
shores.  It was in the lake of Starnberg, near the lordly pleasure-house
that he had built for himself in that fair vale, that poor mad Ludwig,
the late King of Bavaria, drowned himself.  Poor King!  Fate gave him
everything calculated to make a man happy, excepting one thing, and that
was the power of being happy.  Fate has a mania for striking balances.  I
knew a little shoeblack once who used to follow his profession at the
corner of Westminster Bridge.  Fate gave him an average of sixpence a day
to live upon and provide himself with luxuries; but she also gave him a
power of enjoying that kept him jolly all day long.  He could buy as much
enjoyment for a penny as the average man could for a ten-pound
note--more, I almost think.  He did not know he was badly off, any more
than King Ludwig knew he was well off; and all day long he laughed and
played, and worked a little--not more than he could help--and ate and
drank, and gambled.  The last time I saw him was in St. Thomas's
Hospital, into which he had got himself owing to his fatal passion for
walking along outside the stone coping of Westminster Bridge.  He thought
it was "prime," being in the hospital, and told me that he was living
like a fighting-cock, and that he did not mean to go out sooner than he
could help.  I asked him if he were not in pain, and he said "Yes," when
he "thought about it."

Poor little chap! he only managed to live like a "fighting-cock" for
three days more.  Then he died, cheerful up to the last, so they told me,
like the plucky little English game-cock he was.  He could not have been
more than twelve years old when he crowed his last.  It had been a short
life for him, but a very merry one.

Now, if only this little beggar and poor old Ludwig could have gone into
partnership, and so have shared between them the shoeblack's power of
enjoying and the king's stock of enjoyments, what a good thing it would
have been for both of them--especially for King Ludwig.  He would never
have thought of drowning himself then--life would have been too
delightful.

But that would not have suited Fate.  She loves to laugh at men, and to
make of life a paradox.  To the one, she played ravishing strains, having
first taken the precaution to make him stone-deaf.  To the other, she
piped a few poor notes on a cracked tin-whistle, and he thought it was
music, and danced!

A few years later on, at the very same spot where King Ludwig threw back
to the gods their gift of life, a pair of somewhat foolish young lovers
ended their disappointments, and, finding they could not be wedded
together in life, wedded themselves together in death.  The story, duly
reported in the newspapers as an item of foreign intelligence, read more
like some old Rhine-legend than the record of a real occurrence in this
prosaic nineteenth century.

He was a German Count, if I remember rightly, and, like most German
Counts, had not much money; and her father, as fathers will when proposed
to by impecunious would-be sons-in-law, refused his consent.  The Count
then went abroad to try and make, or at all events improve, his fortune.
He went to America, and there he prospered.  In a year or two he came
back, tolerably rich--to find, however, that he was too late.  His lady,
persuaded of his death, had been urged into a marriage with a rich
somebody else.  In ordinary life, of course, the man would have contented
himself with continuing to make love to the lady, leaving the rich
somebody else to pay for her keep.  This young couple, however, a little
lighter headed, or a little deeper hearted than the most of us, whichever
it may have been, and angry at the mocking laughter with which the air
around them seemed filled, went down one stormy night together to the
lake, and sobered droll Fate for an instant by turning her grim comedy
into a somewhat grimmer tragedy.

Soon after losing sight of Starnberg's placid waters, we plunged into the
gloom of the mountains, and began a long, winding climb among their
hidden recesses.  At times, shrieking as if in terror, we passed some
ghostly hamlet, standing out white and silent in the moonlight against
the shadowy hills; and, now and then, a dark, still lake, or mountain
torrent whose foaming waters fell in a long white streak across the
blackness of the night.

We passed by Murnau in the valley of the Dragon, a little town which
possessed a Passion Play of its own in the olden times, and which, until
a few years ago, when the railway-line was pushed forward to
Partenkirchen, was the nearest station to Ober-Ammergau.  It was a
tolerably steep climb up the road from Murnau, over Mount Ettal, to
Ammergau--so steep, indeed, that one stout pilgrim not many years ago,
died from the exertion while walking up.  Sturdy-legged mountaineer and
pulpy citizen both had to clamber up side by side, for no horses could do
more than drag behind them the empty vehicle.

Every season, however, sees the European tourist more and more pampered,
and the difficulties and consequent pleasure and interest of his journey
more and more curtailed and spoilt.  In a few years' time, he will be
packed in cotton-wool in his own back-parlour, labelled for the place he
wants to go to, and unpacked and taken out when he gets there.  The
railway now carries him round Mount Ettal to Oberau, from which little
village a tolerably easy road, as mountain roadways go, of about four or
five English miles takes him up to the valley of the Ammer.

It was midnight when our train landed us at Oberau station; but the place
was far more busy and stirring than on ordinary occasions it is at
mid-day.  Crowds of tourists and pilgrims thronged the little hotel,
wondering, as also did the landlord, where they were all going to sleep;
and wondering still more, though this latter consideration evidently did
not trouble their host, how they were going to get up to Ober-Ammergau in
the morning in time for the play, which always begins at 8 a.m.

Some were engaging carriages at fabulous prices to call for them at five;
and others, who could not secure carriages, and who had determined to
walk, were instructing worried waiters to wake them at 2.30, and ordering
breakfast for a quarter-past three sharp.  (I had no idea there were such
times in the morning!)

We were fortunate enough to find our land-lord, a worthy farmer, waiting
for us with a tumble-down conveyance, in appearance something between a
circus-chariot and a bath-chair, drawn by a couple of powerful-looking
horses; and in this, after a spirited skirmish between our driver and a
mob of twenty or so tourists, who pretended to mistake the affair for an
omnibus, and who would have clambered into it and swamped it, we drove
away.

Higher and higher we climbed, and grander and grander towered the
frowning moon-bathed mountains round us, and chillier and chillier grew
the air.  For most of the way we crawled along, the horses tugging us
from side to side of the steep road; but, wherever our coachman could
vary the monotony of the pace by a stretch-gallop--as, for instance, down
the precipitous descents that occasionally followed upon some extra long
and toilsome ascent--he thoughtfully did so.  At such times the drive
became really quite exciting, and all our weariness was forgotten.

The steeper the descent, the faster, of course, we could go.  The rougher
the road, the more anxious the horses seemed to be to get over it
quickly.  During the gallop, B. and I enjoyed, in a condensed form, all
the advantages usually derived from crossing the Channel on a stormy day,
riding on a switchback railway, and being tossed in a blanket--a hard,
nobbly blanket, full of nasty corners and sharp edges.  I should never
have thought that so many different sensations could have been obtained
from one machine!

About half-way up we passed Ettal, at the entrance to the Valley of the
Ammer.  The great white temple, standing, surrounded by its little
village, high up amid the mountain solitudes, is a famous place of
pilgrimage among devout Catholics.  Many hundreds of years ago, one of
the early Bavarian kings built here a monastery as a shrine for a
miraculous image of the Virgin that had been sent down to him from Heaven
to help him when, in a foreign land, he had stood sore in need,
encompassed by his enemies.  Maybe the stout arms and hearts of his
Bavarian friends were of some service in the crisis also; but the living
helpers were forgotten.  The old church and monastery, which latter was a
sort of ancient Chelsea Hospital for decayed knights, was destroyed one
terrible night some hundred and fifty years ago by a flash of lightning;
but the wonder-working image was rescued unhurt, and may still be seen
and worshipped beneath the dome of the present much less imposing church
which has been reared upon the ruins of its ancestor.

The monastery, which was also rebuilt at the same time, now serves the
more useful purpose of a brewery.

From Ettal the road is comparatively level, and, jolting swiftly over it,
we soon reached Ober-Ammergau.  Lights were passing to and fro behind the
many windows of the square stone houses, and dark, strange-looking
figures were moving about the streets, busy with preparations for the
great business that would commence with the dawn.

We rattled noisily through the village, our driver roaring out "Good
Night!" to everyone he passed in a voice sufficient to wake up everybody
who might be sleeping within a mile, charged light-heartedly round
half-a-dozen corners, trotted down the centre path of somebody's front
garden, squeezed our way through a gate, and drew up at an open door,
through which the streaming light poured out upon two tall, comely
lasses, our host's daughters, who were standing waiting for us in the
porch.  They led us into a large, comfortably furnished room, where a
tempting supper of hot veal-chops (they seem to live on veal in Germany)
and white wine was standing ready.  Under ordinary circumstances I should
have been afraid that such a supper would cause me to be more eager for
change and movement during the ensuing six hours than for sleep; but I
felt that to-night it would take a dozen half-baked firebricks to keep me
awake five seconds after I had got my head on the pillow--or what they
call a pillow in Germany; and so, without hesitation, I made a very
satisfactory meal.

After supper our host escorted us to our bedroom, an airy apartment
adorned with various highly-coloured wood-carvings of a pious but
somewhat ghastly character, calculated, I should say, to exercise a
disturbing influence upon the night's rest of a nervous or sensitive
person.

"Mind that we are called at proper time in the morning," said B. to the
man.  "We don't want to wake up at four o'clock in the afternoon and find
that we have missed the play, after coming all this way to see it."

"Oh! that will be all right," answered the old fellow.  "You won't get
much chance of oversleeping yourself.  We shall all be up and about, and
the whole village stirring, before five; and besides, the band will be
playing at six just beneath the window here, and the cannon on the Kofel
goes off at--"

"Look here," I interrupted, "that won't do for me, you know.  Don't you
think that I am going to be woke up by mere riots outside the window, and
brass-band contests, and earthquakes, and explosions, and those sort of
things, because it can't be done that way.  Somebody's got to come into
this room and haul me out of bed, and sit down on the bed and see that I
don't get into it again, and that I don't go to sleep on the floor.  That
will be the way to get me up to-morrow morning.  Don't let's have any
nonsense about stirring villages and guns and German bands.  I know what
all that will end in, my going back to England without seeing the show.
I want to be roused in the morning, not lulled off to sleep again."

B. translated the essential portions of this speech to the man, and he
laughed and promised upon his sacred word of honour that he would come up
himself and have us both out; and as he was a stalwart and
determined-looking man, I felt satisfied, and wished him "Good-night,"
and made haste to get off my boots before I fell asleep.




TUESDAY, THE 27TH


A Pleasant Morning.--What can one Say about the Passion Play?--B.
Lectures.--Unreliable Description of Ober-Ammergau.--Exaggerated
Description of its Weather.--Possibly Untruthful Account of how the
Passion Play came to be Played.--A Good Face.--The Cultured Schoolboy and
his Ignorant Relations.

I am lying in bed, or, to speak more truthfully, I am sitting up on a
green satin, lace-covered pillow, writing these notes.  A green satin,
lace-covered bed is on the floor beside me.  It is about eleven o'clock
in the morning.  B. is sitting up in his bed a few feet off, smoking a
pipe.  We have just finished a light repast of--what do you think? you
will never guess--coffee and rolls.  We intend to put the week straight
by stopping in bed all day, at all events until the evening.  Two English
ladies occupy the bedroom next to ours.  They seem to have made up their
minds to also stay upstairs all day.  We can hear them walking about
their room, muttering.  They have been doing this for the last
three-quarters of an hour.  They seem troubled about something.

It is very pleasant here.  An overflow performance is being given in the
theatre to-day for the benefit of those people who could not gain
admittance yesterday, and, through the open windows, we can hear the
rhythmic chant of the chorus.  Mellowed by the distance, the wailing
cadence of the plaintive songs, mingled with the shrill Haydnistic
strains of the orchestra, falls with a mournful sweetness on our ears.

We ourselves saw the play yesterday, and we are now discussing it.  I am
explaining to B. the difficulty I experience in writing an account of it
for my diary.  I tell him that I really do not know what to say about it.

He smokes for a while in silence, and then, taking the pipe from his
lips, he says:

"Does it matter very much what you say about it?"

I find much relief in that thought.  It at once lifts from my shoulders
the oppressive feeling of responsibility that was weighing me down.
After all, what does it matter what I say?  What does it matter what any
of us says about anything?  Nobody takes much notice of it, luckily for
everybody.  This reflection must be of great comfort to editors and
critics.  A conscientious man who really felt that his words would carry
weight and influence with them would be almost afraid to speak at all.
It is the man who knows that it will not make an ounce of difference to
anyone what he says, that can grow eloquent and vehement and positive.
It will not make any difference to anybody or anything what I say about
the Ober-Ammergau Passion Play.  So I shall just say what I want to.

But what do I want to say?  What can I say that has not been said, and
said much better, already?  (An author must always pretend to think that
every other author writes better than he himself does.  He does not
really think so, you know, but it looks well to talk as though he did.)
What can I say that the reader does not know, or that, not knowing, he
cares to know?  It is easy enough to talk about nothing, like I have been
doing in this diary hitherto.  It is when one is confronted with the task
of writing about _some_thing, that one wishes one were a respectable
well-to-do sweep--a sweep with a comfortable business of his own, and a
pony--instead of an author.

B. says:

"Well, why not begin by describing Ober-Ammergau."

I say it has been described so often.

He says:

"So has the Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race and the Derby Day, but people
go on describing them all the same, and apparently find other people to
read their descriptions.  Say that the little village, clustered round
its mosque-domed church, nestles in the centre of a valley, surrounded by
great fir-robed hills, which stand, with the cross-crowned Kofel for
their chief, like stern, strong sentinels guarding its old-world peace
from the din and clamour of the outer world.  Describe how the square,
whitewashed houses are sheltered beneath great overhanging gables, and
are encircled by carved wooden balconies and verandahs, where, in the
cool of the evening, peasant wood-carver and peasant farmer sit to smoke
the long Bavarian pipe, and chat about the cattle and the Passion Play
and village politics; and how, in gaudy colours above the porch, are
painted glowing figures of saints and virgins and such-like good folk,
which the rains have sadly mutilated, so that a legless angel on one side
of the road looks dejectedly across at a headless Madonna on the other,
while at an exposed corner some unfortunate saint, more cruelly dealt
with by the weather than he ever was even by the heathen, has been
deprived of everything that he could call his own, with the exception of
half a head and a pair of extra-sized feet.

"Explain how all the houses are numbered according to the date they were
built, so that number sixteen comes next to number forty-seven, and there
is no number one because it has been pulled down.  Tell how
unsophisticated visitors, informed that their lodgings are at number
fifty-three, go wandering for days and days round fifty-two, under the
not unreasonable impression that their house must be next door, though,
as a matter of fact, it is half a mile off at the other end of the
village, and are discovered one sunny morning, sitting on the doorstep of
number eighteen, singing pathetic snatches of nursery rhymes, and trying
to plat their toes into door-mats, and are taken up and carried away
screaming, to end their lives in the madhouse at Munich.

"Talk about the weather.  People who have stayed here for any length of
time tell me that it rains at Ober-Ammergau three days out of every four,
the reason that it does not rain on the fourth day being that every
fourth day is set apart for a deluge.  They tell me, also, that while it
will be pouring with rain just in the village the sun will be shining
brightly all round about, and that the villagers, when the water begins
to come in through their roofs, snatch up their children and hurry off to
the nearest field, where they sit and wait until the storm is over."

"Do you believe them--the persons that you say tell you these tales?" I
ask.

"Personally I do not," he replies.  "I think people exaggerate to me
because I look young and innocent, but no doubt there is a ground-work of
truth in their statements.  I have myself left Ober-Ammergau under a
steady drenching rain, and found a cloudless sky the other side of the
Kofel.

"Then," he continues, "you can comment upon the hardihood of the Bavarian
peasant.  How he or she walks about bare-headed and bare-footed through
the fiercest showers, and seems to find the rain only pleasantly cooling.
How, during the performance of the Passion Play, they act and sing and
stand about upon the uncovered stage without taking the slightest notice
of the downpour of water that is soaking their robes and running from
their streaming hair, to make great pools upon the boards; and how the
audience, in the cheaper, unroofed portion of the theatre, sit with equal
stoicism, watching them, no one ever dreaming even of putting up an
umbrella--or, if he does dream of doing so, experiencing a very rude
awakening from the sticks of those behind."

B. stops to relight his pipe at this point, and I hear the two ladies in
the next room fidgeting about and muttering worse than ever.  It seems to
me they are listening at the door (our room and theirs are connected by a
door); I do wish that they would either get into bed again or else go
downstairs.  They worry me.

"And what shall I say after I have said all that?" I ask B. when at last
he has started his pipe again.

"Oh! well, after that," he replies, "you can give the history of the
Passion Play; how it came to be played."

"Oh, but so many people have done that already," I say again.

"So much the better for you," is his reply.  Having previously heard
precisely the same story from half a dozen other sources, the public will
be tempted to believe you when you repeat the account.  Tell them that
during the thirty year's war a terrible plague (as if half a dozen
different armies, marching up and down their country, fighting each other
about the Lord only knows what, and living on them while doing it, was
not plague enough) swept over Bavaria, devastating each town and hamlet.
Of all the highland villages, Ober-Ammergau by means of a strictly
enforced quarantine alone kept, for a while, the black foe at bay.  No
soul was allowed to leave the village; no living thing to enter it.

"But one dark night Caspar Schuchler, an inhabitant of Ober-Ammergau, who
had been working in the plague-stricken neighbouring village of
Eschenlohe, creeping low on his belly, passed the drowsy sentinels, and
gained his home, and saw what for many a day he had been hungering for--a
sight of his wife and bairns.  It was a selfish act to do, and he and his
fellow-villagers paid dearly for it.  Three days after he had entered his
house he and all his family lay dead, and the plague was raging through
the valley, and nothing seemed able to stay its course.

"When human means fail, we feel it is only fair to give Heaven a chance.
The good people who dwelt by the side of the Ammer vowed that, if the
plague left them, they would, every ten years, perform a Passion Play.
The celestial powers seem to have at once closed with this offer.  The
plague disappeared as if by magic, and every recurring tenth year since,
the Ober-Ammergauites have kept their promise and played their Passion
Play.  They act it to this day as a pious observance.  Before each
performance all the characters gather together on the stage around their
pastor, and, kneeling, pray for a blessing upon the work then about to
commence.  The profits that are made, after paying the performers a wage
that just compensates them for their loss of time--wood-carver Maier, who
plays the Christ, only receives about fifty pounds for the whole of the
thirty or so performances given during the season, to say nothing of the
winter's rehearsals--is put aside, part for the temporal benefit of the
community, and the rest for the benefit of the Church.  From burgomaster
down to shepherd lad, from the Mary and the Jesus down to the meanest
super, all work for the love of their religion, not for money.  Each one
feels that he is helping forward the cause of Christianity."

"And I could also speak," I add, "of grand old Daisenberger, the gentle,
simple old priest, 'the father of the valley,' who now lies in silence
among his children that he loved so well.  It was he, you know, that
shaped the rude burlesque of a coarser age into the impressive
reverential drama that we saw yesterday.  That is a portrait of him over
the bed.  What a plain, homely, good face it is!  How pleasant, how
helpful it is to come across a good face now and then!  I do not mean a
sainted face, suggestive of stained glass and marble tombs, but a rugged
human face that has had the grit, and rain, and sunshine of life rubbed
into it, and that has gained its expression, not by looking up with
longing at the stars, but by looking down with eyes full of laughter and
love at the human things around it."

"Yes," assented B.  "You can put in that if you like.  There is no harm
in it.  And then you can go on to speak of the play itself, and give your
impressions concerning it.  Never mind their being silly.  They will be
all the better for that.  Silly remarks are generally more interesting
than sensible ones."

"But what is the use of saying anything about it at all?" I urge.  "The
merest school-boy must know all about the Ober-Ammergau Passion Play by
this time."

"What has that to do with you?" answers B.  "You are not writing for
cultured school-boys.  You are writing for mere simple men and women.
They will be glad of a little information on the subject, and then when
the schoolboy comes home for his holiday they will be able, so far as
this topic, at all events, is concerned, to converse with him on his own
level and not appear stupid.

"Come," he says, kindly, trying to lead me on, "what did you think about
it?"

"Well," I reply, after musing for a while, "I think that a play of
eighteen acts and some forty scenes, which commences at eight o'clock in
the morning, and continues, with an interval of an hour and a half for
dinner, until six o'clock in the evening, is too long.  I think the piece
wants cutting.  About a third of it is impressive and moving, and what
the earnest student of the drama at home is for ever demanding that a
play should be--namely, elevating; but I consider that the other
two-thirds are tiresome."

"Quite so," answers B.  "But then we must remember that the performance
is not intended as an entertainment, but as a religious service.  To
criticise any part of it as uninteresting, is like saying that half the
Bible might very well have been omitted, and that the whole story could
have been told in a third of the space."




TUESDAY, THE 27TH--CONTINUED


We talk on.--An Argument.--The Story that Transformed the World.

"And now, as to the right or wrong of the performance as a whole.  Do you
see any objection to the play from a religious point of view?"

"No," I reply, "I do not; nor do I understand how anybody else, and least
of all a really believing Christian, can either.  To argue as some do,
that Christianity should be treated as a sacred mystery, is to argue
against the whole scheme of Christianity.  It was Christ himself that
rent the veil of the Temple, and brought religion down into the streets
and market-places of the world.  Christ was a common man.  He lived a
common life, among common men and women.  He died a common death.  His
own methods of teaching were what a Saturday reviewer, had he to deal
with the case, would undoubtedly term vulgar.  The roots of Christianity
are planted deep down in the very soil of life, amid all that is
commonplace, and mean, and petty, and everyday.  Its strength lies in its
simplicity, its homely humanness.  It has spread itself through the world
by speaking to the hearts, rather than to the heads of men.  If it is
still to live and grow, it must be helped along by such methods as these
peasant players of Ober-Ammergau employ, not by high-class essays and the
learned discussions of the cultured.

"The crowded audience that sat beside us in the theatre yesterday saw
Christ of Nazareth nearer than any book, however inspired, could bring
him to them; clearer than any words, however eloquent, could show him.
They saw the sorrow of his patient face.  They heard his deep tones
calling to them.  They saw him in the hour of his so-called triumph,
wending his way through the narrow streets of Jerusalem, the multitude
that thronged round him waving their branches of green palms and shouting
loud hosannas.

"What a poor scene of triumph!--a poor-clad, pale-faced man, mounted upon
the back of a shuffling, unwilling little grey donkey, passing slowly
through the byways of a city, busy upon other things.  Beside him, a
little band of worn, anxious men, clad in thread-bare
garments--fishermen, petty clerks, and the like; and, following, a noisy
rabble, shouting, as crowds in all lands and in all times shout, and as
dogs bark, they know not why--because others are shouting, or barking.
And that scene marks the highest triumph won while he lived on earth by
the village carpenter of Galilee, about whom the world has been fighting
and thinking and talking so hard for the last eighteen hundred years.

"They saw him, angry and indignant, driving out the desecrators from the
temple.  They saw the rabble, who a few brief moments before had followed
him, shouting 'Hosanna,' slinking away from him to shout with his foes.

"They saw the high priests in their robes of white, with the rabbis and
doctors, all the great and learned in the land, sitting late into the
night beneath the vaulted roof of the Sanhedrin's council-hall, plotting
his death.

"They saw him supping with his disciples in the house of Simon.  They saw
poor, loving Mary Magdalen wash his feet with costly ointment, that might
have been sold for three hundred pence, and the money given to the
poor--'and us.'  Judas was so thoughtful for the poor, so eager that
other people should sell all they had, and give the money to the
poor--'and us.'  Methinks that, even in this nineteenth century, one can
still hear from many a tub and platform the voice of Judas, complaining
of all waste, and pleading for the poor--'and us.'

"They were present at the parting of Mary and Jesus by Bethany, and it
will be many a day before the memory of that scene ceases to vibrate in
their hearts.  It is the scene that brings the humanness of the great
tragedy most closely home to us.  Jesus is going to face sorrow and death
at Jerusalem.  Mary's instinct tells her that this is so, and she pleads
to him to stay.

"Poor Mary!  To others he is the Christ, the Saviour of mankind, setting
forth upon his mighty mission to redeem the world.  To loving Mary
Mother, he is her son: the baby she has suckled at her breast, the little
one she has crooned to sleep upon her lap, whose little cheek has lain
against her heart, whose little feet have made sweet music through the
poor home at Bethany: he is her boy, her child; she would wrap her
mother's arms around him and hold him safe against all the world, against
even heaven itself.

"Never, in any human drama, have I witnessed a more moving scene than
this.  Never has the voice of any actress (and I have seen some of the
greatest, if any great ones are living) stirred my heart as did the voice
of Rosa Lang, the Burgomaster's daughter.  It was not the voice of one
woman, it was the voice of Motherdom, gathered together from all the
world over.

"Oliver Wendell Holmes, in _The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table_, I
think, confesses to having been bewitched at different times by two
women's voices, and adds that both these voices belonged to German women.
I am not surprised at either statement of the good doctor's.  I am sure
if a man did fall in love with a voice, he would find, on tracing it to
its source, that it was the voice of some homely-looking German woman.  I
have never heard such exquisite soul-drawing music in my life, as I have
more than once heard float from the lips of some sweet-faced German
Fraulein when she opened her mouth to speak.  The voice has been so pure,
so clear, so deep, so full of soft caressing tenderness, so strong to
comfort, so gentle to soothe, it has seemed like one of those harmonies
musicians tell us that they dream of, but can never chain to earth.

"As I sat in the theatre, listening to the wondrous tones of this
mountain peasant-woman, rising and falling like the murmur of a sea,
filling the vast sky-covered building with their yearning notes, stirring
like a great wind stirs AEolian strings, the thousands of trembling
hearts around her, it seemed to me that I was indeed listening to the
voice of the 'mother of the world,' of mother Nature herself.

"They saw him, as they had often seen him in pictures, sitting for the
last time with his disciples at supper.  But yesterday they saw him, not
a mute, moveless figure, posed in conventional, meaningless attitude, but
a living, loving man, sitting in fellowship with the dear friends that
against all the world had believed in him, and had followed his poor
fortunes, talking with them for the last sweet time, comforting them.

"They heard him bless the bread and wine that they themselves to this day
take in remembrance of him.

"They saw his agony in the Garden of Gethsemane, the human shrinking from
the cup of pain.  They saw the false friend, Judas, betray him with a
kiss.  (Alas! poor Judas!  He loved Jesus, in a way, like the rest did.
It was only his fear of poverty that made him betray his Master.  He was
so poor--he wanted the money so badly!  We cry out in horror against
Judas.  Let us pray rather that we are never tempted to do a shameful
action for a few pieces of silver.  The fear of poverty ever did, and
ever will, make scamps of men.  We would like to be faithful, and noble,
and just, only really times are so bad that we cannot afford it!  As
Becky Sharp says, it is so easy to be good and noble on five thousand a
year, so very hard to be it on the mere five.  If Judas had only been a
well-to-do man, he might have been Saint Judas this day, instead of
cursed Judas.  He was not bad.  He had only one failing--the failing that
makes the difference between a saint and a villain, all the world
over--he was a coward; he was afraid of being poor.)

"They saw him, pale and silent, dragged now before the priests of his own
countrymen, and now before the Roman Governor, while the voice of the
people--the people who had cried 'Hosanna' to him--shouted 'Crucify him!
crucify him!'  They saw him bleeding from the crown of thorns.  They saw
him, still followed by the barking mob, sink beneath the burden of his
cross.  They saw the woman wipe the bloody sweat from off his face.  They
saw the last, long, silent look between the mother and the son, as,
journeying upward to his death, he passed her in the narrow way through
which he once had ridden in brief-lived triumph.  They heard her low sob
as she turned away, leaning on Mary Magdalen.  They saw him nailed upon
the cross between the thieves.  They saw the blood start from his side.
They heard his last cry to his God.  They saw him rise victorious over
death.

"Few believing Christians among the vast audience but must have passed
out from that strange playhouse with their belief and love strengthened.
The God of the Christian, for his sake, became a man, and lived and
suffered and died as a man; and, as a man, living, suffering, dying among
other men, he had that day seen him.

"The man of powerful imagination needs no aid from mimicry, however
excellent, however reverent, to unroll before him in its simple grandeur
the great tragedy on which the curtain fell at Calvary some eighteen and
a half centuries ago.

"A cultivated mind needs no story of human suffering to win or hold it to
a faith.

"But the imaginative and cultured are few and far between, and the
peasants of Ober-Ammergau can plead, as their Master himself once
pleaded, that they seek not to help the learned but the lowly.

"The unbeliever, also, passes out into the village street full of food
for thought.  The rude sermon preached in this hillside temple has shown
to him, clearer than he could have seen before, the secret wherein lies
the strength of Christianity; the reason why, of all the faiths that
Nature has taught to her children to help them in their need, to satisfy
the hunger of their souls, this faith, born by the Sea of Galilee, has
spread the farthest over the world, and struck its note the deepest into
human life.  Not by his doctrines, not even by his promises, has Christ
laid hold upon the hearts of men, but by the story of his life."




TUESDAY, THE 27TH--CONTINUED


We Discuss the Performance.--A Marvellous Piece of Workmanship.--The Adam
Family.--Some Living Groups.--The Chief Performers.--A Good Man, but a
Bad Judas.--Where the Histrionic Artist Grows Wild.--An Alarm!

"And what do you think of the performance _as_ a performance?" asks B.

"Oh, as to that," I reply, "I think what everyone who has seen the play
must think, that it is a marvellous piece of workmanship.

"Experienced professional stage-managers, with all the tricks and methods
of the theatre at their fingers' ends, find it impossible, out of a body
of men and women born and bred in the atmosphere of the playhouse, to
construct a crowd that looks like anything else except a nervous group of
broken-down paupers waiting for soup.

"At Ober-Ammergau a few village priests and representative householders,
who have probably never, any one of them, been inside the walls of a
theatre in their lives, dealing with peasants who have walked straight
upon the stage from their carving benches and milking-stools, produce
swaying multitudes and clamouring mobs and dignified assemblages, so
natural and truthful, so realistic of the originals they represent, that
you feel you want to leap upon the stage and strangle them.

"It shows that earnestness and effort can very easily overtake and pass
mere training and technical skill.  The object of the Ober-Ammergau
'super' is, not to get outside and have a drink, but to help forward the
success of the drama.

"The groupings, both in the scenes of the play itself and in the various
tableaux that precede each act, are such as I doubt if any artist could
improve upon.  The tableau showing the life of Adam and Eve after their
expulsion from Eden makes a beautiful picture.  Father Adam, stalwart and
sunbrowned, clad in sheepskins, rests for a moment from his delving, to
wipe the sweat from his brow.  Eve, still looking fair and happy--though
I suppose she ought not to,--sits spinning and watching the children
playing at 'helping father.'  The chorus from each side of the stage
explained to us that this represented a scene of woe, the result of sin;
but it seemed to me that the Adam family were very contented, and I found
myself wondering, in my common, earthly way, whether, with a little
trouble to draw them closer together, and some honest work to keep them
from getting into mischief, Adam and Eve were not almost better off than
they would have been mooning about Paradise with nothing to do but talk.

"In the tableau representing the return of the spies from Canaan, some
four or five hundred men, women and children are most effectively massed.
The feature of the foreground is the sample bunch of grapes, borne on the
shoulders of two men, which the spies have brought back with them from
the promised land.  The sight of this bunch of grapes, we are told,
astonished the children of Israel.  I can quite understand its doing so.
The picture of it used to astonish me, too, when _I_ was a child.

"The scene of Christ's entry into Jerusalem surrounded by the welcoming
multitude, is a wonderful reproduction of life and movement, and so also
is the scene, towards the end, showing his last journey up to Calvary.
All Jerusalem seems to have turned out to see him pass and to follow him,
the many laughing, the few sad.  The people fill the narrow streets to
overflowing, and press round the spears of the Roman Guard.

"They throng the steps and balconies of every house, they strain to catch
a sight of Christ above each other's heads.  They leap up on each other's
backs to gain a better vantage-ground from which to hurl their jeers at
him.  They jostle irreverently against their priests.  Each individual
man, woman, and child on the stage acts, and acts in perfect harmony with
all the rest.

"Of the chief members of the cast--Maier, the gentle and yet kingly
Christ; Burgomaster Lang, the stern, revengeful High Priest; his daughter
Rosa, the sweet-faced, sweet-voiced Virgin; Rendl, the dignified,
statesman-like Pilate; Peter Rendl, the beloved John, with the purest and
most beautiful face I have ever seen upon a man; old Peter Hett, the
rugged, loving, weak friend, Peter; Rutz, the leader of the chorus (no
sinecure, his post); and Amalie Deschler, the Magdalen--it would be
difficult to speak in terms of too high praise.  Themselves mere
peasants--There are those two women again, spying round our door; I am
sure of it!" I exclaim, breaking off, and listening to the sounds that
come from the next room.  "I wish they would go downstairs; I am
beginning to get quite nervous."

"Oh, I don't think we need worry," answers B.  "They are quite old
ladies, both of them.  I met them on the stairs yesterday.  I am sure
they look harmless enough."

"Well, I don't know," I reply.  "We are all by ourselves, you know.
Nearly everyone in the village is at the theatre, I wish we had got a
dog."

B. reassures me, however, and I continue:

"Themselves mere peasants," I repeat, "they represent some of the
greatest figures in the world's history with as simple a dignity and as
grand a bearing as could ever have been expected from the originals
themselves.  There must be a natural inborn nobility in the character of
these highlanders.  They could never assume or act that manner _au grand
seigneur_ with which they imbue their parts.

"The only character poorly played was that of Judas.  The part of Judas
is really _the_ part of the piece, so far as acting is concerned; but the
exemplary householder who essayed it seemed to have no knowledge or
experience of the ways and methods of bad men.  There seemed to be no
side of his character sufficiently in sympathy with wickedness to enable
him to understand and portray it.  His amateur attempts at scoundrelism
quite irritated me.  It sounds conceited to say so, but I am convinced I
could have given a much more truthful picture of the blackguard myself.

"'Dear, dear me,' I kept on saying under my breath, 'he is doing it all
wrong.  A downright unmitigated villain would never go on like that; he
would do so and so, he would look like this, and speak like that, and act
like the other.  I know he would.  My instinct tells me so.'

"This actor was evidently not acquainted with even the rudiments of
knavery.  I wanted to get up and instruct him in them.  I felt that there
were little subtleties of rascaldom, little touches of criminality, that
I could have put that man up to, which would have transformed his Judas
from woodenness into breathing life.  As it was, with no one in the
village apparently who was worth his salt as a felon to teach him, his
performance was unconvincing, and Judas became a figure to laugh rather
than to shudder at.

"With that exception, the whole company, from Maier down to the donkey,
seemed to be fitted to their places like notes into a master's melody.
It would appear as though, on the banks of the Ammer, the histrionic
artist grew wild."

"They are real actors, all of them," murmurs B. enthusiastically, "the
whole village full; and they all live happily together in one small
valley, and never try to kill each other.  It is marvellous!"

At this point, we hear a sharp knock at the door that separates the
before-mentioned ladies' room from our own.  We both start and turn pale,
and then look at each other.  B. is the first to recover his presence of
mind.  Eliminating, by a strong effort, all traces of nervousness from
his voice, he calls out in a tone of wonderful coolness:

"Yes, what is it?"

"Are you in bed?" comes a voice from the other side of the door.

"Yes," answers B.  "Why?"

"Oh!  Sorry to disturb you, but we shall be so glad when you get up.  We
can't go downstairs without coming through your room.  This is the only
door.  We have been waiting here for two hours, and our train goes at
three."

Great Scott!  So that is why the poor old souls have been hanging round
the door, terrifying us out of our lives.

"All right, we'll be out in five minutes.  So sorry.  Why didn't you call
out before?"




FRIDAY, 30TH, OR SATURDAY, I AM NOT SURE WHICH


Troubles of a Tourist Agent.--His Views on Tourists.--The English Woman
Abroad.--And at Home.--The Ugliest Cathedral in Europe.--Old Masters and
New.--Victual-and-Drink-Scapes.--The German Band.--A "Beer Garden."--Not
the Women to Turn a Man's Head.--Difficulty of Dining to Music.--Why one
should Keep one's Mug Shut.

I think myself it is Saturday.  B. says it is only Friday; but I am
positive I have had three cold baths since we left Ober-Ammergau, which
we did on Wednesday morning.  If it is only Friday, then I have had two
morning baths in one day.  Anyhow, we shall know to-morrow by the shops
being open or shut.

We travelled from Oberau with a tourist agent, and he told us all his
troubles.  It seems that a tourist agent is an ordinary human man, and
has feelings just like we have.  This had never occurred to me before.  I
told him so.

"No," he replied, "it never does occur to you tourists.  You treat us as
if we were mere Providence, or even the Government itself.  If all goes
well, you say, what is the good of us, contemptuously; and if things go
wrong, you say, what is the good of us, indignantly.  I work sixteen
hours a day to fix things comfortably for you, and you cannot even look
satisfied; while if a train is late, or a hotel proprietor overcharges,
you come and bully _me_ about it.  If I see after you, you mutter that I
am officious; and if I leave you alone, you grumble that I am neglectful.
You swoop down in your hundreds upon a tiny village like Ober-Ammergau
without ever letting us know even that you are coming, and then threaten
to write to the _Times_ because there is not a suite of apartments and a
hot dinner waiting ready for each of you.

"You want the best lodgings in the place, and then, when at a tremendous
cost of trouble, they have been obtained for you, you object to pay the
price asked for them.  You all try and palm yourselves off for dukes and
duchesses, travelling in disguise.  You have none of you ever heard of a
second-class railway carriage--didn't know that such things were made.
You want a first-class Pullman car reserved for each two of you.  Some of
you have seen an omnibus in the distance, and have wondered what it was
used for.  To suggest that you should travel in such a plebeian
conveyance, is to give you a shock that takes you two days to recover
from.  You expect a private carriage, with a footman in livery, to take
you through the mountains.  You, all of you, must have the most expensive
places in the theatre.  The eight-mark and six-mark places are every bit
as good as the ten-mark seats, of which there are only a very limited
number; but you are grossly insulted if it is hinted that you should sit
in anything but the dearest chairs.  If the villagers would only be
sensible and charge you ten marks for the eight-mark places you would be
happy; but they won't."

I must candidly confess that the English-speaking people one meets with
on the Continent are, taken as a whole, a most disagreeable contingent.
One hardly ever hears the English language spoken on the Continent,
without hearing grumbling and sneering.

The women are the most objectionable.  Foreigners undoubtedly see the
very poorest specimens of the female kind we Anglo-Saxons have to show.
The average female English or American tourist is rude and
self-assertive, while, at the same time, ridiculously helpless and
awkward.  She is intensely selfish, and utterly inconsiderate of others;
everlastingly complaining, and, in herself, drearily uninteresting.  We
travelled down in the omnibus from Ober-Ammergau with three perfect
specimens of the species, accompanied by the usual miserable-looking man,
who has had all the life talked out of him.  They were grumbling the
whole of the way at having been put to ride in an omnibus.  It seemed
that they had never been so insulted in their lives before, and they took
care to let everybody in the vehicle know that they had paid for
first-class, and that at home they kept their own carriage.  They were
also very indignant because the people at the house where they had lodged
had offered to shake hands with them at parting.  They did not come to
Ober-Ammergau to be treated on terms of familiarity by German peasants,
they said.

There are many women in the world who are in every way much better than
angels.  They are gentle and gracious, and generous and kind, and
unselfish and good, in spite of temptations and trials to which mere
angels are never subjected.  And there are also many women in the world
who, under the clothes, and not unfrequently under the title of a lady,
wear the heart of an underbred snob.  Having no natural dignity, they
think to supply its place with arrogance.  They mistake noisy bounce for
self-possession, and supercilious rudeness as the sign of superiority.
They encourage themselves in sleepy stupidity under the impression that
they are acquiring aristocratic "repose."  They would appear to have
studied "attitude" from the pages of the _London Journal_, coquetry from
barmaids--the commoner class of barmaids, I mean--wit from three-act
farces, and manners from the servants'-hall.  To be gushingly fawning to
those above them, and vulgarly insolent to everyone they consider below
them, is their idea of the way to hold and improve their position,
whatever it may be, in society; and to be brutally indifferent to the
rights and feelings of everybody else in the world is, in their opinion,
the hall-mark of gentle birth.

They are the women you see at private views, pushing themselves in front
of everybody else, standing before the picture so that no one can get
near it, and shouting out their silly opinions, which they evidently
imagine to be brilliantly satirical remarks, in strident tones: the women
who, in the stalls of the theatre, talk loudly all through the
performance; and who, having arrived in the middle of the first act, and
made as much disturbance as they know how, before settling down in their
seats, ostentatiously get up and walk out before the piece is finished:
the women who, at dinner-party and "At Home"--that cheapest and most
deadly uninteresting of all deadly uninteresting social functions--(You
know the receipt for a fashionable "At Home," don't you?  Take five
hundred people, two-thirds of whom do not know each other, and the other
third of whom cordially dislike each other, pack them, on a hot day, into
a room capable of accommodating forty, leave them there to bore one
another to death for a couple of hours with drawing-room philosophy and
second-hand scandal; then give them a cup of weak tea, and a piece of
crumbly cake, without any plate to eat it on; or, if it is an evening
affair, a glass of champagne of the
you-don't-forget-you've-had-it-for-a-week brand, and a ham-sandwich, and
put them out into the street again)--can do nothing but make spiteful
remarks about everybody whose name and address they happen to know: the
women who, in the penny 'bus (for, in her own country, the lady of the
new school is wonderfully economical and business-like), spreads herself
out over the seat, and, looking indignant when a tired little milliner
gets in, would leave the poor girl standing with her bundle for an hour,
rather than make room for her--the women who write to the papers to
complain that chivalry is dead!

B., who has been looking over my shoulder while I have been writing the
foregoing, after the manner of a _Family Herald_ story-teller's wife in
the last chapter (fancy a man having to write the story of his early life
and adventures with his wife looking over his shoulder all the time! no
wonder the tales lack incident), says that I have been living too much on
sauerkraut and white wine; but I reply that if anything has tended to
interfere for a space with the deep-seated love and admiration that, as a
rule, I entertain for all man and woman-kind, it is his churches and
picture-galleries.

We have seen enough churches and pictures since our return to Munich to
last me for a very long while.  I shall not go to church, when I get home
again, more than twice a Sunday, for months to come.

The inhabitants of Munich boast that their Cathedral is the ugliest in
Europe; and, judging from appearances, I am inclined to think that the
claim must be admitted.  Anyhow, if there be an uglier one, I hope I am
feeling well and strong when I first catch sight of it.

As for pictures and sculptures, I am thoroughly tired of them.  The
greatest art critic living could not dislike pictures and sculptures more
than I do at this moment.  We began by spending a whole morning in each
gallery.  We examined each picture critically, and argued with each other
about its "form" and "colour" and "treatment" and "perspective" and
"texture" and "atmosphere."  I generally said it was flat, and B. that it
was out of drawing.  A stranger overhearing our discussions would have
imagined that we knew something about painting.  We would stand in front
of a canvas for ten minutes, drinking it in.  We would walk round it, so
as to get the proper light upon it and to better realise the artist's
aim.  We would back away from it on to the toes of the people behind,
until we reached the correct "distance," and then sit down and shade our
eyes, and criticise it from there; and then we would go up and put our
noses against it, and examine the workmanship in detail.

This is how we used to look at pictures in the early stages of our Munich
art studies.  Now we use picture galleries to practise spurts in.

I did a hundred yards this morning through the old Pantechnicon in
twenty-two and a half seconds, which, for fair heel-and-toe walking, I
consider very creditable.  B. took five-eighths of a second longer for
the same distance; but then he dawdled to look at a Raphael.

The "Pantechnicon," I should explain, is the name we have, for our own
purposes, given to what the Munichers prefer to call the Pinakothek.  We
could never pronounce Pinakothek properly.  We called it "Pynniosec,"
"Pintactec," and the "Happy Tack."  B. one day after dinner called it the
"Penny Cock," and then we both got frightened, and agreed to fix up some
sensible, practical name for it before any mischief was done.  We finally
decided on "Pantechnicon," which begins with a "P," and is a dignified,
old-established name, and one that we can both pronounce.  It is quite as
long, and nearly as difficult to spell, before you know how, as the
other, added to which it has a homely sound.  It seemed to be the very
word.

The old Pantechnicon is devoted to the works of the old masters; I shall
not say anything about these, as I do not wish to disturb in any way the
critical opinion that Europe has already formed concerning them.  I
prefer that the art schools of the world should judge for themselves in
the matter.  I will merely remark here, for purposes of reference, that I
thought some of the pictures very beautiful, and that others I did not
care for.

What struck me as most curious about the exhibition was the number of
canvases dealing with food stuffs.  Twenty-five per cent. of the pictures
in the place seem to have been painted as advertisements for somebody's
home-grown seeds, or as coloured supplements to be given away with the
summer number of the leading gardening journal of the period.

"What could have induced these old fellows," I said to B., "to choose
such very uninteresting subjects?  Who on earth cares to look at the
life-sized portrait of a cabbage and a peck of peas, or at these no doubt
masterly representations of a cut from the joint with bread and
vegetables?  Look at that 'View in a ham-and-beef shop,' No. 7063, size
sixty feet by forty.  It must have taken the artist a couple of years to
paint.  Who did he expect was going to buy it?  And that Christmas-hamper
scene over in the corner; was it painted, do you think, by some poor,
half-starved devil, who thought he would have something to eat in the
house, if it were only a picture of it?"

B. said he thought that the explanation was that the ancient patrons of
art were gentry with a very strong idea of the fitness of things.  For
"their churches and cathedrals," said B., "they had painted all those
virgins and martyrs and over-fed angels that you see everywhere about
Europe.  For their bedrooms, they ordered those--well, those bedroom sort
of pictures, that you may have noticed here and there; and then I expect
they used these victual-and-drink-scapes for their banqueting halls.  It
must have been like a gin-and-bitters to them, the sight of all that
food."

In the new Pantechnicon is exhibited the modern art of Germany.  This
appeared to me to be exceedingly poor stuff.  It seemed to belong to the
illustrated Christmas number school of art.  It was good, sound,
respectable work enough.  There was plenty of colour about it, and you
could tell what everything was meant for.  But there seemed no
imagination, no individuality, no thought, anywhere.  Each picture looked
as though it could have been produced by anyone who had studied and
practised art for the requisite number of years, and who was not a born
fool.  At all events, this is my opinion; and, as I know nothing whatever
about art, I speak without prejudice.

One thing I have enjoyed at Munich very much, and that has been the
music.  The German band that you hear in the square in London while you
are trying to compose an essay on the civilising influence of music, is
not the sort of band that you hear in Germany.  The German bands that
come to London are bands that have fled from Germany, in order to save
their lives.  In Germany, these bands would be slaughtered at the public
expense and their bodies given to the poor for sausages.  The bands that
the Germans keep for themselves are magnificent bands.

Munich of all places in the now united Fatherland, has, I suppose, the
greatest reputation for its military bands, and the citizens are allowed,
not only to pay for them, but to hear them.  Two or three times a day in
different parts of the city one or another of them will be playing _pro
bono publico_, and, in the evening, they are loaned out by the
authorities to the proprietors of the big beer-gardens.

"Go" and dash are the chief characteristics of their method; but, when
needed, they can produce from the battered, time-worn trumpets, which
have been handed down from player to player since the regiment was first
formed, notes as soft and full and clear as any that could start from the
strings of some old violin.

The German band in Germany has to know its business to be listened to by
a German audience.  The Bavarian artisan or shopkeeper understands and
appreciates good music, as he understands and appreciates good beer.  You
cannot impose upon him with an inferior article.  A music-hall audience
in Munich are very particular as to how their beloved Wagner is rendered,
and the trifles from Mozart and Haydn that they love to take in with
their sausages and salad, and which, when performed to their
satisfaction, they will thunderously applaud, must not be taken liberties
with, or they will know the reason why.

The German beer-garden should be visited by everyone who would see the
German people as well as their churches and castles.  It is here that the
workers of all kinds congregate in the evening.  Here, after the labours
of the day, come the tradesman with his wife and family, the young clerk
with his betrothed and--also her mother, alack and well-a-day!--the
soldier with his sweetheart, the students in twos and threes, the little
grisette with her cousin, the shop-boy and the workman.

Here come grey-haired Darby and Joan, and, over the mug of beer they
share between them, they sit thinking of the children--of little Lisa,
married to clever Karl, who is pushing his way in the far-off land that
lies across the great sea; of laughing Elsie, settled in Hamburg, who has
grandchildren of her own now; of fair-haired Franz, his mother's pet, who
fell in sunny France, fighting for the fatherland.  At the next table
sits a blushing, happy little maid, full of haughty airs and graces, such
as may be excused to a little maid who has just saved a no doubt
promising, but at present somewhat awkward-looking, youth from lifelong
misery, if not madness and suicide (depend upon it, that is the
alternative he put before her), by at last condescending to give him the
plump little hand, that he, thinking nobody sees him, holds so tightly
beneath the table-cloth.  Opposite, a family group sit discussing
omelettes and a bottle of white wine.  The father contented,
good-humoured, and laughing; the small child grave and solemn, eating and
drinking in business-like fashion; the mother smiling at both, yet not
forgetting to eat.

I think one would learn to love these German women if one lived among
them for long.  There is something so sweet, so womanly, so genuine about
them.  They seem to shed around them, from their bright, good-tempered
faces, a healthy atmosphere of all that is homely, and simple, and good.
Looking into their quiet, steadfast eyes, one dreams of white household
linen, folded in great presses; of sweet-smelling herbs; of savoury,
appetising things being cooked for supper; of bright-polished furniture;
of the patter of tiny feet; of little high-pitched voices, asking silly
questions; of quiet talks in the lamp-lit parlour after the children are
in bed, upon important questions of house management and home politics,
while long stockings are being darned.

They are not the sort of women to turn a man's head, but they are the
sort of women to lay hold of a man's heart--very gently at first, so that
he hardly knows that they have touched it, and then, with soft, clinging
tendrils that wrap themselves tighter and tighter year by year around it,
and draw him closer and closer--till, as, one by one, the false visions
and hot passions of his youth fade away, the plain homely figure fills
more and more his days--till it grows to mean for him all the better,
more lasting, true part of life--till he feels that the strong, gentle
mother-nature that has stood so long beside him has been welded firmly
into his own, and that they twain are now at last one finished whole.

We had our dinner at a beer-garden the day before yesterday.  We thought
it would be pleasant to eat and drink to the accompaniment of music, but
we found that in practice this was not so.  To dine successfully to music
needs a very strong digestion--especially in Bavaria.

The band that performs at a Munich beer-garden is not the sort of band
that can be ignored.  The members of a Munich military band are big,
broad-chested fellows, and they are not afraid of work.  They do not talk
much, and they never whistle.  They keep all their breath to do their
duty with.  They do not blow their very hardest, for fear of bursting
their instruments; but whatever pressure to the square inch the trumpet,
cornet, or trombone, as the case may be, is calculated to be capable of
sustaining without permanent injury (and they are tolerably sound and
well-seasoned utensils), that pressure the conscientious German bandsman
puts upon each square inch of the trumpet, cornet, or trombone, as the
case may be.

If you are within a mile of a Munich military band, and are not stone
deaf, you listen to it, and do not think of much else.  It compels your
attention by its mere noise; it dominates your whole being by its sheer
strength.  Your mind has to follow it as the feet of the little children
followed the playing of the Pied Piper.  Whatever you do, you have to do
in unison with the band.  All through our meal we had to keep time with
the music.

We ate our soup to slow waltz time, with the result that every spoonful
was cold before we got it up to our mouth.  Just as the fish came, the
band started a quick polka, and the consequence of that was that we had
not time to pick out the bones.  We gulped down white wine to the
"Blacksmith's Galop," and if the tune had lasted much longer we should
both have been blind drunk.  With the advent of our steaks, the band
struck up a selection from Wagner.

I know of no modern European composer so difficult to eat beefsteak to as
Wagner.  That we did not choke ourselves is a miracle.  Wagner's
orchestration is most trying to follow.  We had to give up all idea of
mustard.  B. tried to eat a bit of bread with his steak, and got most
hopelessly out of tune.  I am afraid I was a little flat myself during
the "Valkyries' Ride."  My steak was rather underdone, and I could not
work it quickly enough.

After getting outside hard beefsteak to Wagner, putting away potato salad
to the garden music out of _Faust_ was comparatively simple.  Once or
twice a slice of potato stuck in our throat during a very high note, but,
on the whole, our rendering was fairly artistic.

We rattled off a sweet omelette to a symphony in G--or F, or else K; I
won't be positive as to the precise letter; but it was something in the
alphabet, I know--and bolted our cheese to the ballet music from
_Carmen_.  After which we rolled about in agonies to all the national
airs of Europe.

If ever you visit a German beer-hall or garden--to study character or
anything of that kind--be careful, when you have finished drinking your
beer, to shut the cover of the mug down tight.  If you leave it with the
cover standing open, that is taken as a sign that you want more beer, and
the girl snatches it away and brings it back refilled.

B. and I very nearly had an accident one warm night, owing to our
ignorance of this custom.  Each time after we had swallowed the quart, we
left the pot, standing before us with the cover up, and each time it was,
in consequence, taken away, and brought back to us, brimming full again.
After about the sixth time, we gently remonstrated.

"This is very kind of you, my good girl," B. said, "but really I don't
think we _can_.  I don't think we ought to.  You must not go on doing
this sort of thing.  We will drink this one now that you have brought it,
but we really must insist on its being the last."

After about the tenth time we expostulated still more strongly.

"Now, you know what I told you four quarts ago!" remarked B., severely.
"This can't go on for ever.  Something serious will be happening.  We are
not used to your German school of drinking.  We are only foreigners.  In
our own country we are considered rather swagger at this elbow-raising
business, and for the credit of old England we have done our best.  But
now there must be an end to it.  I simply decline to drink any more.  No,
do not press me.  Not even another gallon!"

"But you both sit there with both your mugs open," replies the girl in an
injured tone.

"What do you mean, 'we sit with our mugs open'?" asks B.  "Can't we have
our mugs open if we like?"

"Ah, yes," she explains pathetically; "but then I think you want more
beer.  Gentlemen always open their mugs when they want them filled with
beer."

We kept our mugs shut after that.




MONDAY, JUNE 9TH


A Long Chapter, but happily the Last.--The Pilgrims' Return.--A Deserted
Town.--Heidelberg.--The Common, or Bed, Sheet, Considered as a Towel.--B.
Grapples with a Continental Time Table.--An Untractable Train.--A Quick
Run.--Trains that Start from Nowhere.--Trains that Arrive at
Nowhere.--Trains that Don't Do Anything.--B. Goes Mad.--Railway
Travelling in Germany.--B. is Taken Prisoner.--His Fortitude.--Advantages
of Ignorance.--First Impressions of Germany and of the Germans.

We are at Ostend.  Our pilgrimage has ended.  We sail for Dover in three
hours' time.  The wind seems rather fresh, but they say that it will drop
towards the evening.  I hope they are not deceiving us.

We are disappointed with Ostend.  We thought that Ostend would be gay and
crowded.  We thought that there would be bands and theatres and concerts,
and busy table-d'hotes, and lively sands, and thronged parades, and
pretty girls at Ostend.

I bought a stick and a new pair of boots at Brussels on purpose for
Ostend.

There does not seem to be a living visitor in the place besides
ourselves--nor a dead one either, that we can find.  The shops are shut
up, the houses are deserted, the casino is closed.  Notice-boards are
exhibited outside the hotels to the effect that the police have strict
orders to take into custody anybody found trespassing upon or damaging
the premises.

We found one restaurant which looked a little less like a morgue than did
the other restaurants in the town, and rang the bell.  After we had
waited for about a quarter of an hour, an old woman answered the door,
and asked us what we wanted.  We said a steak and chipped potatoes for
two, and a couple of lagers.  She said would we call again in about a
fortnight's time, when the family would be at home?  She did not herself
know where the things were kept.

We went down on to the sands this morning.  We had not been walking up
and down for more than half an hour before we came across the distinct
imprint of a human foot.  Someone must have been there this very day!  We
were a good deal alarmed.  We could not imagine how he came there.  The
weather is too fine for shipwrecks, and it was not a part of the coast
where any passing trader would be likely to land.  Besides, if anyone has
landed, where is he?  We have been able to find no trace of him whatever.
To this hour, we have never discovered who our strange visitant was.

It is a very mysterious affair, and I am glad we are going away.

We have been travelling about a good deal since we left Munich.  We went
first to Heidelberg.  We arrived early in the morning at Heidelberg,
after an all-night journey, and the first thing that the proprietor of
the Royal suggested, on seeing us, was that we should have a bath.  We
consented to the operation, and were each shown into a little marble
bath-room, in which I felt like a bit out of a picture by Alma Tadema.

The bath was very refreshing; but I should have enjoyed the whole thing
much better if they had provided me with something more suitable to wipe
upon than a thin linen sheet.  The Germans hold very curious notions as
to the needs and requirements of a wet man.  I wish they would
occasionally wash and bath themselves, and then they would, perhaps,
obtain more practical ideas upon the subject.  I have wiped upon a sheet
in cases of emergency, and so I have upon a pair of socks; but there is
no doubt that the proper thing is a towel.  To dry oneself upon a sheet
needs special training and unusual agility.  A Nautch Girl or a Dancing
Dervish would, no doubt, get through the performance with credit.  They
would twirl the sheet gracefully round their head, draw it lightly across
their back, twist it in waving folds round their legs, wrap themselves
for a moment in its whirling maze, and then lightly skip away from it,
dry and smiling.

But that is not the manner in which the dripping, untaught Briton
attempts to wipe himself upon a sheet.  The method he adopts is, to
clutch the sheet with both hands, lean up against the wall, and rub
himself with it.  In trying to get the thing round to the back of him, he
drops half of it into the water, and from that moment the bathroom is not
big enough to enable him to get away for an instant from that wet half.
When he is wiping the front of himself with the dry half, the wet half
climbs round behind, and, in a spirit of offensive familiarity, slaps him
on the back.  While he is stooping down rubbing his feet, it throws
itself with delirious joy around his head, and he is black in the face
before he can struggle away from its embrace.  When he is least expecting
anything of the kind, it flies round and gives him a playful flick upon
some particularly tender part of his body that sends him springing with a
yell ten feet up into the air.  The great delight of the sheet, as a
whole, is to trip him up whenever he attempts to move, so as to hear what
he says when he sits down suddenly on the stone floor; and if it can
throw him into the bath again just as he has finished wiping himself, it
feels that life is worth living after all.

We spent two days at Heidelberg, climbing the wooded mountains that
surround that pleasant little town, and that afford, from their
restaurant or ruin-crowned summits, enchanting, far-stretching views,
through which, with many a turn and twist, the distant Rhine and nearer
Neckar wind; or strolling among the crumbling walls and arches of the
grand, history-logged wreck that was once the noblest castle in all
Germany.

We stood in awed admiration before the "Great Tun," which is the chief
object of interest in Heidelberg.  What there is of interest in the sight
of a big beer-barrel it is difficult, in one's calmer moments, to
understand; but the guide book says that it is a thing to be seen, and so
all we tourists go and stand in a row and gape at it.  We are a
sheep-headed lot.  If, by a printer's error, no mention were made in the
guide book of the Colosseum, we should spend a month in Rome, and not
think it worth going across the road to look at.  If the guide book says
we must by no means omit to pay a visit to some famous pincushion that
contains eleven million pins, we travel five hundred miles on purpose to
see it!

From Heidelberg we went to Darmstadt.  We spent half-an-hour at
Darmstadt.  Why we ever thought of stopping longer there, I do not know.
It is a pleasant enough town to live in, I should say; but utterly
uninteresting to the stranger.  After one walk round it, we made
inquiries as to the next train out of it, and being informed that one was
then on the point of starting, we tumbled into it and went to Bonn.

From Bonn (whence we made one or two Rhine excursions, and where we
ascended twenty-eight "blessed steps" on our knees--the chapel people
called them "blessed steps;" _we_ didn't, after the first fourteen) we
returned to Cologne.  From Cologne we went to Brussels; from Brussels to
Ghent (where we saw more famous pictures, and heard the mighty "Roland"
ring "o'er lagoon and lake of sand").  From Ghent we went to Bruges
(where I had the satisfaction of throwing a stone at the statue of Simon
Stevin, who added to the miseries of my school-days, by inventing
decimals), and from Bruges we came on here.

Finding out and arranging our trains has been a fearful work.  I have
left the whole business with B., and he has lost two stone over it.  I
used to think at one time that my own dear native Bradshaw was a
sufficiently hard nut for the human intellect to crack; or, to transpose
the simile, that Bradshaw was sufficient to crack an ordinary human nut.
But dear old Bradshaw is an axiom in Euclid for stone-wall obviousness,
compared with a through Continental time-table.  Every morning B. has sat
down with the book before him, and, grasping his head between his hands,
has tried to understand it without going mad.

"Here we are," he has said.  "This is the train that will do for us.
Leaves Munich at 1.45; gets to Heidelberg at 4--just in time for a cup of
tea."

"Gets to Heidelberg at 4?" I exclaim.  "Does the whole distance in two
and a quarter hours?  Why, we were all night coming down!"

"Well, there you are," he says, pointing to the time-table.  "Munich,
depart 1.45; Heidelberg, arrive 4."

"Yes," I say, looking over his shoulder; "but don't you see the 4 is in
thick type?  That means 4 in the morning."

"Oh, ah, yes," he replies.  "I never noticed that.  Yes, of course.  No!
it can't be that either.  Why, that would make the journey fourteen
hours.  It can't take fourteen hours.  No, of course not.  That's not
meant for thick type, that 4.  That's thin type got a little thick,
that's all."

"Well, it can't be 4 this afternoon," I argue.  "It must be 4 to-morrow
afternoon!  That's just what a German express train would like to
do--take a whole day over a six hours' job!"

He puzzles for a while, and then breaks out with:

"Oh!  I see it now.  How stupid of me!  That train that gets to
Heidelberg at 4 comes from Berlin."

He seemed quite delighted with this discovery.

"What's the good of it to us, then?" I ask.

That depresses him.

"No, it is not much good, I'm afraid," he agrees.  "It seems to go
straight from Berlin to Heidelberg without stopping at Munich at all.
Well then, where does the 1.45 go to?  It must go somewhere."

Five minutes more elapse, and then he exclaims:

"Drat this 1.45!  It doesn't seem to go anywhere.  Munich depart 1.45,
and that's all.  It must go somewhere!"

Apparently, however, it does not.  It seems to be a train that starts out
from Munich at 1.45, and goes off on the loose.  Possibly, it is a young,
romantic train, fond of mystery.  It won't say where it's going to.  It
probably does not even know itself.  It goes off in search of adventure.

"I shall start off," it says to itself, "at 1.45 punctually, and just go
on anyhow, without thinking about it, and see where I get to."

Or maybe it is a conceited, headstrong young train.  It will not be
guided or advised.  The traffic superintendent wants it to go to St.
Petersburg or to Paris.  The old grey-headed station-master argues with
it, and tries to persuade it to go to Constantinople, or even to
Jerusalem if it likes that better--urges it to, at all events, make up
its mind where it _is_ going--warns it of the danger to young trains of
having no fixed aim or object in life.  Other people, asked to use their
influence with it, have talked to it like a father, and have begged it,
for their sakes, to go to Kamskatka, or Timbuctoo, or Jericho, according
as they have thought best for it; and then, finding that it takes no
notice of them, have got wild with it, and have told it to go to still
more distant places.

But to all counsel and entreaty it has turned a deaf ear.

"You leave me alone," it has replied; "I know where I'm going to.  Don't
you worry yourself about me.  You mind your own business, all of you.  I
don't want a lot of old fools telling me what to do.  I know what I'm
about."

What can be expected from such a train?  The chances are that it comes to
a bad end.  I expect it is recognised afterwards, a broken-down, unloved,
friendless, old train, wandering aimless and despised in some far-off
country, musing with bitter regret upon the day when, full of foolish
pride and ambition, it started from Munich, with its boiler nicely oiled,
at 1.45.

B. abandons this 1.45 as hopeless and incorrigible, and continues his
search.

"Hulloa! what's this?" he exclaims.  "How will this do us?  Leaves Munich
at 4, gets to Heidelberg 4.15.  That's quick work.  Something wrong
there.  That won't do.  You can't get from Munich to Heidelberg in a
quarter of an hour.  Oh! I see it.  That 4 o'clock goes to Brussels, and
then on to Heidelberg afterwards.  Gets in there at 4.15 to-morrow, I
suppose.  I wonder why it goes round by Brussels, though?  Then it seems
to stop at Prague for ever so long.  Oh, damn this timetable!"

Then he finds another train that starts at 2.15, and seems to be an ideal
train.  He gets quite enthusiastic over this train.

"This is the train for us, old man," he says.  "This is a splendid train,
really.  It doesn't stop anywhere."

"Does it _get_ anywhere?" I ask.

"Of course it gets somewhere," he replies indignantly.  "It's an express!
Munich," he murmurs, tracing its course through the timetable, "depart
2.15.  First and second class only.  Nuremberg?  No; it doesn't stop at
Nuremberg.  Wurtzburg?  No.  Frankfort for Strasburg?  No.  Cologne,
Antwerp, Calais?  Well, where does it stop?  Confound it! it must stop
somewhere.  Berlin, Paris, Brussels, Copenhagen?  No.  Upon my soul, this
is another train that does not go anywhere!  It starts from Munich at
2.15, and that's all.  It doesn't do anything else."

It seems to be a habit of Munich trains to start off in this purposeless
way.  Apparently, their sole object is to get away from the town.  They
don't care where they go to; they don't care what becomes of them, so
long as they escape from Munich.

"For heaven's sake," they say to themselves, "let us get away from this
place.  Don't let us bother about where we shall go; we can decide that
when we are once fairly outside.  Let's get out of Munich; that's the
great thing."

B. begins to grow quite frightened.  He says:

"We shall never be able to leave this city.  There are no trains out of
Munich at all.  It's a plot to keep us here, that's what it is.  We shall
never be able to get away.  We shall never see dear old England again!"

I try to cheer him up by suggesting that perhaps it is the custom in
Bavaria to leave the destination of the train to the taste and fancy of
the passengers.  The railway authorities provide a train, and start it
off at 2.15.  It is immaterial to them where it goes to.  That is a
question for the passengers to decide among themselves.  The passengers
hire the train and take it away, and there is an end of the matter, so
far as the railway people are concerned.  If there is any difference of
opinion between the passengers, owing to some of them wishing to go to
Spain, while others want to get home to Russia, they, no doubt, settle
the matter by tossing up.

B., however, refuses to entertain this theory, and says he wishes I would
not talk so much when I see how harassed he is.  That's all the thanks I
get for trying to help him.

He worries along for another five minutes, and then he discovers a train
that gets to Heidelberg all right, and appears to be in most respects a
model train, the only thing that can be urged against it being that it
does not start from anywhere.

It seems to drop into Heidelberg casually and then to stop there.  One
expects its sudden advent alarms the people at Heidelberg station.  They
do not know what to make of it.  The porter goes up to the
station-master, and says:

"Beg pardon, sir, but there's a strange train in the station."

"Oh!" answers the station-master, surprised, "where did it come from?"

"Don't know," replies the man; "it doesn't seem to know itself."

"Dear me," says the station-master, "how very extraordinary!  What does
it want?"

"Doesn't seem to want anything particular," replies the other.  "It's a
curious sort of train.  Seems to be a bit dotty, if you ask me."

"Um," muses the station-master, "it's a rum go.  Well, I suppose we must
let it stop here a bit now.  We can hardly turn it out a night like this.
Oh, let it make itself comfortable in the wood-shed till the morning, and
then we will see if we can find its friends."

At last B. makes the discovery that to get to Heidelberg we must go to
Darmstadt and take another train from there.  This knowledge gives him
renewed hope and strength, and he sets to work afresh--this time, to find
trains from Munich to Darmstadt, and from Darmstadt to Heidelberg.

"Here we are," he cries, after a few minutes' hunting.  "I've got it!"
(He is of a buoyant disposition.)  "This will be it.  Leaves Munich 10,
gets to Darmstadt 5.25.  Leaves Darmstadt for Heidelberg 5.20, gets to--"

"That doesn't allow us much time for changing, does it?" I remark.

"No," he replies, growing thoughtful again.  "No, that's awkward.  If it
were only the other way round, it would be all right, or it would do if
our train got there five minutes before its time, and the other one was a
little late in starting."

"Hardly safe to reckon on that," I suggest; and he agrees with me, and
proceeds to look for some more fitable trains.

It would appear, however, that all the trains from Darmstadt to
Heidelberg start just a few minutes before the trains from Munich arrive.
It looks quite pointed, as though they tried to avoid us.

B.'s intellect generally gives way about this point, and he becomes
simply drivelling.  He discovers trains that run from Munich to
Heidelberg in fourteen minutes, by way of Venice and Geneva, with
half-an-hour's interval for breakfast at Rome.  He rushes up and down the
book in pursuit of demon expresses that arrive at their destinations
forty-seven minutes before they start, and leave again before they get
there.  He finds out, all by himself, that the only way to get from South
Germany to Paris is to go to Calais, and then take the boat to Moscow.
Before he has done with the timetable, he doesn't know whether he is in
Europe, Asia, Africa, or America, nor where he wants to get to, nor why
he wants to go there.

Then I quietly, but firmly, take the book away from him, and dress him
for going out; and we take our bags and walk to the station, and tell a
porter that, "Please, we want to go to Heidelberg."  And the porter takes
us one by each hand, and leads us to a seat and tells us to sit there and
be good, and that, when it is time, he will come and fetch us and put us
in the train; and this he does.

That is my method of finding out how to get from one place to another.
It is not as dignified, perhaps, as B.'s, but it is simpler and more
efficacious.

It is slow work travelling in Germany.  The German train does not hurry
or excite itself over its work, and when it stops it likes to take a
rest.  When a German train draws up at a station, everybody gets out and
has a walk.  The engine-driver and the stoker cross over and knock at the
station-master's door.  The station-master comes out and greets them
effusively, and then runs back into the house to tell his wife that they
have come, and she bustles out and also welcomes them effusively, and the
four stand chatting about old times and friends and the state of the
crops.  After a while, the engine-driver, during a pause in the
conversation, looks at his watch, and says he is afraid he must be going,
but the station-master's wife won't hear of it.

"Oh, you must stop and see the children," she says.  "They will be home
from school soon, and they'll be so disappointed if they hear you have
been here and gone away again.  Lizzie will never forgive you."

The engine-driver and the stoker laugh, and say that under those
circumstances they suppose they must stop; and they do so.

Meanwhile the booking-clerk has introduced the guard to his sister, and
such a very promising flirtation has been taking place behind the
ticket-office door that it would not be surprising if wedding-bells were
heard in the neighbourhood before long.

The second guard has gone down into the town to try and sell a dog, and
the passengers stroll about the platform and smoke, or partake of a light
meal in the refreshment-room--the poorer classes regaling themselves upon
hot sausage, and the more dainty upon soup.  When everybody appears to be
sufficiently rested, a move onward is suggested by the engine-driver or
the guard, and if all are agreeable to the proposal the train starts.

Tremendous excitement was caused during our journey between Heidelberg
and Darmstadt by the discovery that we were travelling in an express
train (they called it an "express:" it jogged along at the rate of twenty
miles an hour when it could be got to move at all; most of its time it
seemed to be half asleep) with slow-train tickets.  The train was stopped
at the next station and B. was marched off between two stern-looking
gold-laced officials to explain the matter to a stern-looking gold-laced
station-master, surrounded by three stern-looking gold-laced followers.
The scene suggested a drum-head court-martial, and I could see that B.
was nervous, though outwardly calm and brave.  He shouted back a
light-hearted adieu to me as he passed down the platform, and asked me,
if the worst happened, to break it gently to his mother.

However, no harm came of it, and he returned to the carriage without a
stain upon his character, he having made it clear to the satisfaction of
the court--firstly, That he did not know that our tickets were only
slow-train tickets; secondly, That he was not aware that we were not
travelling by a slow train; and thirdly, That he was ready to pay the
difference in the fares.

He blamed himself for having done this last, however, afterwards.  He
seemed to think that he could have avoided this expense by assuming
ignorance of the German language.  He said that two years ago, when he
was travelling in Germany with three other men, the authorities came down
upon them in much the same way for travelling first-class with
second-class tickets.

Why they were doing this B. did not seem able to explain very clearly.
He said that, if he recollected rightly, the guard had told them to get
into a first-class, or else they had not had time to get into a
second-class, or else they did not know they were not in a second-class.
I must confess his explanation appeared to me to be somewhat lame.

Anyhow, there they were in a first-class carriage; and there was the
collector at the door, looking indignantly at their second-class tickets,
and waiting to hear what they had to say for themselves.

One of their party did not know much German, but what little he did know
he was very proud of and liked to air; and this one argued the matter
with the collector, and expressed himself in German so well that the
collector understood and disbelieved every word he said.

He was also, on his part, able, with a little trouble, to understand what
the collector said, which was that he must pay eighteen marks.  And he
had to.

As for the other three, two at all events of whom were excellent German
scholars, they did not understand anything, and nobody could make them
understand anything.  The collector roared at them for about ten minutes,
and they smiled pleasantly and said they wanted to go to Hanover.  He
went and fetched the station-master, and the station-master explained to
them for another ten minutes that, if they did not pay eighteen shillings
each, he should do the German equivalent for summonsing them; and they
smiled and nodded, and told him that they wanted to go to Hanover.  Then
a very important-looking personage in a cocked-hat came up, and was very
angry; and he and the station-master and the collector took it in turns
to explain to B. and his two friends the state of the law on the matter.

They stormed and raged, and threatened and pleaded for a quarter of an
hour or so, and then they got sick, and slammed the door, and went off,
leaving the Government to lose the fifty-four marks.

We passed the German frontier on Wednesday, and have been in Belgium
since.

I like the Germans.  B. says I ought not to let them know this, because
it will make them conceited; but I have no fear of such a result.  I am
sure they possess too much common-sense for their heads to be turned by
praise, no matter from whom.

B. also says that I am displaying more energy than prudence in forming an
opinion of a people merely from a few weeks' travel amongst them.  But my
experience is that first impressions are the most reliable.

At all events, in my case they are.  I often arrive at quite sensible
ideas and judgments, on the spur of the moment.  It is when I stop to
think that I become foolish.

Our first thoughts are the thoughts that are given to us; our second
thoughts are the thoughts that we make for ourselves.  I prefer to trust
to the former.

The Germans are a big, square-shouldered, deep-chested race.  They do not
talk much, but look as though they thought.  Like all big things, they
are easy-going and good-tempered.

Anti-tobacconists, teetotallers, and such-like faddists, would fare badly
in Germany.  A German has no anti-nature notions as to its being wicked
for him to enjoy his life, and still more criminal for him to let anybody
else enjoy theirs.  He likes his huge pipe, and he likes his mug of beer,
and as these become empty he likes to have them filled again; and he
likes to see other people like _their_ pipe and _their_ mug of beer.  If
you were to go dancing round a German, shrieking out entreaties to him to
sign a pledge that he would never drink another drop of beer again as
long as he lived, he would ask you to remember that you were talking to a
man, not to a child or an imbecile, and he would probably impress the
request upon you by boxing your ears for your impertinence.  He can
conduct himself sensibly without making an ass of himself.  He can be
"temperate" without tying bits of coloured ribbon all about himself to
advertise the fact, and without rushing up and down the street waving a
banner and yelling about it.

The German women are not beautiful, but they are lovable and sweet; and
they are broad-breasted and broad-hipped, like the mothers of big sons
should be.  They do not seem to trouble themselves about their "rights,"
but appear to be very contented and happy even without votes.  The men
treat them with courtesy and tenderness, but with none of that
exaggerated deference that one sees among more petticoat-ridden nations.
The Germans are women lovers, not women worshippers; and they are not
worried by any doubts as to which sex shall rule the State, and which
stop at home and mind the children.  The German women are not politicians
and mayors and county councillors; they are housewives.

All classes of Germans are scrupulously polite to one another; but this
is the result of mutual respect, not of snobbery.  The tramcar conductor
expects to be treated with precisely the same courtesy that he tenders.
The Count raises his hat to the shopkeeper, and expects the shopkeeper to
raise his hat to him.

The Germans are hearty eaters; but they are not, like the French, fussy
and finicky over their food.  Their stomach is not their God; and the
cook, with his sauces and _pates_ and _ragouts_, is not their High
Priest.  So long as the dish is wholesome, and there is sufficient of it,
they are satisfied.

In the mere sensuous arts of painting and sculpture the Germans are poor,
in the ennobling arts of literature and music they are great; and this
fact provides a key to their character.

They are a simple, earnest, homely, genuine people.  They do not laugh
much; but when they do, they laugh deep down.  They are slow, but so is a
deep river.  A placid look generally rests upon their heavy features; but
sometimes they frown, and then they look somewhat grim.

A visit to Germany is a tonic to an Englishman.  We English are always
sneering at ourselves, and patriotism in England is regarded as a stamp
of vulgarity.  The Germans, on the other hand, believe in themselves, and
respect themselves.  The world for them is not played out.  Their country
to them is still the "Fatherland."  They look straight before them like a
people who see a great future in front of them, and are not afraid to go
forward to fulfil it.

                        GOOD-BYE, SIR (OR MADAM).





DREAMS

By Jerome K. Jerome


The most extraordinary dream I ever had was one in which I fancied that,
as I was going into a theater, the cloak-room attendant stopped me in
the lobby and insisted on my leaving my legs behind me.

I was not surprised; indeed, my acquaintanceship with theater harpies
would prevent my feeling any surprise at such a demand, even in my
waking moments; but I was, I must honestly confess, considerably
annoyed. It was not the payment of the cloak-room fee that I so much
minded--I offered to give that to the man then and there. It was the
parting with my legs that I objected to.

I said I had never heard of such a rule being attempted to be put in
force at any respectable theater before, and that I considered it a most
absurd and vexatious regulation. I also said I should write to The Times
about it.

The man replied that he was very sorry, but that those were his
instructions. People complained that they could not get to and from
their seats comfortably, because other people's legs were always in
the way; and it had, therefore, been decided that, in future, everybody
should leave their legs outside.

It seemed to me that the management, in making this order, had clearly
gone beyond their legal right; and, under ordinary circumstances, I
should have disputed it. Being present, however, more in the
character of a guest than in that of a patron, I hardly like to make a
disturbance; and so I sat down and meekly prepared to comply with the
demand.

I had never before known that the human leg did unscrew. I had always
thought it was a fixture. But the man showed me how to undo them, and I
found that they came off quite easily.

The discovery did not surprise me any more than the original request
that I should take them off had done. Nothing does surprise one in a
dream.

I dreamed once that I was going to be hanged; but I was not at all
surprised about it. Nobody was. My relations came to see me off, I
thought, and to wish me "Good-by!" They all came, and were all very
pleasant; but they were not in the least astonished--not one of
them. Everybody appeared to regard the coming tragedy as one of the
most-naturally-to-be-expected things in the world.

They bore the calamity, besides, with an amount of stoicism that would
have done credit to a Spartan father. There was no fuss, no scene. On
the contrary, an atmosphere of mild cheerfulness prevailed.

Yet they were very kind. Somebody--an uncle, I think--left me a packet
of sandwiches and a little something in a flask, in case, as he said, I
should feel peckish on the scaffold.

It is "those twin-jailers of the daring" thought, Knowledge and
Experience, that teach us surprise. We are surprised and incredulous
when, in novels and plays, we come across good men and women, because
Knowledge and Experience have taught us how rare and problematical is
the existence of such people. In waking life, my friends and relations
would, of course, have been surprised at hearing that I had committed a
murder, and was, in consequence, about to be hanged, because Knowledge
and Experience would have taught them that, in a country where the
law is powerful and the police alert, the Christian citizen is usually
pretty successful in withstanding the voice of temptation, prompting him
to commit crime of an illegal character.

But into Dreamland, Knowledge and Experience do not enter. They stay
without, together with the dull, dead clay of which they form a part;
while the freed brain, released from their narrowing tutelage, steals
softly past the ebon gate, to wanton at its own sweet will among the
mazy paths that wind through the garden of Persephone.

Nothing that it meets with in that eternal land astonishes it because,
unfettered by the dense conviction of our waking mind, that nought
outside the ken of our own vision can in this universe be, all things
to it are possible and even probable. In dreams, we fly and wonder
not--except that we never flew before. We go naked, yet are not ashamed,
though we mildly wonder what the police are about that they do not stop
us. We converse with our dead, and think it was unkind that they did
not come back to us before. In dreams, there happens that which human
language cannot tell. In dreams, we see "the light that never was on sea
or land," we hear the sounds that never yet were heard by waking ears.

It is only in sleep that true imagination ever stirs within us. Awake,
we never imagine anything; we merely alter, vary, or transpose. We give
another twist to the kaleidoscope of the things we see around us, and
obtain another pattern; but not one of us has ever added one tiniest
piece of new glass to the toy.

A Dean Swift sees one race of people smaller, and another race of people
larger than the race of people that live down his own streets. And he
also sees a land where the horses take the place of men. A Bulwer Lytton
lays the scene of one of his novels inside the earth instead of outside.
A Rider Haggard introduces us to a lady whose age is a few years more
than the average woman would care to confess to; and pictures crabs
larger than the usual shilling or eighteen-penny size. The number of so
called imaginative writers who visit the moon is legion, and for all
the novelty that they find, when they get there, they might just as well
have gone to Putney. Others are continually drawing for us visions of
the world one hundred or one thousand years hence. There is always a
depressing absence of human nature about the place; so much so, that one
feels great consolation in the thought, while reading, that we ourselves
shall be comfortably dead and buried before the picture can be realized.
In these prophesied Utopias everybody is painfully good and clean and
happy, and all the work is done by electricity.

There is somewhat too much electricity, for my taste, in these worlds
to come. One is reminded of those pictorial enamel-paint advertisements
that one sees about so often now, in which all the members of an
extensive household are represented as gathered together in one room,
spreading enamel-paint over everything they can lay their hands upon.
The old man is on a step-ladder, daubing the walls and ceiling with
"cuckoo's-egg green," while the parlor-maid and the cook are on their
knees, painting the floor with "sealing-wax red." The old lady is doing
the picture frames in "terra cotta." The eldest daughter and her young
man are making sly love in a corner over a pot of "high art yellow,"
with which, so soon as they have finished wasting their time, they
will, it is manifest, proceed to elevate the piano. Younger brothers
and sisters are busy freshening up the chairs and tables with
"strawberry-jam pink" and "jubilee magenta." Every blessed thing in that
room is being coated with enamel paint, from the sofa to the fire-irons,
from the sideboard to the eight-day clock. If there is any paint left
over, it will be used up for the family Bible and the canary.

It is claimed for this invention that a little child can make as much
mess with it as can a grown-up person, and so all the children of
the family are represented in the picture as hard at work, enameling
whatever few articles of furniture and household use the grasping
selfishness of their elders has spared to them. One is painting the
toasting fork in a "skim-milk blue," while another is giving aesthetical
value to the Dutch oven by means of a new shade of art green. The
bootjack is being renovated in "old gold," and the baby is sitting on
the floor, smothering its own cradle with "flush-upon-a-maiden's cheek
peach color."

One feels that the thing is being overdone. That family, before another
month is gone, will be among the strongest opponents of enamel paint
that the century has produced. Enamel paint will be the ruin of that
once happy home. Enamel paint has a cold, glassy, cynical appearance.
Its presence everywhere about the place will begin to irritate the old
man in the course of a week or so. He will call it, "This damn'd sticky
stuff!" and will tell the wife that he wonders she didn't paint herself
and the children with it while she was about it. She will reply, in an
exasperatingly quiet tone of voice, that she does like that. Perhaps he
will say next, that she did not warn him against it, and tell him what
an idiot he was making of himself, spoiling the whole house with his
foolish fads. Each one will persist that it was the other one who first
suggested the absurdity, and they will sit up in bed and quarrel about
it every night for a month.

The children having acquired a taste for smudging the concoction about,
and there being nothing else left untouched in the house, will try to
enamel the cat; and then there will be bloodshed, and broken windows,
and spoiled infants, and sorrows and yells. The smell of the paint will
make everybody ill; and the servants will give notice. Tradesmen's
boys will lean up against places that are not dry and get their clothes
enameled and claim compensation. And the baby will suck the paint off
its cradle and have fits.

But the person that will suffer most will, of course, be the eldest
daughter's young man. The eldest daughter's young man is always
unfortunate. He means well, and he tries hard. His great ambition is
to make the family love him. But fate is ever against him, and he only
succeeds in gaining their undisguised contempt. The fact of his being
"gone" on their Emily is, of itself, naturally sufficient to stamp him
as an imbecile in the eyes of Emily's brothers and sisters. The father
finds him slow, and thinks the girl might have done better; while the
best that his future mother-in-law (his sole supporter) can say for him
is, that he seems steady.

There is only one thing that prompts the family to tolerate him, and
that is the reflection that he is going to take Emily away from them.

On that understanding they put up with him.

The eldest daughter's young man, in this particular case, will, you
may depend upon it, choose that exact moment when the baby's life is
hovering in the balance, and the cook is waiting for her wages with
her box in the hall, and a coal-heaver is at the front door with a
policeman, making a row about the damage to his trousers, to come in,
smiling, with a specimen pot of some new high art, squashed-tomato-shade
enamel paint, and suggest that they should try it on the old man's pipe.

Then Emily will go off into hysterics, and Emily's male progenitor will
firmly but quietly lead that ill-starred yet true-hearted young man to
the public side of the garden-gate; and the engagement will be "off."

Too much of anything is a mistake, as the man said when his wife
presented him with four new healthy children in one day. We should
practice moderation in all matters. A little enamel paint would have
been good. They might have enameled the house inside and out, and have
left the furniture alone. Or they might have colored the furniture, and
let the house be. But an entirely and completely enameled home--a
home, such as enamel-paint manufacturers love to picture on their
advertisements, over which the yearning eye wanders in vain, seeking one
single square inch of un-enameled matter--is, I am convinced, a mistake.
It may be a home that, as the testimonials assure us, will easily wash.
It may be an "artistic" home; but the average man is not yet educated up
to the appreciation of it. The average man does not care for high art.
At a certain point, the average man gets sick of high art.

So, in these coming Utopias, in which out unhappy grandchildren will
have to drag out their colorless existence, there will be too much
electricity. They will grow to loathe electricity.

Electricity is going to light them, warm them, carry them, doctor them,
cook for them, execute them, if necessary. They are going to be weaned
on electricity, rocked in their cradles by electricity, slapped by
electricity, ruled and regulated and guided by electricity, buried by
electricity. I may be wrong, but I rather think they are going to be
hatched by electricity.

In the new world of our progressionist teachers, it is electricity that
is the real motive-power. The men and women are only marionettes--worked
by electricity.

But it was not to speak of the electricity in them, but of the
originality in them, that I referred to these works of fiction. There
is no originality in them whatever. Human thought is incapable of
originality. No man ever yet imagined a new thing--only some variation
or extension of an old thing.

The sailor, when he was asked what he would do with a fortune, promptly
replied:

"Buy all the rum and 'baccy there is in the world."

"And what after that?" they asked him.

"Eh?"

"What would you buy after that--after you had bought up all the rum and
tobacco there was in the world--what would you buy then?"

"After that? Oh! 'um!" (a long pause). "Oh!" (with inspiration) "why,
more 'baccy!"

Rum and tobacco he knew something of, and could therefore imagine about.
He did not know any other luxuries, therefore he could not conceive of
any others.

So if you ask one of these Utopian-dreaming gentry what, after they had
secured for their world all the electricity there was in the Universe,
and after every mortal thing in their ideal Paradise, was done and said
and thought by electricity, they could imagine as further necessary to
human happiness, they would probably muse for awhile, and then reply,
"More electricity."

They know electricity. They have seen the electric light, and heard of
electric boats and omnibuses. They have possibly had an electric shock
at a railway station for a penny.

Therefore, knowing that electricity does three things, they can go on
and "imagine" electricity doing three hundred things, and the very great
ones among them can imagine it doing three thousand things; but for
them, or anybody else, to imagine a new force, totally unconnected
with and different from anything yet known in nature, would be utterly
impossible.

Human thought is not a firework, ever shooting off fresh forms and
shapes as it burns; it is a tree, growing very slowly--you can watch it
long and see no movement--very silently, unnoticed. It was planted in
the world many thousand years ago, a tiny, sickly plant. And men guarded
it and tended it, and gave up life and fame to aid its growth. In
the hot days of their youth, they came to the gate of the garden and
knocked, begging to be let in, and to be counted among the gardeners.
And their young companions without called to them to come back, and play
the man with bow and spear, and win sweet smiles from rosy lips, and
take their part amid the feast, and dance, not stoop with wrinkled
brows, at weaklings' work. And the passers by mocked them and called
shame, and others cried out to stone them. And still they stayed there
laboring, that the tree might grow a little, and they died and were
forgotten.

And the tree grew fair and strong. The storms of ignorance passed over
it, and harmed it not. The fierce fires of superstition soared around
it; but men leaped into the flames and beat them back, perishing, and
the tree grew. With the sweat of their brow have men nourished its green
leaves. Their tears have moistened the earth about it. With their blood
they have watered its roots.

The seasons have come and passed, and the tree has grown and flourished.
And its branches have spread far and high, and ever fresh shoots are
bursting forth, and ever new leaves unfolding to the light. But they
are all part of the one tree--the tree that was planted on the first
birthday of the human race. The stem that bears them springs from the
gnarled old trunk that was green and soft when white-haired Time was a
little child; the sap that feeds them is drawn up through the roots that
twine and twist about the bones of the ages that are dead.

The human mind can no more produce an original thought than a tree can
bear an original fruit. As well might one cry for an original note in
music as expect an original idea from a human brain.

One wishes our friends, the critics, would grasp this simple truth, and
leave off clamoring for the impossible, and being shocked because they
do not get it. When a new book is written, the high-class critic opens
it with feelings of faint hope, tempered by strong conviction of coming
disappointment. As he pores over the pages, his brow darkens with
virtuous indignation, and his lip curls with the Godlike contempt that
the exceptionally great critic ever feels for everybody in this world,
who is not yet dead. Buoyed up by a touching, but totally fallacious,
belief that he is performing a public duty, and that the rest of the
community is waiting in breathless suspense to learn his opinion of the
work in question, before forming any judgment concerning it themselves,
he, nevertheless, wearily struggles through about a third of it. Then
his long-suffering soul revolts, and he flings it aside with a cry of
despair.

"Why, there is no originality whatever in this," he says. "This book is
taken bodily from the Old Testament. It is the story of Adam and Eve all
over again. The hero is a mere man! with two arms, two legs, and a head
(so called). Why, it is only Moses's Adam under another name! And the
heroine is nothing but a woman! and she is described as beautiful, and
as having long hair. The author may call her 'Angelina,' or any other
name he chooses; but he has evidently, whether he acknowledges it
or not, copied her direct from Eve. The characters are barefaced
plagiarisms from the book of Genesis! Oh! to find an author with
originality!"

One spring I went a walking tour in the country. It was a glorious
spring. Not the sort of spring they give us in these miserable times,
under this shameless government--a mixture of east wind, blizzard, snow,
rain, slush, fog, frost, hail, sleet and thunder-storms--but a sunny,
blue-sky'd, joyous spring, such as we used to have regularly every year
when I was a young man, and things were different.

It was an exceptionally beautiful spring, even for those golden days;
and as I wandered through the waking land, and saw the dawning of the
coming green, and watched the blush upon the hawthorn hedge, deepening
each day beneath the kisses of the sun, and looked up at the proud old
mother trees, dandling their myriad baby buds upon their strong fond
arms, holding them high for the soft west wind to caress as he passed
laughing by, and marked the primrose yellow creep across the carpet of
the woods, and saw the new flush of the field and saw the new light on
the hills, and heard the new-found gladness of the birds, and heard
from copse and farm and meadow the timid callings of the little new-born
things, wondering to find themselves alive, and smelt the freshness of
the earth, and felt the promise in the air, and felt a strong hand in
the wind, my spirit rose within me. Spring had come to me also, and
stirred me with a strange new life, with a strange new hope I, too,
was part of nature, and it was spring! Tender leaves and blossoms were
unfolding from my heart. Bright flowers of love and gratitude were
opening round its roots. I felt new strength in all my limbs. New blood
was pulsing through my veins. Nobler thoughts and nobler longings were
throbbing through my brain.

As I walked, Nature came and talked beside me, and showed me the world
and myself, and the ways of God seemed clearer.

It seemed to me a pity that all the beautiful and precious thoughts and
ideas that were crowding in upon me should be lost to my fellow-men, and
so I pitched my tent at a little cottage, and set to work to write them
down then and there as they came to me.

"It has been complained of me," I said to myself, "that I do not write
literary and high class work--at least, not work that is exceptionally
literary and high-class. This reproach shall be removed. I will write
an article that shall be a classic. I have worked for the ordinary,
every-day reader. It is right that I should do something now to improve
the literature of my beloved country."

And I wrote a grand essay--though I say it who should not, though I
don't see why I shouldn't--all about spring, and the way it made you
feel, and what it made you think. It was simply crowded with elevated
thoughts and high-class ideas and cultured wit, was that essay. There
was only one fault about that essay: it was too brilliant. I wanted
commonplace relief. It would have exhausted the average reader; so much
cleverness would have wearied him.

I wish I could remember some of the beautiful things in that essay, and
here set them down; because then you would be able to see what they
were like for yourselves, and that would be so much more simpler than
my explaining to you how beautiful they were. Unfortunately, however, I
cannot now call to mind any of them.

I was very proud of this essay, and when I got back to town I called on
a very superior friend of mine, a critic, and read it to him. I do not
care for him to see any of my usual work, because he really is a very
superior person indeed, and the perusal of it appears to give him pains
inside. But this article, I thought, would do him good.

"What do you think of it?" I asked, when I had finished.

"Splendid," he replied, "excellently arranged. I never knew you were
so well acquainted with the works of the old writers. Why, there is
scarcely a classic of any note that you have not quoted from. But
where--where," he added, musing, "did you get that last idea but two
from? It's the only one I don't seem to remember. It isn't a bit of your
own, is it?"

He said that, if so, he should advise me to leave it out. Not that it
was altogether bad, but that the interpolation of a modern thought among
so unique a collection of passages from the ancients seemed to spoil the
scheme.

And he enumerated the various dead-and-buried gentlemen from whom he
appeared to think I had collated my article.

"But," I replied, when I had recovered my astonishment sufficiently to
speak, "it isn't a collection at all. It is all original. I wrote the
thoughts down as they came to me. I have never read any of these people
you mention, except Shakespeare."

Of course Shakespeare was bound to be among them. I am getting to
dislike that man so. He is always being held up before us young authors
as a model, and I do hate models. There was a model boy at our school,
I remember, Henry Summers; and it was just the same there. It was
continually, "Look at Henry Summers! he doesn't put the preposition
before the verb, and spell business b-i-z!" or, "Why can't you write
like Henry Summers? He doesn't get the ink all over the copy-book and
half-way up his back!" We got tired of this everlasting "Look at Henry
Summers!" after a while, and so, one afternoon, on the way home, a few
of us lured Henry Summers up a dark court; and when he came out again he
was not worth looking at.

Now it is perpetually, "Look at Shakespeare!" "Why don't you write like
Shakespeare?" "Shakespeare never made that joke. Why don't you joke like
Shakespeare?"

If you are in the play-writing line it is still worse for you. "Why
don't you write plays like Shakespeare's?" they indignantly say.
"Shakespeare never made his comic man a penny steamboat captain."
"Shakespeare never made his hero address the girl as 'ducky.' Why don't
you copy Shakespeare?" If you do try to copy Shakespeare, they tell you
that you must be a fool to attempt to imitate Shakespeare.

Oh, shouldn't I like to get Shakespeare up our street, and punch him!

"I cannot help that," replied my critical friend--to return to our
previous question--"the germ of every thought and idea you have got
in that article can be traced back to the writers I have named. If
you doubt it, I will get down the books, and show you the passages for
yourself."

But I declined the offer. I said I would take his word for it, and would
rather not see the passages referred to. I felt indignant. "If," as
I said, "these men--these Platos and Socrateses and Ciceros and
Sophocleses and Aristophaneses and Aristotles and the rest of them had
been taking advantage of my absence to go about the world spoiling my
business for me, I would rather not hear any more about them."

And I put on my hat and came out, and I have never tried to write
anything original since.

I dreamed a dream once. (It is the sort of thing a man would dream.
You cannot very well dream anything else, I know. But the phrase sounds
poetical and biblical, and so I use it.) I dreamed that I was in a
strange country--indeed, one might say an extraordinary country. It was
ruled entirely by critics.

The people in this strange land had a very high opinion of
critics--nearly as high an opinion of critics as the critics themselves
had, but not, of course, quite--that not being practicable--and they had
agreed to be guided in all things by the critics. I stayed some years in
that land. But it was not a cheerful place to live in, so I dreamed.

There were authors in this country, at first, and they wrote books. But
the critics could find nothing original in the books whatever, and said
it was a pity that men, who might be usefully employed hoeing potatoes,
should waste their time and the time of the critics, which was of still
more importance, in stringing together a collection of platitudes,
familiar to every school-boy, and dishing up old plots and stories that
had already been cooked and recooked for the public until everybody had
been surfeited with them.

And the writers read what the critics said and sighed, and gave up
writing books, and went off and hoed potatoes; as advised. They had
had no experience in hoeing potatoes, and they hoed very badly; and
the people whose potatoes they hoed strongly recommended them to leave
hoeing potatoes, and to go back and write books. But you can't do what
everybody advises.

There were artists also in this strange world, at first, and they
painted pictures, which the critics came and looked at through
eyeglasses.

"Nothing whatever original in them," said the critics; "same old colors,
same old perspective and form, same old sunset, same old sea and land,
and sky and figures. Why do these poor men waste their time, painting
pictures, when they might be so much more satisfactorily employed on
ladders painting houses?"

Nothing, by the by, you may have noticed, troubles your critic more than
the idea that the artist is wasting his time. It is the waste of time
that vexes the critic; he has such an exalted idea of the value of other
people's time. "Dear, dear me!" he says to himself, "why, in the time
the man must have taken to paint this picture or to write this book,
he might have blacked fifteen thousand pairs of boots, or have carried
fifteen thousand hods of mortar up a ladder. This is how the time of the
world is lost!"

It never occurs to him that, but for that picture or book, the artist
would, in all probability, have been mouching about with a pipe in his
mouth, getting into trouble.

It reminds me of the way people used to talk to me when I was a boy.
I would be sitting, as good as gold, reading "The Pirate's Lair," when
some cultured relative would look over my shoulder and say: "Bah! what
are you wasting your time with rubbish for? Why don't you go and do
something useful?" and would take the book away from me. Upon which I
would get up, and go out to "do something useful;" and would come home
an hour afterward, looking like a bit out of a battle picture, having
tumbled through the roof of Farmer Bate's greenhouse and killed a
cactus, though totally unable to explain how I came to be on the roof of
Farmer Bate's greenhouse. They had much better have left me alone, lost
in "The Pirate's Lair!"

The artists in this land of which I dreamed left off painting pictures,
after hearing what the critics said, and purchased ladders, and went off
and painted houses.

Because, you see, this country of which I dreamed was not one of those
vulgar, ordinary countries, such as exist in the waking world, where
people let the critics talk as much as ever they like, and nobody pays
the slightest attention to what they say. Here, in this strange land,
the critics were taken seriously, and their advice followed.

As for the poets and sculptors, they were very soon shut up. The idea of
any educated person wanting to read modern poetry when he could obtain
Homer, or caring to look at any other statue while there was still some
of the Venus de Medicis left, was too absurd. Poets and sculptors were
only wasting their time.

What new occupation they were recommended to adopt, I forget. Some
calling they knew nothing whatever about, and that they were totally
unfitted for, of course.

The musicians tried their art for a little while, but they, too, were
of no use. "Merely a repetition of the same notes in different
combinations," said the critics. "Why will people waste their time
writing unoriginal music, when they might be sweeping crossings?"

One man had written a play. I asked what the critics had said about him.
They showed me his tomb.

Then, there being no more artists or _litterateurs_ or dramatists or
musicians left for their beloved critics to criticise, the general
public of this enlightened land said to themselves, "Why should not our
critics come and criticise us? Criticism is useful to a man. Have we
not often been told so? Look how useful it has been to the artists and
writers--saved the poor fellows from wasting their time? Why shouldn't
we have some of its benefits?"

They suggested the idea to the critics, and the critics thought it an
excellent one, and said they would undertake the job with pleasure. One
must say for the critics that they never shirk work. They will sit and
criticise for eighteen hours a day, if necessary, or even, if quite
unnecessary, for the matter of that. You can't give them too much to
criticise. They will criticise everything and everybody in this world.
They will criticise everything in the next world, too, when they get
there. I expect poor old Pluto has a lively time with them all, as it
is.

So, when a man built a house, or a farm-yard hen laid an egg, the
critics were asked in to comment on it. They found that none of the
houses were original. On every floor were passages that seemed mere
copies from passages in other houses. They were all built on the same
hackneyed plan; cellars underneath, ground floor level with the street,
attic at the top. No originality anywhere!

So, likewise with the eggs. Every egg suggested reminiscences of other
eggs.

It was heartrending work.

The critics criticised all things. When a young couple fell in love,
they each, before thinking of marriage, called upon the critics for a
criticism of the other one.

Needless to say that, in the result, no marriage ever came of it.

"My dear young lady," the critics would say, after the inspection had
taken place, "I can discover nothing new whatever about the young man.
You would simply be wasting your time in marrying him."

Or, to the young man, it would be:

"Oh, dear, no! Nothing attractive about the girl at all. Who on
earth gave you that notion? Simply a lovely face and figure, angelic
disposition, beautiful mind, stanch heart, noble character. Why, there
must have been nearly a dozen such girls born into the world since its
creation. You would be only wasting your time loving her."

They criticised the birds for their hackneyed style of singing, and the
flowers for their hackneyed scents and colors. They complained of the
weather that it lacked originality--(true, they had not lived out an
English spring)--and found fault with the Sun because of the sameness of
his methods.

They criticised the babies. When a fresh infant was published in a
house, the critics would call in a body to pass their judgment upon it,
and the young mother would bring it down for them to sample.

"Did you ever see a child anything like that in this world before?" she
would say, holding it out to them. "Isn't it a wonderful baby? _You_
never saw a child with legs like that, I know. Nurse says he's the most
extraordinary baby she ever attended. Bless him!"

But the critics did not think anything of it.

"Tut, tut," they would reply, "there is nothing extraordinary about
that child--no originality whatever. Why, it's exactly like every other
baby--bald head, red face, big mouth, and stumpy nose. Why, that's only
a weak imitation of the baby next door. It's a plagiarism, that's what
that child is. You've been wasting your time, madam. If you can't do
anything more original than that, we should advise you to give up the
business altogether."

That was the end of criticism in that strange land.

"Oh! look here, we've had enough of you and your originality," said the
people to the critics, after that. "Why, _you_ are not original, when
one comes to think of it, and your criticisms are not original. You've
all of you been saying exactly the same thing ever since the time of
Solomon. We are going to drown you and have a little peace."

"What, drown a critic!" cried the critics, "never heard of such a
monstrous proceeding in our lives!"

"No, we flatter ourselves it is an original idea," replied the public,
brutally. "You ought to be charmed with it. Out you come!"

So they took the critics out and drowned them, and then passed a short
act, making criticism a capital offense.

After that, the art and literature of the country followed,
somewhat, the methods of the quaint and curious school, but the land,
notwithstanding, was a much more cheerful place to live in, I dreamed.

But I never finished telling you about the dream in which I thought I
left my legs behind me when I went into a certain theater.

I dreamed that the ticket the man gave me for my legs was No. 19, and I
was worried all through the performance for fear No. 61 should get hold
of them, and leave me his instead. Mine are rather a fine pair of legs,
and I am, I confess, a little proud of them--at all events, I prefer
them to anybody else's. Besides, number sixty-one's might be a skinny
pair, and not fit me.

It quite spoiled my evening, fretting about this.

Another extraordinary dream I had was one in which I dreamed that I
was engaged to be married to my Aunt Jane. That was not, however, the
extraordinary part of it; I have often known people to dream things like
that. I knew a man who once dreamed that he was actually married to his
own mother-in-law! He told me that never in his life had he loved the
alarm clock with more deep and grateful tenderness than he did that
morning. The dream almost reconciled him to being married to his real
wife. They lived quite happily together for a few days, after that
dream.

No; the extraordinary part of my dream was, that I knew it was a dream.
"What on earth will uncle say to this engagement?" I thought to myself,
in my dream. "There's bound to be a row about it. We shall have a deal
of trouble with uncle, I feel sure." And this thought quite troubled me
until the sweet reflection came: "Ah! well, it's only a dream."

And I made up my mind that I would wake up as soon as uncle found out
about the engagement, and leave him and Aunt Jane to fight the matter
out between themselves.

It is a very great comfort, when the dream grows troubled and alarming,
to feel that it is only a dream, and to know that we shall awake soon
and be none the worse for it. We can dream out the foolish perplexity
with a smile then.

Sometimes the dream of life grows strangely troubled and perplexing, and
then he who meets dismay the bravest is he who feels that the fretful
play is but a dream--a brief, uneasy dream of three score years and ten,
or thereabouts, from which, in a little while, he will awake--at least,
he dreams so.

How dull, how impossible life would be without dreams--waking dreams, I
mean--the dreams that we call "castles in the air," built by the kindly
hands of Hope! Were it not for the mirage of the oasis, drawing his
footsteps ever onward, the weary traveler would lie down in the desert
sand and die. It is the mirage of distant success, of happiness that,
like the bunch of carrots fastened an inch beyond the donkey's nose,
seems always just within our reach, if only we will gallop fast enough,
that makes us run so eagerly along the road of Life.

Providence, like a father with a tired child, lures us ever along the
way with tales and promises, until, at the frowning gate that ends the
road, we shrink back, frightened. Then, promises still more sweet he
stoops and whispers in our ear, and timid yet partly reassured, and
trying to hide our fears, we gather up all that is left of our little
stock of hope and, trusting yet half afraid, push out our groping feet
into the darkness.



EVERGREENS

By Jerome K. Jerome


They look so dull and dowdy in the spring weather, when the snow drops
and the crocuses are putting on their dainty frocks of white and mauve
and yellow, and the baby-buds from every branch are peeping with bright
eyes out on the world, and stretching forth soft little leaves toward
the coming gladness of their lives. They stand apart, so cold and hard
amid the stirring hope and joy that are throbbing all around them.

And in the deep full summer-time, when all the rest of nature dons its
richest garb of green, and the roses clamber round the porch, and
the grass waves waist-high in the meadow, and the fields are gay with
flowers--they seem duller and dowdier than ever then, wearing their
faded winter's dress, looking so dingy and old and worn.

In the mellow days of autumn, when the trees, like dames no longer
young, seek to forget their aged looks under gorgeous bright-toned robes
of gold and brown and purple, and the grain is yellow in the fields,
and the ruddy fruit hangs clustering from the drooping boughs, and the
wooded hills in their thousand hues stretched like leafy rainbows above
the vale--ah! surely they look their dullest and dowdiest then. The
gathered glory of the dying year is all around them. They seem so out of
place among it, in their somber, everlasting green, like poor relations
at a rich man's feast. It is such a weather-beaten old green dress. So
many summers' suns have blistered it, so many winters' rains have beat
upon it--such a shabby, mean, old dress; it is the only one they have!

They do not look quite so bad when the weary winter weather is come,
when the flowers are dead, and the hedgerows are bare, and the trees
stand out leafless against the gray sky, and the birds are all silent,
and the fields are brown, and the vine clings round the cottages with
skinny, fleshless arms, and they alone of all things are unchanged, they
alone of all the forest are green, they alone of all the verdant host
stand firm to front the cruel winter.

They are not very beautiful, only strong and stanch and steadfast--the
same in all times, through all seasons--ever the same, ever green. The
spring cannot brighten them, the summer cannot scorch them, the autumn
cannot wither them, the winter cannot kill them.

There are evergreen men and women in the world, praise be to God! Not
many of them, but a few. They are not the showy folk; they are not the
clever, attractive folk. (Nature is an old-fashioned shopkeeper; she
never puts her best goods in the window.) They are only the quiet,
strong folk; they are stronger than the world, stronger than life or
death, stronger than Fate. The storms of life sweep over them, and the
rains beat down upon them, and the biting frosts creep round them; but
the winds and the rains and the frosts pass away, and they are still
standing, green and straight. They love the sunshine of life in their
undemonstrative way--its pleasures, its joys. But calamity cannot bow
them, sorrow and affliction bring not despair to their serene faces,
only a little tightening of the lips; the sun of our prosperity makes
the green of their friendship no brighter, the frost of our adversity
kills not the leaves of their affection.

Let us lay hold of such men and women; let us grapple them to us with
hooks of steel; let us cling to them as we would to rocks in a tossing
sea. We do not think very much of them in the summertime of life. They
do not flatter us or gush over us. They do not always agree with us.
They are not always the most delightful society, by any means. They are
not good talkers, nor--which would do just as well, perhaps better--do
they make enraptured listeners. They have awkward manners, and very
little tact. They do not shine to advantage beside our society friends.
They do not dress well; they look altogether somewhat dowdy and
commonplace. We almost hope they will not see us when we meet them
just outside the club. They are not the sort of people we want to
ostentatiously greet in crowded places. It is not till the days of our
need that we learn to love and know them. It is not till the winter that
the birds see the wisdom of building their nests in the evergreen trees.

And we, in our spring-time folly of youth, pass them by with a sneer,
the uninteresting, colorless evergreens, and, like silly children with
nothing but eyes in their heads, stretch out our hands and cry for the
pretty flowers. We will make our little garden of life such a charming,
fairy-like spot, the envy of every passer-by! There shall nothing grow
in it but lilies and roses, and the cottage we will cover all over with
Virginia-creeper. And, oh, how sweet it will look, under the dancing
summer sun-light, when the soft west breeze is blowing!

And, oh, how we shall stand and shiver there when the rain and the east
wind come!

Oh, you foolish, foolish little maidens, with your dainty heads so full
of unwisdom! how often--oh! how often, are you to be warned that it is
not always the sweetest thing in lovers that is the best material to
make a good-wearing husband out of? "The lover sighing like a furnace"
will not go on sighing like a furnace forever. That furnace will go out.
He will become the husband, "full of strange oaths--jealous in honor,
sudden and quick in quarrel," and grow "into the lean and slipper'd
pantaloon." How will he wear? There will be no changing him if he does
not suit, no sending him back to be altered, no having him let out a bit
where he is too tight and hurts you, no having him taken in where he is
too loose, no laying him by when the cold comes, to wrap yourself up in
something warmer. As he is when you select him, so he will have to last
you all your life--through all changes, through all seasons.

Yes, he looks very pretty now--handsome pattern, if the colors are fast
and it does not fade--feels soft and warm to the touch. How will he
stand the world's rough weather? How will he stand life's wear and tear?

He looks so manly and brave. His hair curls so divinely. He dresses so
well (I wonder if the tailor's bill is paid?) He kisses your hand so
gracefully. He calls you such pretty names. His arm feels so strong a
round you. His fine eyes are so full of tenderness as they gaze down
into yours.

Will he kiss your hand when it is wrinkled and old? Will he call you
pretty names when the baby is crying in the night, and you cannot keep
it quiet--or, better still, will he sit up and take a turn with it? Will
his arm be strong around you in the days of trouble? Will his eyes shine
above you full of tenderness when yours are growing dim?

And you boys, you silly boys! what materials for a wife do you think you
will get out of the empty-headed coquettes you are raving and tearing
your hair about. Oh! yes, she is very handsome, and she dresses with
exquisite taste (the result of devoting the whole of her heart, mind and
soul to the subject, and never allowing her thoughts to be distracted
from it by any other mundane or celestial object whatsoever); and she
is very agreeable and entertaining and fascinating; and she will go
on looking handsome, and dressing exquisitely, and being agreeable and
entertaining and fascinating just as much after you have married her as
before--more so, if anything.

But _you_ will not get the benefit of it. Husbands will be charmed and
fascinated by her in plenty, but _you_ will not be among them. You
will run the show, you will pay all the expenses, do all the work. Your
performing lady will be most affable and enchanting to the crowd. They
will stare at her, and admire her, and talk to her, and flirt with her.
And you will be able to feel that you are quite a benefactor to your
fellow-men and women--to your fellow-men especially--in providing such
delightful amusement for them, free. But _you_ will not get any of the
fun yourself.

You will not get the handsome looks. _You_ will get the jaded face, and
the dull, lusterless eyes, and the untidy hair with the dye showing on
it. You will not get the exquisite dresses. _You_ will get dirty,
shabby frocks and slommicking dressing-gowns, such as your cook would
be ashamed to wear. _You_ will not get the charm and fascination. _You_
will get the after-headaches, the complainings and grumblings, the
silence and sulkiness, the weariness and lassitude and ill-temper that
comes as such a relief after working hard all day at being pleasant!

It is not the people who shine in society, but the people who brighten
up the back parlor; not the people who are charming when they are out,
but the people who are charming when they are in, that are good to
_live_ with. It is not the brilliant men and women, but the simple,
strong, restful men and women, that make the best traveling companions
for the road of life. The men and women who will only laugh as they
put up the umbrella when the rain begins to fall, who will trudge along
cheerfully through the mud and over the stony places--the comrades who
will lay their firm hand on ours and strengthen us when the way is dark
and we are growing weak--the evergreen men and women, who, like
the holly, are at their brightest and best when the blast blows
chilliest--the stanch men and women!

It is a grand thing this stanchness. It is the difference between a dog
and a sheep--between a man and an oyster.

Women, as a rule, are stancher than men. There are women that you feel
you could rely upon to the death. But very few men indeed have this
dog-like virtue. Men, taking them generally, are more like cats. You may
live with them and call them yours for twenty years, but you can never
feel _quite_ sure of them. You never know exactly what they are thinking
of. You never feel easy in your mind as to the result of the next-door
neighbor's laying down a Brussels carpet in his kitchen.

We have no school for the turning-out of stanch men in this nineteenth
century. In the old, earnest times, war made men stanch and true to each
other. We have learned up a good many glib phrases about the wickedness
of war, and we thank God that we live in these peaceful, trading times,
wherein we can--and do--devote the whole of our thoughts and energies to
robbing and cheating and swindling one another--to "doing" our friends,
and overcoming our enemies by trickery and lies--wherein, undisturbed by
the wicked ways of fighting-men, we can cultivate to better perfection
the "smartness," the craft, and the cunning, and all the other
"business-like" virtues on which we so pride ourselves, and which were
so neglected and treated with so little respect in the bad old age of
violence, when men chose lions and eagles for their symbols rather than
foxes.

There is a good deal to be said against war. I am not prepared to
maintain that war did not bring with it disadvantages, but there can be
no doubt that, for the noblest work of Nature--the making of men--it
was a splendid manufactory. It taught men courage. It trained them in
promptness and determination, in strength of brain and strength of hand.
From its stern lessons they learned fortitude in suffering, coolness in
danger, cheerfulness under reverses. Chivalry, Reverence, and Loyalty
are the beautiful children of ugly War. But, above all gifts, the
greatest gift it gave to men was stanchness.

It first taught men to be true to one another; to be true to their duty,
true to their post; to be in all things faithful, even unto death.

The martyrs that died at the stake; the explorers that fought with
Nature and opened up the world for us; the reformers (they had to do
something more than talk in those days) who won for us our liberties;
the men who gave their lives to science and art, when science and art
brought, not as now, fame and fortune, but shame and penury--they
sprang from the loins of the rugged men who had learned, on many a grim
battlefield, to laugh at pain and death, who had had it hammered into
them, with many a hard blow, that the whole duty of a man in this world
is to be true to his trust, and fear not.

Do you remember the story of the old Viking who had been converted
to Christianity, and who, just as they were about, with much joy, to
baptize him, paused and asked: "But what--if this, as you tell me, is
the only way to the true Valhalla--what has become of my comrades, my
friends who are dead, who died in the old faith--where are they?"

The priests, confused, replied there could be no doubt those unfortunate
folk had gone to a place they would rather not mention.

"Then," said the old warrior, stepping back, "I will not be baptized. I
will go along with my own people."

He had lived with them, fought beside them; they were his people. He
would stand by them to the end--of eternity. Most assuredly, a very
shocking old Viking! But I think it might be worth while giving up our
civilization and our culture to get back to the days when they made men
like that.

The only reminder of such times that we have left us now, is the
bull-dog; and he is fast dying out--the pity of it! What a splendid old
dog he is! so grim, so silent, so stanch; so terrible, when he has got
his idea, of his duty clear before him; so absurdly meek, when it is
only himself that is concerned.

He is the gentlest, too, and the most lovable of all dogs. He does not
look it. The sweetness of his disposition would not strike the casual
observer at first glance. He resembles the gentleman spoken of in the
oft-quoted stanza:

     'E's all right when yer knows 'im.
     But yer've got to know 'im fust.

The first time I ever met a bull-dog--to speak to, that is--was many
years ago. We were lodging down in the country, an orphan friend of
mine named George, and myself, and one night, coming home late from some
dissolving views we found the family had gone to bed. They had left a
light in our room, however, and we went in and sat down, and began to
take off our boots.

And then, for the first time, we noticed on the hearthrug a bull-dog.
A dog with a more thoughtfully ferocious expression--a dog with,
apparently, a heart more dead to all ennobling and civilizing
sentiments--I have never seen. As George said, he looked more like some
heathen idol than a happy English dog.

He appeared to have been waiting for us; and he rose up and greeted us
with a ghastly grin, and got between us and the door.

We smiled at him--a sickly, propitiatory smile. We said, "Good dog--poor
fellow!" and we asked him, in tones implying that the question could
admit of no negative, if he was not a "nice old chap." We did not really
think so. We had our own private opinion concerning him, and it was
unfavorable. But we did not express it. We would not have hurt his
feelings for the world. He was a visitor, our guest, so to speak--and,
as well-brought-up young men, we felt that the right thing to do was for
us to prevent his gaining any hint that we were not glad to see him, and
to make him feel as little as possible the awkwardness of his position.

I think we succeeded. He was singularly unembarrassed, and far more at
his ease than even we were. He took but little notice of our flattering
remarks, but was much drawn toward George's legs. George used to be,
I remember, rather proud of his legs. I could never see enough in them
myself to excuse George's vanity; indeed, they always struck me
as lumpy. It is only fair to acknowledge, however, that they quite
fascinated that bull-dog. He walked over and criticized them with the
air of a long-baffled connoisseur who had at last found his ideal. At
the termination of his inspection he distinctly smiled.

George, who at that time was modest and bashful, blushed and drew them
up on to the chair. On the dog's displaying a desire to follow them,
George moved up on to the table, and squatted there in the middle,
nursing his knees. George's legs being lost to him, the dog appeared
inclined to console himself with mine. I went and sat beside George on
the table.

Sitting with your feet drawn up in front of you, on a small and rickety
one-legged table, is a most trying exercise, especially if you are not
used to it. George and I both felt our position keenly. We did not like
to call out for help, and bring the family down. We were proud young
men, and we feared lest, to the unsympathetic eye of the comparative
stranger, the spectacle we should present might not prove imposing.

We sat on in silence for about half an hour, the dog keeping a
reproachful eye upon us from the nearest chair, and displaying
elephantine delight whenever we made any movement suggestive of climbing
down.

At the end of the half hour we discussed the advisability of "chancing
it," but decided not to. "We should never," George said, "confound
foolhardiness with courage."

"Courage," he continued--George had quite a gift for maxims--"courage is
the wisdom of manhood; foolhardiness, the folly of youth."

He said that to get down from the table while that dog remained in the
room, would clearly prove us to be possessed of the latter quality; so
we restrained ourselves, and sat on.

We sat on for over an hour, by which time, having both grown careless
of life and indifferent to the voice of Wisdom, we did "chance it;" and
throwing the table-cloth over our would-be murderer, charged for the
door and got out.

The next morning we complained to our landlady of her carelessness in
leaving wild beasts about the place, and we gave her a brief if not
exactly truthful, history of the business.

Instead of the tender womanly sympathy we had expected, the old lady sat
down in the easy chair and burst out laughing.

"What! old Boozer," she exclaimed, "you was afraid of old Boozer! Why,
bless you, he wouldn't hurt a worm! He ain't got a tooth in his head,
he ain't; we has to feed him with a spoon; and I'm sure the way the cat
chivies him about must be enough to make his life a burden to him. I
expect he wanted you to nurse him; he's used to being nursed."

And that was the brute that had kept us sitting on a table, with our
boots off, for over an hour on a chilly night!

Another bull-dog exhibition that occurs to me was one given by my uncle.
He had had a bulldog--a young one--given to him by a friend. It was a
grand dog, so his friend had told him; all it wanted was training--it
had not been properly trained. My uncle did not profess to know much
about the training of bull-dogs; but it seemed a simple enough matter,
so he thanked the man, and took his prize home at the end of a rope.

"Have we got to live in the house with _this?_" asked my aunt,
indignantly, coming in to the room about an hour after the dog's advent,
followed by the quadruped himself, wearing an idiotically self-satisfied
air.

"That!" exclaimed my uncle, in astonishment; "why, it's a splendid dog.
His father was honorably mentioned only last year at the Aquarium."

"Ah, well, all I can say is, that his son isn't going the way to
get honorably mentioned in this neighborhood," replied my aunt, with
bitterness; "he's just finished killing poor Mrs. McSlanger's cat, if
you want to know what he has been doing. And a pretty row there'll be
about it, too!"

"Can't we hush it up?" said my uncle.

"Hush it up?" retorted my aunt. "If you'd heard the row, you wouldn't
sit there and talk like a fool. And if you'll take my advice," added my
aunt, "you'll set to work on this 'training,' or whatever it is, that
has got to be done to the dog, before any human life is lost."

My uncle was too busy to devote any time to the dog for the next day or
so, and all that could be done was to keep the animal carefully confined
to the house.

And a nice time we had with him! It was not that the animal was
bad-hearted. He meant well--he tried to do his duty. What was wrong
with him was that he was too hard-working. He wanted to do too much. He
started with an exaggerated and totally erroneous notion of his duties
and responsibilities. His idea was that he had been brought into the
house for the purpose of preventing any living human soul from coming
near it and of preventing any person who might by chance have managed to
slip in from ever again leaving it.

We endeavored to induce him to take a less exalted view of his position,
but in vain. That was the conception he had formed in his own mind
concerning his earthly task, and that conception he insisted on living
up to with, what appeared to us to be, unnecessary conscientiousness.

He so effectually frightened away all the trades people, that they at
last refused to enter the gate. All that they would do was to bring
their goods and drop them over the fence into the front garden, from
where we had to go and fetch them as we wanted them.

"I wish you'd run into the garden," my aunt would say to me--I was
stopping with them at the time--"and see if you can find any sugar; I
think there's some under the big rose-bush. If not, you'd better go to
Jones' and order some."

And on the cook's inquiring what she should get ready for lunch, my aunt
would say:

"Well, I'm sure, Jane, I hardly know. What have we? Are there any chops
in the garden, or was it a bit of steak that I noticed on the lawn?"

On the second afternoon the plumbers came to do a little job to the
kitchen boiler. The dog, being engaged at the time in the front of the
house, driving away the postman, did not notice their arrival. He
was broken-hearted at finding them there when he got downstairs, and
evidently blamed himself most bitterly. Still, there they were, all
owing to his carelessness, and the only thing to be done now was to see
that they did not escape.

There were three plumbers (it always takes three plumbers to do a job;
the first man comes on ahead to tell you that the second man will be
there soon, the second man comes to say that he can't stop, and the
third man follows to ask if the first man has been there); and that
faithful, dumb animal kept them pinned up in the kitchen--fancy wanting
to keep plumbers in a house longer than is absolutely necessary!--for
five hours, until my uncle came home; and the bill ran: "Self and two
men engaged six hours, repairing boiler-tap, 18s.; material, 2d.; total
18s. 2d."

He took a dislike to the cook from the very first. We did not blame him
for this. She was a disagreeable old woman, and we did not think much
of her ourselves. But when it came to keeping her out of the kitchen,
so that she could not do her work, and my aunt and uncle had to cook the
dinner themselves, assisted by the housemaid--a willing-enough girl, but
necessarily inexperienced--we felt that the woman was being subject to
persecution.

My uncle, after this, decided that the dog's training must be no longer
neglected. The man next door but one always talked as if he knew a lot
about sporting matters, and to him my uncle went for advice as to how to
set about it.

"Oh, yes," said the man, cheerfully, "very simple thing, training a
bull-dog. Wants patience, that's all."

"Oh, that will be all right," said my uncle; "it can't want much more
than living in the same house with him before he's trained does. How do
you start?"

"Well, I'll tell you," said next-door-but-one. "You take him up into a
room where there's not much furniture, and you shut the door and bolt
it."

"I see," said my uncle.

"Then you place him on the floor in the middle of the room, and you go
down on your knees in front of him, and begin to irritate him."

"Oh!"

"Yes--and you go on irritating him until you have made him quite
savage."

"Which, from what I know of the dog, won't take long," observed my uncle
thoughtfully.

"So much the better. The moment he gets savage he will fly at you."

My uncle agreed that the idea seemed plausible.

"He will fly at your throat," continued the next-door-but-one man, "and
this is where you will have to be careful. _As_ he springs toward you,
and _before_ he gets hold of you, you must hit him a fair straight blow
on his nose, and knock him down."

"Yes, I see what you mean."

"Quite so--well, the moment you have knocked him down, he will jump up
and go for you again. You must knock him down again; and you must keep
on doing this, until the dog is thoroughly cowed and exhausted. Once he
is thoroughly cowed, the thing's done--dog's as gentle as a lamb after
that."

"Oh!" says my uncle, rising from his chair, "you think that a good way,
do you?"

"Certainly," replied the next-door-but-one man; "it never fails."

"Oh! I wasn't doubting it," said my uncle; "only it's just occurred to
me that as you understand the knack of these things, perhaps _you'd_
like to come in and try _your_ hand on the dog? We can give you a
room quite to yourselves; and I'll undertake that nobody comes near to
interfere with you. And if--if," continued my uncle, with that kindly
thoughtfulness which ever distinguished his treatment of others, "_if_,
by any chance, you should miss hitting the dog at the proper critical
moment, or, if _you_ should get cowed and exhausted first, instead of
the dog--why, I shall only be too pleased to take the whole burden of
the funeral expenses on my own shoulders; and I hope you know me well
enough to feel sure that the arrangements will be tasteful, and, at the
same time, unostentatious!"

And out my uncle walked.

We next consulted the butcher, who agreed that the prize-ring method was
absurd, especially when recommended to a short-winded, elderly family
man, and who recommended, instead, plenty of out-door exercise for the
dog, under my uncle's strict supervision and control.

"Get a fairly long chain for him," said the butcher, "and take him out
for a good stiff run every evening. Never let him get away from you;
make him mind you, and bring him home always thoroughly exhausted. You
stick to that for a month or two, regular, and you'll have him like a
little child."

"Um!--seems to me that I'm going to get more training over his job than
anybody else," muttered my uncle, as he thanked the man and left the
shop; "but I suppose it's got to be done. Wish I'd never had the d---
dog now!"

So, religiously, every evening, my uncle would fasten a long chain to
that poor dog, and drag him away from his happy home with the idea of
exhausting him; and the dog would come back as fresh as paint, my uncle
behind him, panting and clamoring for brandy.

My uncle said he should never have dreamed there could have been such
stirring times in this prosaic nineteenth century as he had, training
that dog.

Oh, the wild, wild scamperings over the breezy common--the dog trying to
catch a swallow, and my uncle, unable to hold him back, following at the
other end of the chain!

Oh, the merry frolics in the fields, when the dog wanted to kill a cow,
and the cow wanted to kill the dog, and they each dodged round my uncle,
trying to do it!

And, oh, the pleasant chats with the old ladies when the dog wound the
chain into a knot around their legs, and upset them, and my uncle had to
sit down in the road beside them, and untie them before they could get
up again!

But a crisis came at last. It was a Saturday afternoon--uncle being
exercised by dog in usual way--nervous children playing in road, see
dog, scream, and run--playful young dog thinks it a game, jerks chain
out of uncle's grasp, and flies after them--uncle flies after dog,
calling it names--fond parent in front garden, seeing beloved children
chased by savage dog, followed by careless owner, flies after uncle,
calling _him_ names--householders come to doors and cry, "Shame!"--also
throw things at dog--things don't hit dog, hit uncle--things that don't
hit uncle, hit fond parent--through the village and up the hill, over
the bridge and round by the green--grand run, mile and a half without a
break! Children sink exhausted--dog gambols up among them--children go
into fits--fond parent and uncle come up together, both breathless.

"Why don't you call your dog off, you wicked old man?"

"Because I can't recollect his name, you old fool, you!"

Fond parent accuses uncle of having set dog on--uncle, indignant,
reviles fond parent--exasperated fond parent attacks uncle--uncle
retaliates with umbrella--faithful dog comes to assistance of uncle,
and inflicts great injury on fond parent--arrival of police--dog attacks
police--uncle and fond parent both taken into custody--uncle fined five
pounds and costs for keeping a ferocious dog at large--uncle fined five
pounds and costs for assault on fond parent--uncle fined five pounds and
cost for assault on police!

My uncle gave the dog away soon after that. He did not waste him. He
gave him as a wedding-present to a near relation.

But the saddest story I ever heard in connection with a bull-dog, was
one told by my aunt herself.

Now you can rely upon this story, because it is not one of mine, it is
one of my aunt's, and she would scorn to tell a lie. This is a story
you could tell to the heathen, and feel that you were teaching them
the truth and doing them good. They give this story out at all the
Sunday-schools in our part of the country, and draw moral lessons from
it. It is a story that a little child can believe.

It happened in the old crinoline days. My aunt, who was then living in a
country-town, had gone out shopping one morning, and was standing in the
High Street, talking to a lady friend, a Mrs. Gumworthy, the doctor's
wife. She (my aunt) had on a new crinoline that morning, in which,
to use her own expression, she rather fancied herself. It was
a tremendously big one, as stiff as a wire-fence; and it "set"
beautifully.

They were standing in front of Jenkins', the draper's; and my aunt
thinks that it--the crinoline--must have got caught up in something,
and an opening thus left between it and the ground. However this may
be, certain it is that an absurdly large and powerful bull-dog, who was
fooling round about there at the time, managed, somehow or other, to
squirm in under my aunt's crinoline, and effectually imprison himself
beneath it.

Finding himself suddenly in a dark and gloomy chamber, the dog,
naturally enough, got frightened, and made frantic rushes to get out.
But whichever way he charged; there was the crinoline in front of
him. As he flew, he, of course, carried it before him, and with the
crinoline, of course, went my aunt.

But nobody knew the explanation. My aunt herself did not know what had
happened. Nobody had seen the dog creep inside the crinoline. All that
the people did see was a staid and eminently respectable middle-aged
lady suddenly, and without any apparent reason, throw her umbrella down
in the road, fly up the High Street at the rate of ten miles an hour,
rush across it at the imminent risk of her life, dart down it again on
the other side, rush sideways, like an excited crab, into a
grocer's shop, run three times round the shop, upsetting the whole
stock-in-trade, come out of the shop backward and knock down a postman,
dash into the roadway and spin round twice, hover for a moment,
undecided, on the curb, and then away up the hill again, as if she had
only just started, all the while screaming out at the top of her voice
for somebody to stop her!

Of course, everybody thought she was mad. The people flew before her
like chaff before the wind. In less than five seconds the High Street
was a desert. The townsfolk scampered into their shops and houses and
barricaded the doors. Brave men dashed out and caught up little children
and bore them to places of safety amid cheers. Carts and carriages were
abandoned, while the drivers climbed up lamp-posts!

What would have happened had the affair gone on much longer--whether my
aunt would have been shot, or the fire-engine brought into requisition
against her--it is impossible, having regard to the terrified state of
the crowd, to say. Fortunately for her, she became exhausted. With
one despairing shriek she gave way, and sat down on the dog; and peace
reigned once again in that sweet rural town.







ARE WE AS INTERESTING AS WE THINK WE ARE?



"Charmed.  Very hot weather we've been having of late--I mean cold.
Let me see, I did not quite catch your name just now.  Thank you so
much.  Yes, it is a bit close."  And a silence falls, neither of us
being able to think what next to say.

What has happened is this:  My host has met me in the doorway, and
shaken me heartily by the hand.

"So glad you were able to come," he has said.  "Some friends of mine
here, very anxious to meet you."  He has bustled me across the room.
"Delightful people.  You'll like them--have read all your books."

He has brought me up to a stately lady, and has presented me.  We
have exchanged the customary commonplaces, and she, I feel, is
waiting for me to say something clever, original and tactful.  And I
don't know whether she is Presbyterian or Mormon; a Protectionist or
a Free Trader; whether she is engaged to be married or has lately
been divorced!

A friend of mine adopts the sensible plan of always providing you
with a short history of the person to whom he is about to lead you.

"I want to introduce you to a Mrs. Jones," he whispers.  "Clever
woman.  Wrote a book two years ago.  Forget the name of it.
Something about twins.  Keep away from sausages.  Father ran a pork
shop in the Borough.  Husband on the Stock Exchange.  Keep off coke.
Unpleasantness about a company.  You'll get on best by sticking to
the book.  Lot in it about platonic friendship.  Don't seem to be
looking too closely at her.  Has a slight squint she tries to hide."

By this time we have reached the lady, and he introduces me as a
friend of his who is simply dying to know her.

"Wants to talk about your book," he explains.  "Disagrees with you
entirely on the subject of platonic friendship.  Sure you'll be able
to convince him."

It saves us both a deal of trouble.  I start at once on platonic
friendship, and ask her questions about twins, avoiding sausages and
coke.  She thinks me an unusually interesting man, and I am less
bored than otherwise I might be.

I have sometimes thought it would be a serviceable device if, in
Society, we all of us wore a neat card--pinned, say, upon our back--
setting forth such information as was necessary; our name legibly
written, and how to be pronounced; our age (not necessarily in good
faith, but for purposes of conversation.  Once I seriously hurt a
German lady by demanding of her information about the Franco-German
war.  She looked to me as if she could not object to being taken for
forty.  It turned out she was thirty-seven.  Had I not been an
Englishman I might have had to fight a duel); our religious and
political beliefs; together with a list of the subjects we were most
at home upon; and a few facts concerning our career--sufficient to
save the stranger from, what is vulgarly termed "putting his foot in
it."  Before making jokes about "Dumping," or discussing the question
of Chinese Cheap Labour, one would glance behind and note whether
one's companion was ticketed "Whole-hogger," or "Pro-Boer."  Guests
desirous of agreeable partners--an "agreeable person," according to
the late Lord Beaconsfield's definition, being "a person who agrees
with you"--could make their own selection.

"Excuse me.  Would you mind turning round a minute?  Ah, 'Wagnerian
Crank!'  I am afraid we should not get on together. I prefer the
Italian school."

Or, "How delightful.  I see you don't believe in vaccination.  May I
take you into supper?"

Those, on the other hand, fond of argument would choose a suitable
opponent.  A master of ceremonies might be provided who would stand
in the centre of the room and call for partners:  "Lady with strong
views in favour of female franchise wishes to meet gentleman holding
the opinions of St. Paul.  With view to argument."

An American lady, a year or two ago, wrote me a letter that did me
real good:  she appreciated my work with so much understanding,
criticised it with such sympathetic interest.  She added that, when
in England the summer before, she had been on the point of accepting
an invitation to meet me; but at the last moment she had changed her
mind; she felt so sure--she put it pleasantly, but this is what it
came to--that in my own proper person I should fall short of her
expectations.  For my own sake I felt sorry she had cried off; it
would have been worth something to have met so sensible a woman.  An
author introduced to people who have read--or who say that they have
read--his books, feels always like a man taken for the first time to
be shown to his future wife's relations.  They are very pleasant.
They try to put him at his ease.  But he knows instinctively they are
disappointed with him.  I remember, when a very young man, attending
a party at which a famous American humorist was the chief guest.  I
was standing close behind a lady who was talking to her husband.

"He doesn't look a bit funny," said the lady.

"Great Scott!" answered her husband.  "How did you expect him to
look?  Did you think he would have a red nose and a patch over one
eye?"

"Oh, well, he might look funnier than that, anyhow," retorted the
lady, highly dissatisfied.  "It isn't worth coming for."

We all know the story of the hostess who, leaning across the table
during the dessert, requested of the funny man that he would kindly
say something amusing soon, because the dear children were waiting to
go to bed.  Children, I suppose, have no use for funny people who
don't choose to be funny.  I once invited a friend down to my house
for a Saturday to Monday.  He is an entertaining man, and before he
came I dilated on his powers of humour--somewhat foolishly perhaps--
in the presence of a certain youthful person who resides with me, and
who listens when she oughtn't to, and never when she ought.  He
happened not to be in a humorous mood that evening.  My young
relation, after dinner, climbed upon my knee.  For quite five minutes
she sat silent.  Then she whispered:

"Has he said anything funny?"

"Hush.  No, not yet; don't be silly."

Five minutes later:  "Was that funny?"

"No, of course not."

"Why not?"

"Because--can't you hear?  We are talking about Old Age Pensions."

"What's that?"

"Oh, it's--oh, never mind now.  It isn't a subject on which one can
be funny."

"Then what's he want to talk about it for?"

She waited for another quarter of an hour.  Then, evidently bored,
and much to my relief, suggested herself that she might as well go to
bed.  She ran to me the next morning in the garden with an air of
triumph.

"He said something so funny last night," she told me.

"Oh, what was it?" I inquired.  It seemed to me I must have missed
it.

"Well, I can't exactly 'member it," she explained, "not just at the
moment.  But it was so funny.  I dreamed it, you know."

For folks not Lions, but closely related to Lions, introductions must
be trying ordeals.  You tell them that for years you have been
yearning to meet them.  You assure them, in a voice trembling with
emotion, that this is indeed a privilege.  You go on to add that when
a boy -

At this point they have to interrupt you to explain that they are not
the Mr. So-and-So, but only his cousin or his grandfather; and all
you can think of to say is:  "Oh, I'm so sorry."

I had a nephew who was once the amateur long-distance bicycle
champion.  I have him still, but he is stouter and has come down to a
motor car.  In sporting circles I was always introduced as
"Shorland's Uncle."  Close-cropped young men would gaze at me with
rapture; and then inquire:  "And do you do anything yourself, Mr.
Jerome?"

But my case was not so bad as that of a friend of mine, a doctor.  He
married a leading actress, and was known ever afterwards as "Miss B-
's husband."

At public dinners, where one takes one's seat for the evening next to
someone that one possibly has never met before, and is never likely
to meet again, conversation is difficult and dangerous.  I remember
talking to a lady at a Vagabond Club dinner.  She asked me during the
entree--with a light laugh, as I afterwards recalled--what I thought,
candidly, of the last book of a certain celebrated authoress.  I told
her, and a coldness sprang up between us.  She happened to be the
certain celebrated authoress; she had changed her place at the last
moment so as to avoid sitting next to another lady novelist, whom she
hated.

One has to shift oneself, sometimes, on these occasions.  A newspaper
man came up to me last Ninth of November at the Mansion House.

"Would you mind changing seats with me?" he asked.  "It's a bit
awkward.  They've put me next to my first wife."

I had a troubled evening myself once long ago.  I accompanied a young
widow lady to a musical At Home, given by a lady who had more
acquaintances than she knew.  We met the butler at the top of the
stairs.  My friend spoke first:

"Say Mrs. Dash and--"

The butler did not wait for more--he was a youngish man--but shouted
out:

"Mr. and Mrs. Dash."

"My dear! how very quiet you have kept!" cried our hostess delighted.
"Do let me congratulate you."

The crush was too great and our hostess too distracted at the moment
for any explanations.  We were swept away, and both of us spent the
remainder of the evening feebly protesting our singleness.

If it had happened on the stage it would have taken us the whole play
to get out of it.  Stage people are not allowed to put things right
when mistakes are made with their identity.  If the light comedian is
expecting a plumber, the first man that comes into the drawing-room
has got to be a plumber.  He is not allowed to point out that he
never was a plumber; that he doesn't look like a plumber; that no one
not an idiot would mistake him for a plumber.  He has got to be shut
up in the bath-room and have water poured over him, just as if he
were a plumber--a stage plumber, that is.  Not till right away at the
end of the last act is he permitted to remark that he happens to be
the new curate.

I sat out a play once at which most people laughed.  It made me sad.
A dear old lady entered towards the end of the first act.  We knew
she was the aunt.  Nobody can possibly mistake the stage aunt--except
the people on the stage.  They, of course, mistook her for a circus
rider, and shut her up in a cupboard.  It is what cupboards seem to
be reserved for on the stage.  Nothing is ever put in them excepting
the hero's relations.  When she wasn't in the cupboard she was in a
clothes basket, or tied up in a curtain.  All she need have done was
to hold on to something while remarking to the hero:

"If you'll stop shouting and jumping about for just ten seconds, and
give me a chance to observe that I am your maiden aunt from
Devonshire, all this tomfoolery can be avoided."

That would have ended it.  As a matter of fact that did end it five
minutes past eleven.  It hadn't occurred to her to say it before.

In real life I never knew but of one case where a man suffered in
silence unpleasantness he could have ended with a word; and that was
the case of the late Corney Grain.  He had been engaged to give his
entertainment at a country house.  The lady was a nouvelle riche of
snobbish instincts.  She left instructions that Corney Grain when he
arrived was to dine with the servants.  The butler, who knew better,
apologised; but Corney was a man not easily disconcerted.  He dined
well, and after dinner rose and addressed the assembled company.

"Well, now, my good friends," said Corney, "if we have all finished,
and if you are all agreeable, I shall be pleased to present to you my
little show."

The servants cheered.  The piano was dispensed with.  Corney
contrived to amuse his audience very well for half-an-hour without
it.  At ten o'clock came down a message:  Would Mr. Corney Grain come
up into the drawing-room.  Corney went.  The company in the drawing-
room were waiting, seated.

"We are ready, Mr. Grain," remarked the hostess.

"Ready for what?" demanded Corney.

"For your entertainment," answered the hostess.

"But I have given it already," explained Corney; "and my engagement
was for one performance only."

"Given it!  Where?  When?"

"An hour ago, downstairs."

"But this is nonsense," exclaimed the hostess.

"It seemed to me somewhat unusual," Corney replied; "but it has
always been my privilege to dine with the company I am asked to
entertain.  I took it you had arranged a little treat for the
servants."

And Corney left to catch his train.

Another entertainer told me the following story, although a joke
against himself.  He and Corney Grain were sharing a cottage on the
river.  A man called early one morning to discuss affairs, and was
talking to Corney in the parlour, which was on the ground floor.  The
window was open.  The other entertainer--the man who told me the
story--was dressing in the room above.  Thinking he recognised the
voice of the visitor below, he leant out of his bedroom window to
hear better.  He leant too far, and dived head foremost into a bed of
flowers, his bare legs--and only his bare legs--showing through the
open window of the parlour.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed the visitor, turning at the moment and
seeing a pair of wriggling legs above the window sill; "who's that?"

Corney fixed his eyeglass and strolled to the window.

"Oh, it's only What's-his-name," he explained.  "Wonderful spirits.
Can be funny in the morning."



SHOULD WOMEN BE BEAUTIFUL?



Pretty women are going to have a hard time of it later on.  Hitherto,
they have had things far too much their own way.  In the future there
are going to be no pretty girls, for the simple reason there will be
no plain girls against which to contrast them.  Of late I have done
some systematic reading of ladies' papers.  The plain girl submits to
a course of "treatment."  In eighteen months she bursts upon Society
an acknowledged beauty.  And it is all done by kindness.  One girl
writes:

"Only a little while ago I used to look at myself in the glass and
cry.  Now I look at myself and laugh."

The letter is accompanied by two photographs of the young lady.  I
should have cried myself had I seen her as she was at first.  She was
a stumpy, flat-headed, squat-nosed, cross-eyed thing.  She did not
even look good.  One virtue she appears to have had, however.  It was
faith.  She believed what the label said, she did what the label told
her.  She is now a tall, ravishing young person, her only trouble
being, I should say, to know what to do with her hair--it reaches to
her knees and must be a nuisance to her.  She would do better to give
some of it away.  Taking this young lady as a text, it means that the
girl who declines to be a dream of loveliness does so out of
obstinacy.  What the raw material may be does not appear to matter.
Provided no feature is absolutely missing, the result is one and the
same.

Arrived at years of discretion, the maiden proceeds to choose the
style of beauty she prefers.  Will she be a Juno, a Venus, or a
Helen?  Will she have a Grecian nose, or one tip-tilted like the
petal of a rose?  Let her try the tip-tilted style first.  The
professor has an idea it is going to be fashionable.  If afterwards
she does not like it, there will be time to try the Grecian.  It is
difficult to decide these points without experiment.

Would the lady like a high or a low forehead?  Some ladies like to
look intelligent.  It is purely a matter of taste.  With the Grecian
nose, the low broad forehead perhaps goes better.  It is more
according to precedent.  On the other hand, the high brainy forehead
would be more original.  It is for the lady herself to select.

We come to the question of eyes.  The lady fancies a delicate blue,
not too pronounced a colour--one of those useful shades that go with
almost everything.  At the same time there should be depth and
passion.  The professor understands exactly the sort of eye the lady
means.  But it will be expensive.  There is a cheap quality; the
professor does not recommend it.  True that it passes muster by
gaslight, but the sunlight shows it up.  It lacks tenderness, and at
the price you can hardly expect it to contain much hidden meaning.
The professor advises the melting, Oh-George-take-me-in-your-arms-
and-still-my-foolish-fears brand.  It costs a little more, but it
pays for itself in the end.

Perhaps it will be best, now the eye has been fixed upon, to discuss
the question of the hair.  The professor opens his book of patterns.
Maybe the lady is of a wilful disposition.  She loves to run laughing
through the woods during exceptionally rainy weather; or to gallop
across the downs without a hat, her fair ringlets streaming in the
wind, the old family coachman panting and expostulating in the rear.
If one may trust the popular novel, extremely satisfactory husbands
have often been secured in this way.  You naturally look at a girl
who is walking through a wood, laughing heartily apparently for no
other reason than because it is raining--who rides at stretch gallop
without a hat.  If you have nothing else to do, you follow her.  It
is always on the cards that such a girl may do something really
amusing before she gets home.  Thus things begin.

To a girl of this kind, naturally curly hair is essential.  It must
be the sort of hair that looks better when it is soaking wet.  The
bottle of stuff that makes this particular hair to grow may be
considered dear, if you think merely of the price.  But that is not
the way to look at it.  "What is it going to do for me?"  That is
what the girl has got to ask herself.  It does not do to spoil the
ship for a ha'porth of tar, as the saying is.  If you are going to be
a dashing, wilful beauty, you must have the hair for it, or the whole
scheme falls to the ground.

Eyebrows and eyelashes, the professor assumes, the lady would like to
match the hair.  Too much eccentricity the professor does not agree
with.  Nature, after all, is the best guide; neatness combined with
taste, that is the ideal to be aimed at.  The eyebrows should be
almost straight, the professor thinks; the eyelashes long and silky,
with just the suspicion of a curl.  The professor would also suggest
a little less cheekbone.  Cheekbones are being worn low this season.

Will the lady have a dimpled chin, or does she fancy the square-cut
jaw?  Maybe the square-cut jaw and the firm, sweet mouth are more
suitable for the married woman.  They go well enough with the baby
and the tea-urn, and the strong, proud man in the background.  For
the unmarried girl the dimpled chin and the rosebud mouth are,
perhaps, on the whole safer.  Some gentlemen are so nervous of that
firm, square jaw.  For the present, at all events, let us keep to the
rosebud and the dimple.

Complexion!  Well, there is only one complexion worth considering--a
creamy white, relieved by delicate peach pink.  It goes with
everything, and is always effective.  Rich olives, striking pallors--
yes, you hear of these things doing well.  The professor's
experience, however, is that for all-round work you will never
improve upon the plain white and pink.  It is less liable to get out
of order, and is the easiest at all times to renew.

For the figure, the professor recommends something lithe and supple.
Five foot four is a good height, but that is a point that should be
discussed first with the dressmaker.  For trains, five foot six is,
perhaps, preferable.  But for the sporting girl, who has to wear
short frocks, that height would, of course, be impossible.

The bust and the waist are also points on which the dressmaker should
be consulted.  Nothing should be done in a hurry.  What is the
fashion going to be for the next two or three seasons?  There are
styles demanding that beginning at the neck you should curve out,
like a pouter pigeon.  There is apparently no difficulty whatever in
obtaining this result.  But if crinolines, for instance, are likely
to come in again!  The lady has only to imagine it for herself:  the
effect might be grotesque, suggestive of a walking hour-glass.  So,
too, with the waist.  For some fashions it is better to have it just
a foot from the neck.  At other times it is more useful lower down.
The lady will kindly think over these details and let the professor
know.  While one is about it, one may as well make a sound job.

It is all so simple, and, when you come to think of it, really not
expensive.  Age, apparently, makes no difference.  A woman is as old
as she looks.  In future, I take it, there will be no ladies over
five-and-twenty.  Wrinkles!  Why any lady should still persist in
wearing them is a mystery to me.  With a moderate amount of care any
middle-class woman could save enough out of the housekeeping money in
a month to get rid of every one of them.  Grey hair!  Well, of
course, if you cling to grey hair, there is no more to be said.  But
to ladies who would just as soon have rich wavy-brown or a delicate
shade of gold, I would point out that there are one hundred and
forty-seven inexpensive lotions on the market, any one of which,
rubbed gently into the head with a tooth-brush (not too hard) just
before going to bed will, to use a colloquialism, do the trick.

Are you too stout, or are you too thin?  All you have to do is to say
which, and enclose stamps.  But do not make a mistake and send for
the wrong recipe.  If you are already too thin, you might in
consequence suddenly disappear before you found out your mistake.
One very stout lady I knew worked at herself for eighteen months and
got stouter every day.  This discouraged her so much that she gave up
trying.  No doubt she had made a muddle and had sent for the wrong
bottle, but she would not listen to further advice.  She said she was
tired of the whole thing.

In future years there will be no need for a young man to look about
him for a wife; he will take the nearest girl, tell her his ideal,
and, if she really care for him, she will go to the shop and have
herself fixed up to his pattern.  In certain Eastern countries, I
believe, something of this kind is done.  A gentleman desirous of
adding to his family sends round the neighbourhood the weight and
size of his favourite wife, hinting that if another can be found of
the same proportions, there is room for her.  Fathers walk round
among their daughters, choose the most likely specimen, and have her
fattened up.  That is their brutal Eastern way.  Out West we shall be
more delicate.  Match-making mothers will probably revive the old
confession book.  Eligible bachelors will be invited to fill in a
page:  "Your favourite height in women," "Your favourite measurement
round the waist," "Do you like brunettes or blondes?"

The choice will be left to the girls.

"I do think Henry William just too sweet for words," the maiden of
the future will murmur to herself.  Gently, coyly, she will draw from
him his ideal of what a woman should be.  In from six months to a
year she will burst upon him, the perfect She; height, size, weight,
right to a T.  He will clasp her in his arms.

"At last," he will cry, "I have found her, the woman of my dreams."

And if he does not change his mind, and the bottles do not begin to
lose their effect, there will be every chance that they will be happy
ever afterwards.

Might not Science go even further?  Why rest satisfied with making a
world of merely beautiful women?  Cannot Science, while she is about
it, make them all good at the same time.  I do not apologise for the
suggestion.  I used to think all women beautiful and good.  It is
their own papers that have disillusioned me.  I used to look at this
lady or at that--shyly, when nobody seemed to be noticing me--and
think how fair she was, how stately.  Now I only wonder who is her
chemist.

They used to tell me, when I was a little boy, that girls were made
of sugar and spice.  I know better now.  I have read the recipes in
the Answers to Correspondents.

When I was quite a young man I used to sit in dark corners and
listen, with swelling heart, while people at the piano told me where
little girl babies got their wonderful eyes from, of the things they
did to them in heaven that gave them dimples.  Ah me!  I wish now I
had never come across those ladies' papers.  I know the stuff that
causes those bewitching eyes.  I know the shop where they make those
dimples; I have passed it and looked in.  I thought they were
produced by angels' kisses, but there was not an angel about the
place, that I could see.  Perhaps I have also been deceived as
regards their goodness.  Maybe all women are not so perfect as in the
popular short story they appear to be.  That is why I suggest that
Science should proceed still further, and make them all as beautiful
in mind as she is now able to make them in body.  May we not live to
see in the advertisement columns of the ladies' paper of the future
the portrait of a young girl sulking in a corner--"Before taking the
lotion!"  The same girl dancing among her little brothers and
sisters, shedding sunlight through the home--"After the three first
bottles!"  May we not have the Caudle Mixture:  One tablespoonful at
bed-time guaranteed to make the lady murmur, "Good-night, dear; hope
you'll sleep well," and at once to fall asleep, her lips parted in a
smile?  Maybe some specialist of the future will advertise Mind
Massage:  "Warranted to remove from the most obstinate subject all
traces of hatred, envy, and malice."

And, when Science has done everything possible for women, there might
be no harm in her turning her attention to us men.  Her idea at
present seems to be that we men are too beautiful, physically and
morally, to need improvement.  Personally, there are one or two
points about which I should like to consult her.



WHEN IS THE BEST TIME TO BE MERRY?



There is so much I could do to improve things generally in and about
Europe, if only I had a free hand.  I should not propose any great
fundamental changes.  These poor people have got used to their own
ways; it would be unwise to reform them all at once.  But there are
many little odds and ends that I could do for them, so many of their
mistakes I could correct for them.  They do not know this.  If they
only knew there was a man living in their midst willing to take them
in hand and arrange things for them, how glad they would be.  But the
story is always the same.  One reads it in the advertisements of the
matrimonial column:

"A lady, young, said to be good-looking"--she herself is not sure on
the point; she feels that possibly she may be prejudiced; she puts
before you merely the current gossip of the neighbourhood; people say
she is beautiful; they may be right, they may be wrong:  it is not
for her to decide--"well-educated, of affectionate disposition,
possessed of means, desires to meet gentleman with a view to
matrimony."

Immediately underneath one reads of a gentleman of twenty-eight,
"tall, fair, considered agreeable."  Really the modesty of the
matrimonial advertiser teaches to us ordinary mortals quite a
beautiful lesson.  I know instinctively that were anybody to ask me
suddenly:

"Do you call yourself an agreeable man?" I should answer promptly:

"An agreeable man!  Of course I'm an agreeable man.  What silly
questions you do ask!"  If he persisted in arguing the matter,
saying:

"But there are people who do not consider you an agreeable man."  I
should get angry with him.

"Oh, they think that, do they?" I should say.  "Well, you tell them
from me, with my compliments, that they are a set of blithering
idiots.  Not agreeable!  You show me the man who says I'm not
agreeable.  I'll soon let him know whether I'm agreeable or not."

These young men seeking a wife are silent on the subject of their own
virtues.  Such are for others to discover.  The matrimonial
advertiser confines himself to a simple statement of fact:  he is
considered agreeable."

He is domestically inclined, and in receipt of a good income.  He is
desirous of meeting a lady of serious disposition, with view to
matrimony.  If possessed of means--well, it is a trifle hardly worth
considering one way or the other.  He does not insist upon it; on the
other hand he does not exclude ladies of means; the main idea is
matrimony.

It is sad to reflect upon a young lady, said to be good-looking (let
us say good-looking and be done with it:  a neighbourhood does not
rise up and declare a girl good-looking if she is not good-looking,
that is only her modest way of putting it), let us say a young lady,
good-looking, well-educated, of affectionate disposition--it is
undeniably sad to reflect that such an one, matrimonially inclined,
should be compelled to have recourse to the columns of a matrimonial
journal.  What are the young men in the neighbourhood thinking of?
What more do they want?  Is it Venus come to life again with ten
thousand a year that they are waiting for!  It makes me angry with my
own sex reading these advertisements.  And when one thinks of the
girls that do get married!

But life is a mystery.  The fact remains:  here is the ideal wife
seeking in vain for a husband.  And here, immediately underneath--I
will not say the ideal husband, he may have faults; none of us are
perfect, but as men go a decided acquisition to any domestic hearth,
an agreeable gentleman, fond of home life, none of your gad-abouts--
calls aloud to the four winds for a wife--any sort of a wife,
provided she be of a serious disposition.  In his despair, he has
grown indifferent to all other considerations.  "Is there in this
world," he has said to himself, "one unmarried woman, willing to
marry me, an agreeable man, in receipt of a good income."  Possibly
enough this twain have passed one another in the street, have sat
side by side in the same tram-car, never guessing, each one, that the
other was the very article of which they were in want to make life
beautiful.

Mistresses in search of a servant, not so much with the idea of
getting work out of her, rather with the object of making her happy,
advertise on one page.  On the opposite page, domestic treasures--
disciples of Carlyle, apparently, with a passionate love of work for
its own sake--are seeking situations, not so much with the desire of
gain as with the hope of finding openings where they may enjoy the
luxury of feeling they are leading useful lives.  These philanthropic
mistresses, these toil-loving hand-maidens, have lived side by side
in the same town for years, never knowing one another.

So it is with these poor European peoples.  They pass me in the
street.  They do not guess that I am ready and willing to take them
under my care, to teach them common sense with a smattering of
intelligence--to be, as one might say, a father to them.  They look
at me.  There is nothing about me to tell them that I know what is
good for them better than they do themselves.  In the fairy tales the
wise man wore a conical hat and a long robe with twiddly things all
round the edge.  You knew he was a clever man.  It avoided the
necessity of explanation.  Unfortunately, the fashion has gone out.
We wise men have to wear just ordinary clothes.  Nobody knows we are
wise men.  Even when we tell them so, they don't believe it.  This it
is that makes our task the more difficult.

One of the first things I should take in hand, were European affairs
handed over to my control, would be the rearrangement of the
Carnival.  As matters are, the Carnival takes place all over Europe
in February.  At Nice, in Spain, or in Italy, it may be occasionally
possible to feel you want to dance about the streets in thin costume
during February.  But in more northern countries during Carnival time
I have seen only one sensible masker; he was a man who had got
himself up as a diver.  It was in Antwerp.  The rain was pouring down
in torrents; a cheery, boisterous John Bull sort of an east wind was
blustering through the streets at the rate of fifteen miles an hour.
Pierrots, with frozen hands, were blowing blue noses.  An elderly
Cupid had borrowed an umbrella from a cafe and was waiting for a
tram.  A very little devil was crying with the cold, and wiping his
eyes with the end of his own tail.  Every doorway was crowded with
shivering maskers.  The diver alone walked erect, the water streaming
from him.

February is not the month for open air masquerading.  The "confetti,"
which has come to be nothing but coloured paper cut into small discs,
is a sodden mass.  When a lump of it strikes you in the eye, your
instinct is not to laugh gaily, but to find out the man who threw it
and to hit him back.  This is not the true spirit of Carnival.  The
marvel is that, in spite of the almost invariably adverse weather,
these Carnivals still continue.  In Belgium, where Romanism still
remains the dominant religion, Carnival maintains itself stronger
than elsewhere in Northern Europe.

At one small town, Binche, near the French border, it holds
uninterrupted sway for three days and two nights, during which time
the whole of the population, swelled by visitors from twenty miles
round, shouts, romps, eats and drinks and dances.  After which the
visitors are packed like sardines into railway trains.  They pin
their tickets to their coats and promptly go to sleep.  At every
station the railway officials stumble up and down the trains with
lanterns.  The last feeble effort of the more wakeful reveller,
before he adds himself to the heap of snoring humanity on the floor
of the railway carriage, is to change the tickets of a couple of his
unconscious companions.  In this way gentlemen for the east are
dragged out by the legs at junctions, and packed into trains going
west; while southern fathers are shot out in the chill dawn at lonely
northern stations, to find themselves greeted with enthusiasm by
other people's families.

At Binche, they say--I have not counted them myself--that thirty
thousand maskers can be seen dancing at the same time.  When they are
not dancing they are throwing oranges at one another.  The houses
board up their windows.  The restaurants take down their mirrors and
hide away the glasses.  If I went masquerading at Binche I should go
as a man in armour, period Henry the Seventh.

"Doesn't it hurt," I asked a lady who had been there, "having oranges
thrown at you?  Which sort do they use, speaking generally, those
fine juicy ones--Javas I think you call them--or the little hard
brand with skins like a nutmeg-grater?  And if both sorts are used
indiscriminately, which do you personally prefer?"

"The smart people," she answered, "they are the same everywhere--they
must be extravagant--they use the Java orange.  If it hits you in the
back I prefer the Java orange.  It is more messy than the other, but
it does not leave you with that curious sensation of having been
temporarily stunned.  Most people, of course, make use of the small
hard orange.  If you duck in time, and so catch it on the top of your
head, it does not hurt so much as you would think.  If, however, it
hits you on a tender place--well, myself, I always find that a little
sal volatile, with old cognac--half and half, you understand--is
about the best thing.  But it only happens once a year," she added.

Nearly every town gives prizes for the best group of maskers.  In
some cases the first prize amounts to as much as two hundred pounds.
The butchers, the bakers, the candlestick makers, join together and
compete.  They arrive in wagons, each group with its band.  Free
trade is encouraged.  Each neighbouring town and village "dumps" its
load of picturesque merry-makers.

It is in these smaller towns that the spirit of King Carnival finds
happiest expression.  Almost every third inhabitant takes part in the
fun.  In Brussels and the larger towns the thing appears ridiculous.
A few hundred maskers force their way with difficulty through
thousands of dull-clad spectators, looking like a Spanish river in
the summer time, a feeble stream, dribbling through acres of muddy
bank.  At Charleroi, the centre of the Belgian Black Country, the
chief feature of the Carnival is the dancing of the children.  A
space is specially roped off for them.

If by chance the sun is kind enough to shine, the sight is a pretty
one.  How they love the dressing up and the acting, these small
mites!  One young hussy--she could hardly have been more than ten--
was gotten up as a haughty young lady.  Maybe some elder sister had
served as a model.  She wore a tremendous wig of flaxen hair, a hat
that I guarantee would have made its mark even at Ascot on the Cup
Day, a skirt that trailed two yards behind her, a pair of what had
once been white kid gloves, and a blue silk parasol.  Dignity!  I
have seen the offended barmaid, I have met the chorus girl--not by
appointment, please don't misunderstand me, merely as a spectator--up
the river on Sunday.  But never have I witnessed in any human being
so much hauteur to the pound avoir-dupois as was carried through the
streets of Charleroi by that small brat.  Companions of other days,
mere vulgar boys and girls, claimed acquaintance with her.  She
passed them with a stare of such utter disdain that it sent them
tumbling over one another backwards.  By the time they had recovered
themselves sufficiently to think of an old tin kettle lying handy in
the gutter she had turned the corner.

Two miserably clad urchins, unable to scrape together the few sous
necessary for the hire of a rag or two, had nevertheless determined
not to be altogether out of it.  They had managed to borrow a couple
of white blouses--not what you would understand by a white blouse,
dear Madame, a dainty thing of frills and laces, but the coarse white
sack the street sweeper wears over his clothes.  They had also
borrowed a couple of brooms.  Ridiculous little objects they looked,
the tiny head of each showing above the great white shroud as gravely
they walked, the one behind the other, sweeping the mud into the
gutter.  They also were of the Carnival, playing at being scavengers.

Another quaint sight I witnessed.  The "serpentin" is a feature of
the Belgian Carnival.  It is a strip of coloured paper, some dozen
yards long, perhaps.  You fling it as you would a lassoo, entangling
the head of some passer-by.  Naturally, the object most aimed at by
the Belgian youth is the Belgian maiden.  And, naturally also, the
maiden who finds herself most entangled is the maiden who--to use
again the language of the matrimonial advertiser--"is considered
good-looking."  The serpentin about her head is the "feather in her
cap" of the Belgian maiden on Carnival Day.  Coming suddenly round
the corner I almost ran into a girl.  Her back was towards me.  It
was a quiet street.  She had half a dozen of these serpentins.
Hurriedly, with trembling hands, she was twisting them round and
round her own head.  I looked at her as I passed.  She flushed
scarlet.  Poor little snub-nosed pasty-faced woman!  I wish she had
not seen me.  I could have bought sixpenny-worth, followed her, and
tormented her with them; while she would have pretended indignation--
sought, discreetly, to escape from me.

Down South, where the blood flows quicker, King Carnival is, indeed,
a jolly old soul.  In Munich he reigns for six weeks, the end coming
with a mad two days revel in the streets.  During the whole of the
period, folks in ordinary, every-day costume are regarded as
curiosities; people wonder what they are up to.  From the Grafin to
the Dienstmadchen, from the Herr Professor to the "Piccolo," as they
term the small artist that answers to our page boy, the business of
Munich is dancing, somewhere, somehow, in a fancy costume.  Every
theatre clears away the stage, every cafe crowds its chairs and
tables into corners, the very streets are cleared for dancing.
Munich goes mad.

Munich is always a little mad.  The maddest ball I ever danced at was
in Munich.  I went there with a Harvard University professor.  He had
been told what these balls were like.  Ever seeking knowledge of all
things, he determined to take the matter up for himself and examine
it.  The writer also must ever be learning.  I agreed to accompany
him.  We had not intended to dance.  Our idea was that we could be
indulgent spectators, regarding from some coign of vantage the antics
of the foolish crowd.  The professor was clad as became a professor.
Myself, I wore a simply-cut frock-coat, with trousering in French
grey.  The doorkeeper explained to us that this was a costume ball;
he was sorry, but gentlemen could only be admitted in evening dress
or in masquerade.

It was half past one in the morning.  We had sat up late on purpose;
we had gone without our dinner; we had walked two miles.  The
professor suggested pinning up the tails of his clerically-cut coat
and turning in his waistcoat.  The doorkeeper feared it would not be
quite the same thing.  Besides, my French grey trousers refused to
adapt themselves.  The doorkeeper proposed our hiring a costume--a
little speculation of his own; gentlemen found it simpler sometimes,
especially married gentlemen, to hire a costume in this manner,
changing back into sober garments before returning home.  It reduced
the volume of necessary explanation.

"Have you anything, my good man," said the professor, "anything that
would effect a complete disguise?"

The doorkeeper had the very thing--a Chinese arrangement, with
combined mask and wig.  It fitted neatly over the head, and was
provided with a simple but ingenious piece of mechanism by means of
which much could be done with the pigtail.  Myself the doorkeeper hid
from view under the cowl of a Carmelite monk.

"I do hope nobody recognises us," whispered my friend the professor
as we entered.

I can only hope sincerely that they did not.  I do not wish to talk
about myself.  That would be egotism.  But the mystery of the
professor troubles me to this day.  A grave, earnest gentleman, the
father of a family, I saw him with my own eyes put that ridiculous
pasteboard mask over his head.  Later on--a good deal later on--I
found myself walking again with him through silent star-lit streets.
Where he had been in the interval, and who then was the strange
creature under the Chinaman's mask, will always remain to me an
unsolved problem.



DO WE LIE A-BED TOO LATE?



It was in Paris, many years ago, that I fell by chance into this
habit of early rising.  My night--by reasons that I need not enter
into--had been a troubled one.  Tired of the hot bed that gave no
sleep, I rose and dressed myself, crept down the creaking stairs,
experiencing the sensations of a burglar new to his profession,
unbolted the great door of the hotel, and passed out into an unknown,
silent city, bathed in a mysterious soft light.  Since then, this
strange sweet city of the dawn has never ceased to call to me.  It
may be in London, in Paris again, in Brussels, Berlin, Vienna, that I
have gone to sleep, but if perchance I wake before the returning tide
of human life has dimmed its glories with the mists and vapours of
the noisy day, I know that beyond my window blind the fairy city, as
I saw it first so many years ago--this city that knows no tears, no
sorrow, through which there creeps no evil thing; this city of quiet
vistas, fading into hope; this city of far-off voices whispering
peace; this city of the dawn that still is young--invites me to talk
with it awhile before the waking hours drive it before them, and with
a sigh it passes whence it came.

It is the great city's one hour of purity, of dignity.  The very rag-
picker, groping with her filthy hands among the ashes, instead of an
object of contempt, moves from door to door an accusing Figure, her
thin soiled garments, her bent body, her scarred face, hideous with
the wounds of poverty, an eloquent indictment of smug Injustice,
sleeping behind its deaf shutters.  Yet even into her dim brain has
sunk the peace that fills for this brief hour the city.  This, too,
shall have its end, my sister!  Men and women were not born to live
on the husks that fill the pails outside the rich man's door.
Courage a little while longer, you and yours.  Your rheumy eyes once
were bright, your thin locks once soft and wavy, your poor bent back
once straight; and maybe, as they tell you in their gilded churches,
this bulging sack shall be lifted from your weary shoulders, your
misshapen limbs be straight again.  You pass not altogether unheeded
through these empty streets.  Not all the eyes of the universe are
sleeping.

The little seamstress, hurrying to her early work!  A little later
she will be one of the foolish crowd, joining in the foolish
laughter, in the coarse jests of the work-room:  but as yet the hot
day has not claimed her.  The work-room is far beyond, the home of
mean cares and sordid struggles far behind.  To her, also, in this
moment are the sweet thoughts of womanhood.  She puts down her bag,
rests herself upon a seat.  If all the day were dawn, this city of
the morning always with us!  A neighbouring clock chimes forth the
hour.  She starts up from her dream and hurries on--to the noisy
work-room.

A pair of lovers cross the park, holding each other's hands.  They
will return later in the day, but there will be another expression in
their eyes, another meaning in the pressure of their hands.  Now the
purity of the morning is with them.

Some fat, middle-aged clerk comes puffing into view:  his ridiculous
little figure very podgy.  He stops to take off his hat and mop his
bald head with his handkerchief:  even to him the morning lends
romance.  His fleshy face changes almost as one looks at him.  One
sees again the lad with his vague hopes, his absurd ambitions.

There is a statue of Aphrodite in one of the smaller Paris parks.
Twice in the same week, without particularly meaning it, I found
myself early in the morning standing in front of this statue gazing
listlessly at it, as one does when in dreamy mood; and on both
occasions, turning to go, I encountered the same man, also gazing at
it with, apparently, listless eyes.  He was an uninteresting looking
man--possibly he thought the same of me.  From his dress he might
have been a well-to-do tradesman, a minor Government official,
doctor, or lawyer.  Quite ten years later I paid my third visit to
the same statue at about the same hour.  This time he was there
before me.  I was hidden from him by some bushes.  He glanced round
but did not see me; and then he did a curious thing.  Placing his
hands on the top of the pedestal, which may have been some seven feet
in height, he drew himself up, and kissed very gently, almost
reverentially, the foot of the statue, begrimed though it was with
the city's dirt.  Had he been some long-haired student of the Latin
Quarter one would not have been so astonished.  But he was such a
very commonplace, quite respectable looking man.  Afterwards he drew
a pipe from his pocket, carefully filled and lighted it, took his
umbrella from the seat where it had been lying, and walked away.

Had it been their meeting-place long ago?  Had he been wont to tell
her, gazing at her with lover's eyes, how like she was to the statue?
The French sculptor has not to consider Mrs. Grundy.  Maybe, the
lady, raising her eyes, had been confused; perhaps for a moment
angry--some little milliner or governess, one supposes.  In France
the jeune fille of good family does not meet her lover unattended.
What had happened?  Or was it but the vagrant fancy of a middle-aged
bourgeois seeking in imagination the romance that reality so rarely
gives us, weaving his love dream round his changeless statue?

In one of Ibsen's bitter comedies the lovers agree to part while they
are still young, never to see each other in the flesh again.  Into
the future each will bear away the image of the other, godlike,
radiant with the glory of youth and love; each will cherish the
memory of a loved one who shall be beautiful always.  That their
parting may not appear such wild nonsense as at first it strikes us,
Ibsen shows us other lovers who have married in the orthodox fashion.
She was all that a mistress should be.  They speak of her as they
first knew her fifteen years ago, when every man was at her feet.  He
then was a young student, burning with fine ideals, with enthusiasm
for all the humanities.

They enter.

What did you expect?  Fifteen years have passed--fifteen years of
struggle with the grim realities.  He is fat and bald.  Eleven
children have to be provided for.  High ideals will not even pay the
bootmaker.  To exist you have to fight for mean ends with mean
weapons.  And the sweet girl heroine!  Now the worried mother of
eleven brats!  One rings down the curtain amid Satanic laughter.

That is why, for one reason among so many, I love this mystic morning
light.  It has a strange power of revealing the beauty that is hidden
from us by the coarser beams of the full day.  These worn men and
women, grown so foolish looking, so unromantic; these artisans and
petty clerks plodding to their monotonous day's work; these dull-eyed
women of the people on their way to market to haggle over sous, to
argue and contend over paltry handfuls of food.  In this magic
morning light the disguising body becomes transparent.  They have
grown beautiful, not ugly, with the years of toil and hardship; these
lives, lived so patiently, are consecrated to the service of the
world.  Joy, hope, pleasure--they have done with all such, life for
them is over.  Yet they labour, ceaselessly, uncomplainingly.  It is
for the children.

One morning, near Brussels, I encountered a cart of faggots, drawn by
a hound so lean that stroking him might have hurt a dainty hand.  I
was shocked--angry, till I noticed his fellow beast of burden pushing
the cart from behind.  Such a scarecrow of an old woman!  There was
little to choose between them.  I walked with them a little way.  She
lived near Waterloo.  All day she gathered wood in the great forest,
and starting at three o'clock each morning, the two lean creatures
between them dragged the cart nine miles to Brussels, returning when
they had sold their load.  With luck she might reckon on a couple of
francs.  I asked her if she could not find something else to do.

Yes, it was possible, but for the little one, her grandchild.  Folks
will not employ old women burdened with grandchildren.

You fair, dainty ladies, who would never know it was morning if
somebody did not enter to pull up the blind and tell you so!  You do
well not to venture out in this magic morning light.  You would look
so plain--almost ugly, by the side of these beautiful women.

It is curious the attraction the Church has always possessed for the
marketing classes.  Christ drove them from the Temple, but still, in
every continental city, they cluster round its outer walls.  It makes
a charming picture on a sunny morning, the great cathedral with its
massive shadow forming the background; splashed about its feet, like
a parterre of gay flowers around the trunk of some old tree, the
women, young girls in their many coloured costumes, sitting before
their piled-up baskets of green vegetables, of shining fruits.

In Brussels the chief market is held on the Grande Place.  The great
gilded houses have looked down upon much the same scene every morning
these four hundred years.  In summer time it commences about half-
past four; by five o'clock it is a roaring hive, the great city round
about still sleeping.

Here comes the thrifty housewife of the poor, to whom the difference
of a tenth of a penny in the price of a cabbage is all-important, and
the much harassed keeper of the petty pension.  There are houses in
Brussels where they will feed you, light you, sleep you, wait on you,
for two francs a day.  Withered old ladies, ancient governesses, who
will teach you for forty centimes an hour, gather round these
ricketty tables, wolf up the thin soup, grumble at the watery coffee,
help themselves with unladylike greediness to the potato pie.  It
must need careful housewifery to keep these poor creatures on two
francs a day and make a profit for yourself.  So "Madame," the much-
grumbled-at, who has gone to bed about twelve, rises a little before
five, makes her way down with her basket.  Thus a few sous may be
saved upon the day's economies.

Sometimes it is a mere child who is the little housekeeper.  One
thinks that perhaps this early training in the art of haggling may
not be good for her.  Already there is a hard expression in the
childish eyes, mean lines about the little mouth.  The finer
qualities of humanity are expensive luxuries, not to be afforded by
the poor.

They overwork their patient dogs, and underfeed them.  During the two
hours' market the poor beasts, still fastened to their little
"chariots," rest in the open space about the neighbouring Bourse.
They snatch at what you throw them; they do not even thank you with a
wag of the tail.  Gratitude!  Politeness!  What mean you?  We have
not heard of such.  We only work.  Some of them amid all the din lie
sleeping between their shafts.  Some are licking one another's sores.
One would they were better treated; alas! their owners, likewise, are
overworked and underfed, housed in kennels no better.  But if the
majority in every society were not overworked and underfed and meanly
housed, why, then the minority could not be underworked and overfed
and housed luxuriously.  But this is talk to which no respectable
reader can be expected to listen.

They are one babel of bargaining, these markets.  The purchaser
selects a cauliflower.  Fortunately, cauliflowers have no feelings,
or probably it would burst into tears at the expression with which it
is regarded.  It is impossible that any lady should desire such a
cauliflower.  Still, out of mere curiosity, she would know the price-
-that is, if the owner of the cauliflower is not too much ashamed of
it to name a price.

The owner of the cauliflower suggests six sous.  The thing is too
ridiculous for argument.  The purchaser breaks into a laugh.

The owner of the cauliflower is stung.  She points out the beauties
of that cauliflower.  Apparently it is the cauliflower out of all her
stock she loves the best; a better cauliflower never lived; if there
were more cauliflowers in the world like this particular cauliflower
things might be different.  She gives a sketch of the cauliflower's
career, from its youth upwards.  Hard enough it will be for her when
the hour for parting from it comes.  If the other lady has not
sufficient knowledge of cauliflowers to appreciate it, will she
kindly not paw it about, but put it down and go away, and never let
the owner of the cauliflower see her again.

The other lady, more as a friend than as a purchaser, points out the
cauliflower's defects.  She wishes well to the owner of the
cauliflower, and would like to teach her something about her
business.  A lady who thinks such a cauliflower worth six sous can
never hope to succeed as a cauliflower vendor.  Has she really taken
the trouble to examine the cauliflower for herself, or has love made
her blind to its shortcomings?

The owner of the cauliflower is too indignant to reply.  She snatches
it away, appears to be comforting it, replaces it in the basket.  The
other lady is grieved at human obstinacy and stupidity in general.
If the owner of the cauliflower had had any sense she would have
asked four sous.  Eventually business is done at five.

It is the custom everywhere abroad--asking the price of a thing is
simply opening conversation.  A lady told me that, the first day she
began housekeeping in Florence, she handed over to a poulterer for a
chicken the price he had demanded--with protestations that he was
losing on the transaction, but wanted, for family reasons,
apparently, to get rid of the chicken.  He stood for half a minute
staring at her, and then, being an honest sort of man, threw in a
pigeon.

Foreign housekeepers starting business in London appear hurt when our
tradesmen decline to accept half-a-crown for articles marked three-
and-six.

"Then why mark it only three-and-sixpence?" is the foreign
housekeeper's argument.



SHOULD MARRIED MEN PLAY GOLF?



That we Englishmen attach too much importance to sport goes without
saying--or, rather, it has been said so often as to have become a
commonplace.  One of these days some reforming English novelist will
write a book, showing the evil effects of over-indulgence in sport:
the neglected business, the ruined home, the slow but sure sapping of
the brain--what there may have been of it in the beginning--leading
to semi-imbecility and yearly increasing obesity.

A young couple, I once heard of, went for their honeymoon to
Scotland.  The poor girl did not know he was a golfer (he had wooed
and won her during a period of idleness enforced by a sprained
shoulder), or maybe she would have avoided Scotland.  The idea they
started with was that of a tour.  The second day the man went out for
a stroll by himself.  At dinner-time he observed, with a far-away
look in his eyes, that it seemed a pretty spot they had struck, and
suggested their staying there another day.  The next morning after
breakfast he borrowed a club from the hotel porter, and remarked that
he would take a walk while she finished doing her hair.  He said it
amused him, swinging a club while he walked.  He returned in time for
lunch and seemed moody all the afternoon.  He said the air suited
him, and urged that they should linger yet another day.

She was young and inexperienced, and thought, maybe, it was liver.
She had heard much about liver from her father.  The next morning he
borrowed more clubs, and went out, this time before breakfast,
returning to a late and not over sociable dinner.  That was the end
of their honeymoon so far as she was concerned.  He meant well, but
the thing had gone too far.  The vice had entered into his blood, and
the smell of the links drove out all other considerations.

We are most of us familiar, I take it, with the story of the golfing
parson, who could not keep from swearing when the balls went wrong.

"Golf and the ministry don't seem to go together," his friend told
him.  "Take my advice before it's too late, and give it up, Tammas."

A few months later Tammas met his friend again.

"You were right, Jamie," cried the parson cheerily, "they didna run
well in harness; golf and the meenistry, I hae followed your advice:
I hae gi'en it oop."

"Then what are ye doing with that sack of clubs?" inquired Jamie.

"What am I doing with them?" repeated the puzzled Tammas.  "Why I am
going to play golf with them."  A light broke upon him.  "Great
Heavens, man!" he continued, "ye didna' think 'twas the golf I'd
gi'en oop?"

The Englishman does not understand play.  He makes a life-long labour
of his sport, and to it sacrifices mind and body.  The health resorts
of Europe--to paraphrase a famous saying that nobody appears to have
said--draw half their profits from the playing fields of Eton and
elsewhere.  In Swiss and German kurhausen enormously fat men bear
down upon you and explain to you that once they were the champion
sprinters or the high-jump representatives of their university--men
who now hold on to the bannisters and groan as they haul themselves
upstairs.  Consumptive men, between paroxysms of coughing, tell you
of the goals they scored when they were half-backs or forwards of
extraordinary ability.  Ex-light-weight amateur pugilists, with the
figure now of an American roll-top desk, butt you into a corner of
the billiard-room, and, surprised they cannot get as near you as they
would desire, whisper to you the secret of avoiding the undercut by
the swiftness of the backward leap.  Broken-down tennis players, one-
legged skaters, dropsical gentlemen-riders, are to be met with
hobbling on crutches along every highway of the Engadine.

They are pitiable objects.  Never having learnt to read anything but
the sporting papers, books are of no use to them.  They never wasted
much of their youth on thought, and, apparently, have lost the knack
of it.  They don't care for art, and Nature only suggests to them the
things they can no longer do.  The snow-clad mountain reminds them
that once they were daring tobogannists; the undulating common makes
them sad because they can no longer handle a golf-club; by the
riverside they sit down and tell you of the salmon they caught before
they caught rheumatic fever; birds only make them long for guns;
music raises visions of the local cricket-match of long ago,
enlivened by the local band; a picturesque estaminet, with little
tables spread out under the vines, recalls bitter memories of ping-
pong.  One is sorry for them, but their conversation is not
exhilarating.  The man who has other interests in life beyond sport
is apt to find their reminiscences monotonous; while to one another
they do not care to talk.  One gathers that they do not altogether
believe one another.

The foreigner is taking kindly to our sports; one hopes he will be
forewarned by our example and not overdo the thing.  At present, one
is bound to admit, he shows no sign of taking sport too seriously.
Football is gaining favour more and more throughout Europe.  But yet
the Frenchman has not got it out of his head that the coup to
practise is kicking the ball high into the air and catching it upon
his head.  He would rather catch the ball upon his head than score a
goal.  If he can manoeuvre the ball away into a corner, kick it up
into the air twice running, and each time catch it on his head, he
does not seem to care what happens after that.  Anybody can have the
ball; he has had his game and is happy.

They talk of introducing cricket into Belgium; I shall certainly try
to be present at the opening game.  I am afraid that, until he learns
from experience, the Belgian fielder will stop cricket balls with his
head.  That the head is the proper thing with which to play ball
appears to be in his blood.  My head is round, he argues, and hard,
just like the ball itself; what part of the human frame more fit and
proper with which to meet and stop a ball.

Golf has not yet caught on, but tennis is firmly established from St.
Petersburg to Bordeaux.  The German, with the thoroughness
characteristic of him, is working hard.  University professors, stout
majors, rising early in the morning, hire boys and practise back-
handers and half-volleys.  But to the Frenchman, as yet, it is a
game.  He plays it in a happy, merry fashion, that is shocking to
English eyes.

Your partner's service rather astonishes you.  An occasional yard or
so beyond the line happens to anyone, but this man's object appears
to be to break windows.  You feel you really must remonstrate, when
the joyous laughter and tumultuous applause of the spectators explain
the puzzle to you.  He has not been trying to serve; he has been
trying to hit a man in the next court who is stooping down to tie up
his shoe-lace.  With his last ball he has succeeded.  He has hit the
man in the small of the back, and has bowled him over.  The unanimous
opinion of the surrounding critics is that the ball could not
possibly have been better placed.  A Doherty has never won greater
applause from the crowd.  Even the man who has been hit appears
pleased; it shows what a Frenchman can do when he does take up a
game.

But French honour demands revenge.  He forgets his shoe, he forgets
his game.  He gathers together all the balls that he can find; his
balls, your balls, anybody's balls that happen to be handy.  And then
commences the return match.  At this point it is best to crouch down
under shelter of the net.  Most of the players round about adopt this
plan; the more timid make for the club-house, and, finding themselves
there, order coffee and light up cigarettes.  After a while both
players appear to be satisfied.  The other players then gather round
to claim their balls.  This makes a good game by itself.  The object
is to get as many balls as you can, your own and other people's--for
preference other people's--and run off with them round the courts,
followed by whooping claimants.

In the course of half-an-hour or so, when everybody is dead beat, the
game--the original game--is resumed.  You demand the score; your
partner promptly says it is "forty-fifteen."  Both your opponents
rush up to the net, and apparently there is going to be a duel.  It
is only a friendly altercation; they very much doubt its being
"forty-fifteen."  "Fifteen-forty" they could believe; they suggest it
as a compromise.  The discussion is concluded by calling it deuce.
As it is rare for a game to proceed without some such incident
occurring in the middle of it, the score generally is deuce.  This
avoids heart-burning; nobody wins a set and nobody loses.  The one
game generally suffices for the afternoon.

To the earnest player, it is also confusing to miss your partner
occasionally--to turn round and find that he is talking to a man.
Nobody but yourself takes the slightest objection to his absence.
The other side appear to regard it as a good opportunity to score.
Five minutes later he resumes the game.  His friend comes with him,
also the dog of his friend.  The dog is welcomed with enthusiasm; all
balls are returned to the dog.  Until the dog is tired you do not get
a look in.  But all this will no doubt soon be changed.  There are
some excellent French and Belgian players; from them their
compatriots will gradually learn higher ideals.  The Frenchman is
young in the game.  As the right conception of the game grows upon
him, he will also learn to keep the balls lower.

I suppose it is the continental sky.  It is so blue, so beautiful; it
naturally attracts one.  Anyhow, the fact remains that most tennis
players on the Continent, whether English or foreign, have a tendency
to aim the ball direct at Heaven.  At an English club in Switzerland
there existed in my days a young Englishman who was really a
wonderful player.  To get the ball past him was almost an
impossibility.  It was his return that was weak.  He only had one
stroke; the ball went a hundred feet or so into the air and descended
in his opponent's court.  The other man would stand watching it, a
little speck in the Heavens, growing gradually bigger and bigger as
it neared the earth.  Newcomers would chatter to him, thinking he had
detected a balloon or an eagle.  He would wave them aside, explain to
them that he would talk to them later, after the arrival of the ball.
It would fall with a thud at his feet, rise another twenty yards or
so and again descend.  When it was at the proper height he would hit
it back over the net, and the next moment it would be mounting the
sky again.  At tournaments I have seen that young man, with tears in
his eyes, pleading to be given an umpire.  Every umpire had fled.
They hid behind trees, borrowed silk hats and umbrellas and pretended
they were visitors--any device, however mean, to avoid the task of
umpiring for that young man.  Provided his opponent did not go to
sleep or get cramp, one game might last all day.  Anyone could return
his balls; but, as I have said, to get a ball past him was almost an
impossibility.  He invariably won; the other man, after an hour or
so, would get mad and try to lose.  It was his only chance of dinner.

It is a pretty sight, generally speaking, a tennis ground abroad.
The women pay more attention to their costumes than do our lady
players.  The men are usually in spotless white.  The ground is often
charmingly situated, the club-house picturesque; there is always
laughter and merriment.  The play may not be so good to watch, but
the picture is delightful.  I accompanied a man a little while ago to
his club on the outskirts of Brussels.  The ground was bordered by a
wood on one side, and surrounded on the other three by petites
fermes--allotments, as we should call them in England, worked by the
peasants themselves.

It was a glorious spring afternoon.  The courts were crowded.  The
red earth and the green grass formed a background against which the
women, in their new Parisian toilets, under their bright parasols,
stood out like wondrous bouquets of moving flowers.  The whole
atmosphere was a delightful mingling of idle gaiety, flirtation, and
graceful sensuousness.  A modern Watteau would have seized upon the
scene with avidity.

Just beyond--separated by the almost invisible wire fencing--a group
of peasants were working in the field.  An old woman and a young
girl, with ropes about their shoulders, were drawing a harrow, guided
by a withered old scarecrow of a man.  They paused for a moment at
the wire fencing, and looked through.  It was an odd contrast; the
two worlds divided by that wire fencing--so slight, almost invisible.
The girl swept the sweat from her face with her hand; the woman
pushed back her grey locks underneath the handkerchief knotted about
her head; the old man straightened himself with some difficulty.  So
they stood, for perhaps a minute, gazing with quiet, passionless
faces through that slight fencing, that a push from their work-
hardened hands might have levelled.

Was there any thought, I wonder, passing through their brains?  The
young girl--she was a handsome creature in spite of her disfiguring
garments.  The woman--it was a wonderfully fine face:  clear, calm
eyes, deep-set under a square broad brow.  The withered old
scarecrow--ever sowing the seed in the spring of the fruit that
others shall eat.

The old man bent again over the guiding ropes:  gave the word.  The
team moved forward up the hill.  It is Anatole France, I think, who
says:  Society is based upon the patience of the poor.



ARE EARLY MARRIAGES A MISTAKE?



I am chary nowadays of offering counsel in connection with subjects
concerning which I am not and cannot be an authority.  Long ago I
once took upon myself to write a paper about babies.  It did not aim
to be a textbook on the subject.  It did not even claim to exhaust
the topic.  I was willing that others, coming after me, should
continue the argument--that is if, upon reflection, they were still
of opinion there was anything more to be said.  I was pleased with
the article.  I went out of my way to obtain an early copy of the
magazine in which it appeared, on purpose to show it to a lady friend
of mine.  She was the possessor of one or two babies of her own,
specimens in no way remarkable, though she herself, as was natural
enough, did her best to boom them.  I thought it might be helpful to
her:  the views and observations, not of a rival fancier, who would
be prejudiced, but of an intelligent amateur.  I put the magazine
into her hands, opened at the proper place.

"Read it through carefully and quietly," I said; "don't let anything
distract you.  Have a pencil and a bit of paper ready at your side,
and note down any points upon which you would like further
information.  If there is anything you think I have missed out let me
know.  It may be that here and there you will be disagreeing with me.
If so, do not hesitate to mention it, I shall not be angry.  If a
demand arises I shall very likely issue an enlarged and improved
edition of this paper in the form of a pamphlet, in which case hints
and suggestions that to you may appear almost impertinent will be of
distinct help to me."

"I haven't got a pencil," she said; "what's it all about?"

"It's about babies," I explained, and I lent her a pencil.

That is another thing I have learnt.  Never lend a pencil to a woman
if you ever want to see it again.  She has three answers to your
request for its return.  The first, that she gave it back to you and
that you put it in your pocket, and that it's there now, and that if
it isn't it ought to be.  The second, that you never lent it to her.
The third, that she wishes people would not lend her pencils and then
clamour for them back, just when she has something else far more
important to think about.

"What do you know about babies?" she demanded.

"If you will read the paper," I replied, "you will see for yourself.
It's all there."

She flicked over the pages contemptuously.

"There doesn't seem much of it?" she retorted.

"It is condensed," I pointed out to her.

"I am glad it is short.  All right, I'll read it," she agreed.

I thought my presence might disturb her, so went out into the garden.
I wanted her to get the full benefit of it.  I crept back now and
again to peep through the open window.  She did not seem to be making
many notes.  But I heard her making little noises to herself.  When I
saw she had reached the last page, I re-entered the room.

"Well?" I said.

"Is it meant to be funny," she demanded, "or is it intended to be
taken seriously?"

"There may be flashes of humour here and there--"

She did not wait for me to finish.

"Because if it's meant to be funny," she said, "I don't think it is
at all funny.  And if it is intended to be serious, there's one thing
very clear, and that is that you are not a mother."

With the unerring instinct of the born critic she had divined my one
weak point.  Other objections raised against me I could have met.
But that one stinging reproach was unanswerable.  It has made me, as
I have explained, chary of tendering advice on matters outside my own
department of life.  Otherwise, every year, about Valentine's day,
there is much that I should like to say to my good friends the birds.
I want to put it to them seriously.  Is not the month of February
just a little too early?  Of course, their answer would be the same
as in the case of my motherly friend.

"Oh, what do you know about it? you are not a bird."

I know I am not a bird, but that is the very reason why they should
listen to me.  I bring a fresh mind to bear upon the subject.  I am
not tied down by bird convention.  February, my dear friends--in
these northern climes of ours at all events--is much too early.  You
have to build in a high wind, and nothing, believe me, tries a lady's
temper more than being blown about.  Nature is nature, and womenfolk,
my dear sirs, are the same all the world over, whether they be birds
or whether they be human.  I am an older person than most of you, and
I speak with the weight of experience.

If I were going to build a house with my wife, I should not choose a
season of the year when the bricks and planks and things were liable
to be torn out of her hand, her skirts blown over her head, and she
left clinging for dear life to a scaffolding pole.  I know the
feminine biped and, you take it from me, that is not her notion of a
honeymoon.  In April or May, the sun shining, the air balmy--when,
after carrying up to her a load or two of bricks, and a hod or two of
mortar, we could knock off work for a few minutes without fear of the
whole house being swept away into the next street--could sit side by
side on the top of a wall, our legs dangling down, and peck and
morsel together; after which I could whistle a bit to her--then
housebuilding might be a pleasure.

The swallows are wisest; June is their idea, and a very good idea,
too.  In a mountain village in the Tyrol, early one summer, I had the
opportunity of watching very closely the building of a swallow's
nest.  After coffee, the first morning, I stepped out from the great,
cool, dark passage of the wirtschaft into the blazing sunlight, and,
for no particular reason, pulled-to the massive door behind me.
While filling my pipe, a swallow almost brushed by me, then wheeled
round again, and took up a position on the fence only a few yards
from me.  He was carrying what to him was an exceptionally large and
heavy brick.  He put it down beside him on the fence, and called out
something which I could not understand.  I did not move.  He got
quite excited and said some more.  It was undoubtable he was
addressing me--nobody else was by.  I judged from his tone that he
was getting cross with me.  At this point my travelling companion,
his toilet unfinished, put his head out of the window just above me.

"Such an odd thing," he called down to me.  "I never noticed it last
night.  A pair of swallows are building a nest here in the hall.
You've got to be careful you don't mistake it for a hat-peg.  The old
lady says they have built there regularly for the last three years."

Then it came to me what it was the gentleman had been saying to me:
"I say, sir, you with the bit of wood in your mouth, you have been
and shut the door and I can't get in."

Now, with the key in my possession, it was so clear and
understandable, I really forgot for the moment he was only a bird.

"I beg your pardon," I replied, "I had no idea.  Such an
extraordinary place to build a nest."

I opened the door for him, and, taking up his brick again, he
entered, and I followed him in.  There was a deal of talk.

"He shut the door," I heard him say, "Chap there, sucking the bit of
wood.  Thought I was never going to get in."

"I know," was the answer; "it has been so dark in here, if you'll
believe me, I've hardly been able to see what I've been doing."

"Fine brick, isn't it?  Where will you have it?"

Observing me sitting there, they lowered their voices.  Evidently she
wanted him to put the brick down and leave her to think.  She was not
quite sure where she would have it.  He, on the other hand, was sure
he had found the right place for it.  He pointed it out to her and
explained his views.  Other birds quarrel a good deal during nest
building, but swallows are the gentlest of little people.  She let
him put it where he wanted to, and he kissed her and ran out.  She
cocked her eye after him, watched till he was out of sight, then
deftly and quickly slipped it out and fixed it the other side of the
door.

"Poor dears" (I could see it in the toss of her head); "they will
think they know best; it is just as well not to argue with them."

Every summer I suffer much from indignation.  I love to watch the
swallows building.  They build beneath the eaves outside my study
window.  Such cheerful little chatter-boxes they are.  Long after
sunset, when all the other birds are sleeping, the swallows still are
chattering softly.  It sounds as if they were telling one another
some pretty story, and often I am sure there must be humour in it,
for every now and then one hears a little twittering laugh.  I
delight in having them there, so close to me.  The fancy comes to me
that one day, when my brain has grown more cunning, I, too, listening
in the twilight, shall hear the stories that they tell.

One or two phrases already I have come to understand:  "Once upon a
time"--"Long, long ago"--"In a strange, far-off land."  I hear these
words so constantly, I am sure I have them right.  I call it "Swallow
Street," this row of six or seven nests.  Two or three, like villas
in their own grounds, stand alone, and others are semi-detached.  It
makes me angry that the sparrows will come and steal them.  The
sparrows will hang about deliberately waiting for a pair of swallows
to finish their nest, and then, with a brutal laugh that makes my
blood boil, drive the swallows away and take possession of it.  And
the swallows are so wonderfully patient.

"Never mind, old girl," says Tommy Swallow, after the first big cry
is over, to Jenny Swallow, "let's try again."

And half an hour later, full of fresh plans, they are choosing
another likely site, chattering cheerfully once more.  I watched the
building of a particular nest for nearly a fortnight one year; and
when, after two or three days' absence, I returned and found a pair
of sparrows comfortably encsonced therein, I just felt mad.  I saw
Mrs. Sparrow looking out.  Maybe my anger was working upon my
imagination, but it seemed to me that she nodded to me:

"Nice little house, ain't it?  What I call well built."

Mr. Sparrow then flew up with a gaudy feather, dyed blue, which
belonged to me.  I recognised it.  It had come out of the brush with
which the girl breaks the china ornaments in our drawing-room.  At
any other time I should have been glad to see him flying off with the
whole thing, handle included.  But now I felt the theft of that one
feather as an added injury.  Mrs. Sparrow chirped with delight at
sight of the gaudy monstrosity.  Having got the house cheap, they
were going to spend their small amount of energy upon internal
decoration.  That was their idea clearly, a "Liberty interior."  She
looked more like a Cockney sparrow than a country one--had been born
and bred in Regent Street, no doubt.

"There is not much justice in this world," said I to myself; "but
there's going to be some introduced into this business--that is, if I
can find a ladder."

I did find a ladder, and fortunately it was long enough.  Mr. and
Mrs. Sparrow were out when I arrived, possibly on the hunt for cheap
photo frames and Japanese fans.  I did not want to make a mess.  I
removed the house neatly into a dust-pan, and wiped the street clear
of every trace of it.  I had just put back the ladder when Mrs.
Sparrow returned with a piece of pink cotton-wool in her mouth.  That
was her idea of a colour scheme:  apple-blossom pink and Reckitt's
blue side by side.  She dropped her wool and sat on the waterspout,
and tried to understand things.

"Number one, number two, number four; where the blazes"--sparrows are
essentially common, and the women are as bad as the men--"is number
three?"

Mr. Sparrow came up from behind, over the roof.  He was carrying a
piece of yellow-fluff, part of a lamp-shade, as far as I could judge.

"Move yourself," he said, "what's the sense of sitting there in the
rain?"

"I went out just for a moment," replied Mrs. Sparrow; "I could not
have been gone, no, not a couple of minutes.  When I came back--"

"Oh, get indoors," said Mr. Sparrow, "talk about it there."

"It's what I'm telling you," continued Mrs. Sparrow, "if you would
only listen.  There isn't any door, there isn't any house--"

"Isn't any--" Mr. Sparrow, holding on to the rim of the spout, turned
himself topsy-turvy and surveyed the street.  From where I was
standing behind the laurel bushes I could see nothing but his back.

He stood up again, looking angry and flushed.

"What have you done with the house?  Can't I turn my back a minute--"

"I ain't done nothing with it.  As I keep on telling you, I had only
just gone--"

"Oh, bother where you had gone.  Where's the darned house gone?
that's what I want to know."

They looked at one another.  If ever astonishment was expressed in
the attitude of a bird it was told by the tails of those two
sparrows.  They whispered wickedly together.  The idea occurred to
them that by force or cunning they might perhaps obtain possession of
one of the other nests.  But all the other nests were occupied, and
even gentle Jenny Swallow, once in her own home with the children
round about her, is not to be trifled with.  Mr. Sparrow called at
number two, put his head in at the door, and then returned to the
waterspout.

"Lady says we don't live there," he explained to Mrs. Sparrow.  There
was silence for a while.

"Not what I call a classy street," commented Mrs. Sparrow.

"If it were not for that terrible tired feeling of mine," said Mr.
Sparrow, "blame if I wouldn't build a house of my own."

"Perhaps," said Mrs. Sparrow, "--I have heard it said that a little
bit of work, now and then, does you good."

"All sorts of wild ideas about in the air nowadays," said Mr.
Sparrow, "it don't do to listen to everybody."

"And it don't do to sit still and do nothing neither," snapped Mrs.
Sparrow.  "I don't want to have to forget I'm a lady, but--well, any
man who was a man would see things for himself."

"Why did I every marry?" retorted Mr. Sparrow.

They flew away together, quarrelling.



DO WRITERS WRITE TOO MUCH?



On a newspaper placard, the other day, I saw announced a new novel by
a celebrated author.  I bought a copy of the paper, and turned
eagerly to the last page.  I was disappointed to find that I had
missed the first six chapters.  The story had commenced the previous
Saturday; this was Friday.  I say I was disappointed and so I was, at
first.  But my disappointment did not last long.  The bright and
intelligent sub-editor, according to the custom now in vogue, had
provided me with a short synopsis of those first six chapters, so
that without the trouble of reading them I knew what they were all
about.

"The first instalment," I learned, "introduces the reader to a
brilliant and distinguished company, assembled in the drawing-room of
Lady Mary's maisonette in Park Street.  Much smart talk is indulged
in."

I know that "smart talk" so well.  Had I not been lucky enough to
miss that first chapter I should have had to listen to it once again.
Possibly, here and there, it might have been new to me, but it would
have read, I know, so very like the old.  A dear, sweet white-haired
lady of my acquaintance is never surprised at anything that happens.

"Something very much of the same kind occurred," she will remember,
"one winter when we were staying in Brighton.  Only on that occasion
the man's name, I think, was Robinson."

We do not live new stories--nor write them either.  The man's name in
the old story was Robinson, we alter it to Jones.  It happened, in
the old forgotten tale, at Brighton, in the winter time; we change it
to Eastbourne, in the spring.  It is new and original--to those who
have not heard "something very like it" once before.

"Much smart talk is indulged in," so the sub-editor has explained.
There is absolutely no need to ask for more than that.  There is a
Duchess who says improper things.  Once she used to shock me.  But I
know her now.  She is really a nice woman; she doesn't mean them.
And when the heroine is in trouble, towards the middle of the book,
she is just as amusing on the side of virtue.  Then there is a
younger lady whose speciality is proverbs.  Apparently whenever she
hears a proverb she writes it down and studies it with the idea of
seeing into how many different forms it can be twisted.  It looks
clever; as a matter of fact, it is extremely easy.

Be virtuous and you will be happy.

She jots down all the possible variations:  Be virtuous and you will
be unhappy.

"Too simple that one," she tells herself.  Be virtuous and your
friends will be happy if you are not.

"Better, but not wicked enough.  Let us think again.  Be happy and
people will jump to the conclusion that you are virtuous.

"That's good, I'll try that one at to-morrow's party."

She is a painstaking lady.  One feels that, better advised, she might
have been of use in the world.

There is likewise a disgraceful old Peer who tells naughty stories,
but who is good at heart; and one person so very rude that the wonder
is who invited him.

Occasionally a slangy girl is included, and a clergyman, who takes
the heroine aside and talks sense to her, flavoured with epigram.
All these people chatter a mixture of Lord Chesterfield and Oliver
Wendell Holmes, of Heine, Voltaire, Madame de Stael, and the late
lamented H. J. Byron.  "How they do it beats me," as I once overheard
at a music hall a stout lady confess to her friend while witnessing
the performance of a clever troup, styling themselves "The Boneless
Wonders of the Universe."

The synopsis added that:  "Ursula Bart, a charming and
unsophisticated young American girl possessed of an elusive
expression makes her first acquaintance with London society."

Here you have a week's unnecessary work on the part of the author
boiled down to its essentials.  She was young.  One hardly expects an
elderly heroine.  The "young" might have been dispensed with,
especially seeing it is told us that she was a girl.  But maybe this
is carping.  There are young girls and old girls.  Perhaps it is as
well to have it in black and white; she was young.  She was an
American young girl.  There is but one American young girl in English
fiction.  We know by heart the unconventional things that she will
do, the startlingly original things that she will say, the fresh
illuminating thoughts that will come to her as, clad in a loose robe
of some soft clinging stuff, she sits before the fire, in the
solitude of her own room.

To complete her she had an "elusive expression."  The days when we
used to catalogue the heroine's "points" are past.  Formerly it was
possible.  A man wrote perhaps some half-a-dozen novels during the
whole course of his career.  He could have a dark girl for the first,
a light girl for the second, sketch a merry little wench for the
third, and draw you something stately for the fourth.  For the
remaining two he could go abroad.  Nowadays, when a man turns out a
novel and six short stories once a year, description has to be
dispensed with.  It is not the writer's fault.  There is not
sufficient variety in the sex.  We used to introduce her thus:

"Imagine to yourself, dear reader, an exquisite and gracious creature
of five feet three.  Her golden hair of that peculiar shade"--here
would follow directions enabling the reader to work it out for
himself.  He was to pour some particular wine into some particular
sort of glass, and wave it about before some particular sort of a
light.  Or he was to get up at five o'clock on a March morning and go
into a wood.  In this way he could satisfy himself as to the
particular shade of gold the heroine's hair might happen to be.  If
he were a careless or lazy reader he could save himself time and
trouble by taking the author's word for it.  Many of them did.

"Her eyes!"  They were invariably deep and liquid.  They had to be
pretty deep to hold all the odds and ends that were hidden in them;
sunlight and shadow, mischief, unsuspected possibilities, assorted
emotions, strange wild yearnings.  Anything we didn't know where else
to put we said was hidden in her eyes.

"Her nose!"  You could have made it for yourself out of a pen'orth of
putty after reading our description of it.

"Her forehead!"  It was always "low and broad."  I don't know why it
was always low.  Maybe because the intellectual heroine was not then
popular.  For the matter of that I doubt if she be really popular
now.  The brainless doll, one fears, will continue for many years to
come to be man's ideal woman--and woman's ideal of herself for
precisely the same period, one may be sure.

"Her chin!"  A less degree of variety was permissible in her chin.
It had to be at an angle suggestive of piquancy, and it had to
contain at least the suspicion of a dimple.

To properly understand her complexion you were expected to provide
yourself with a collection of assorted fruits and flowers.  There are
seasons in the year when it must have been difficult for the
conscientious reader to have made sure of her complexion.  Possibly
it was for this purpose that wax flowers and fruit, carefully kept
from the dust under glass cases, were common objects in former times
upon the tables of the cultured.

Nowadays we content ourselves--and our readers also, I am inclined to
think--with dashing her off in a few bold strokes.  We say that
whenever she entered a room there came to one dreams of an old world
garden, the sound of far-off bells.  Or that her presence brought
with it the scent of hollyhocks and thyme.  As a matter of fact I
don't think hollyhocks do smell.  It is a small point; about such we
do not trouble ourselves.  In the case of the homely type of girl I
don't see why we should not borrow Mr. Pickwick's expression, and
define her by saying that in some subtle way she always contrived to
suggest an odour of chops and tomato sauce.

If we desire to be exact we mention, as this particular author seems
to have done, that she had an "elusive expression," or a penetrating
fragrance.  Or we say that she moved, the centre of an indefinable
nuance.

But it is not policy to bind oneself too closely to detail.  A wise
friend of mine, who knows his business, describes his hero invariably
in the vaguest terms.  He will not even tell you whether the man is
tall or short, clean shaven or bearded.

"Make the fellow nice," is his advice.  "Let every woman reader
picture him to herself as her particular man.  Then everything he
says and does becomes of importance to her.  She is careful not to
miss a word."

For the same reason he sees to it that his heroine has a bit of every
girl in her.  Generally speaking, she is a cross between Romola and
Dora Copperfield.  His novels command enormous sales.  The women say
he draws a man to the life, but does not seem to know much about
women.  The men like his women, but think his men stupid.

Of another famous author no woman of my acquaintance is able to speak
too highly.  They tell me his knowledge of their sex is simply
marvellous, his insight, his understanding of them almost uncanny.
Thinking it might prove useful, I made an exhaustive study of his
books.  I noticed that his women were without exception brilliant
charming creatures possessed of the wit of a Lady Wortlay Montagu,
combined with the wisdom of a George Eliot.  They were not all of
them good women, but all of them were clever and all of them were
fascinating.  I came to the conclusion that his lady critics were
correct:  he did understand women.  But to return to our synopsis.

The second chapter, it appeared, transported us to Yorkshire where:
"Basil Longleat, a typical young Englishman, lately home from
college, resides with his widowed mother and two sisters.  They are a
delightful family."

What a world of trouble to both writer and to reader is here saved.
"A typical young Englishman!"  The author probably wrote five pages,
elaborating.  The five words of the sub-editor present him to me more
vividly.  I see him positively glistening from the effects of soap
and water.  I see his clear blue eye; his fair crisp locks, the
natural curliness of which annoys him personally, though alluring to
everybody else; his frank winning smile.  He is "lately home from
college."  That tells me that he is a first-class cricketer; a first-
class oar; that as a half-back he is incomparable; that he swims like
Captain Webb; is in the first rank of tennis players; that his half-
volley at ping-pong has never been stopped.  It doesn't tell me much
about his brain power.  The description of him as a "typical young
Englishman" suggests more information on this particular point.  One
assumes that the American girl with the elusive expression is going
to have sufficient for both.

"They are a delightful family."  The sub-editor does not say so, but
I imagine the two sisters are likewise typical young Englishwomen.
They ride and shoot and cook and make their own dresses, have common
sense and love a joke.

The third chapter is "taken up with the humours of a local cricket
match."

Thank you, Mr. Sub-editor.  I feel I owe you gratitude.

In the fourth, Ursula Bart (I was beginning to get anxious about her)
turns up again.  She is staying at the useful Lady Mary's place in
Yorkshire.  She meets Basil by accident one morning while riding
alone.  That is the advantage of having an American girl for your
heroine.  Like the British army:  it goes anywhere and does anything.

In chapter five Basil and Ursula meet again; this time at a picnic.
The sub-editor does not wish to repeat himself, otherwise he possibly
would have summed up chapter five by saying it was "taken up with the
humours of the usual picnic."

In chapter six something happens:

"Basil, returning home in the twilight, comes across Ursula Bart, in
a lonely point of the moor, talking earnestly to a rough-looking
stranger.  His approach over the soft turf being unnoticed, he cannot
help overhearing Ursula's parting words to the forbidding-looking
stranger:  'I must see you again!  To-morrow night at half-past nine!
In the gateway of the ruined abbey!'  Who is he?  And why must Ursula
see him again at such an hour, in such a spot?"

So here, at cost of reading twenty lines, I am landed, so to speak,
at the beginning of the seventh chapter.  Why don't I set to work to
read it?  The sub-editor has spoiled me.

"You read it," I want to say to him.  "Tell me to-morrow morning what
it is all about.  Who was this bounder?  Why should Ursula want to
see him again?  Why choose a draughty place?  Why half-past nine
o'clock at night, which must have been an awkward time for both of
them--likely to lead to talk?  Why should I wade though this seventh
chapter of three columns and a half?  It's your work.  What are you
paid for?"

My fear is lest this sort of thing shall lead to a demand on the part
of the public for condensed novels.  What busy man is going to spend
a week of evenings reading a book when a nice kind sub-editor is
prepared in five minutes to tell him what it is all about!

Then there will come a day--I feel it--when the business-like Editor
will say to himself:  "What in thunder is the sense of my paying one
man to write a story of sixty thousand words and another man to read
it and tell it again in sixteen hundred!"

We shall be expected to write our novels in chapters not exceeding
twenty words.  Our short stories will be reduced to the formula:
"Little boy.  Pair of skates.  Broken ice, Heaven's gates."  Formerly
an author, commissioned to supply a child's tragedy of this genre for
a Christmas number, would have spun it out into five thousand words.
Personally, I should have commenced the previous spring--given the
reader the summer and autumn to get accustomed to the boy.  He would
have been a good boy; the sort of boy that makes a bee-line for the
thinnest ice.  He would have lived in a cottage.  I could have spread
that cottage over two pages; the things that grew in the garden, the
view from the front door.  You would have known that boy before I had
done with him--felt you had known him all your life.  His quaint
sayings, his childish thoughts, his great longings would have been
impressed upon you.  The father might have had a dash of humour in
him, the mother's early girlhood would have lent itself to pretty
writing.  For the ice we would have had a mysterious lake in the
wood, said to be haunted.  The boy would have loved o' twilights to
stand upon its margin.  He would have heard strange voices calling to
him.  You would have felt the thing was coming.

So much might have been done.  When I think of that plot wasted in
nine words it makes me positively angry.

And what is to become of us writers if this is to be the new fashion
in literature?  We are paid by the length of our manuscript at rates
from half-a-crown a thousand words, and upwards.  In the case of
fellows like Doyle and Kipling I am told it runs into pounds.  How
are we to live on novels the serial rights of which to most of us
will work out at four and nine-pence.

It can't be done.  It is no good telling me you can see no reason why
we should live.  That is no answer.  I'm talking plain business.

And what about book-rights?  Who is going to buy novels of three
pages?  They will have to be printed as leaflets and sold at a penny
a dozen.  Marie Corelli and Hall Caine--if all I hear about them is
true--will possibly make their ten or twelve shillings a week.  But
what about the rest of us?  This thing is worrying me.



SHOULD SOLDIERS BE POLITE?



My desire was once to pass a peaceful and pleasant winter in
Brussels, attending to my work, improving my mind.  Brussels is a
bright and cheerful town, and I think I could have succeeded had it
not been for the Belgian Army.  The Belgian Army would follow me
about and worry me.  Judging of it from my own experience, I should
say it was a good army.  Napoleon laid it down as an axiom that your
enemy never ought to be permitted to get away from you--never ought
to be allowed to feel, even for a moment, that he had shaken you off.
What tactics the Belgian Army might adopt under other conditions I am
unable to say, but against me personally that was the plan of
campaign it determined upon and carried out with a success that was
astonishing, even to myself.

I found it utterly impossible to escape from the Belgian Army.  I
made a point of choosing the quietest and most unlikely streets, I
chose all hours--early in the morning, in the afternoon, late in the
evening.  There were moments of wild exaltation when I imagined I had
given it the slip.  I could not see it anywhere, I could not hear it.

"Now," said I to myself, "now for five minutes' peace and quiet."

I had been doing it injustice:  it had been working round me.
Approaching the next corner, I would hear the tattoo of its drum.
Before I had gone another quarter of a mile it would be in full
pursuit of me.  I would jump upon a tram, and travel for miles.
Then, thinking I had shaken it off, I would alight and proceed upon
my walk.  Five minutes later another detachment would be upon my
heels.  I would slink home, the Belgian Army pursuing me with its
exultant tattoo.  Vanquished, shamed, my insular pride for ever
vanished, I would creep up into my room and close the door.  The
victorious Belgian Army would then march back to barracks.

If only it had followed me with a band:  I like a band.  I can loaf
against a post, listening to a band with anyone.  I should not have
minded so much had it come after me with a band.  But the Belgian
Army, apparently, doesn't run to a band.  It has nothing but this
drum.  It has not even a real drum--not what I call a drum.  It is a
little boy's drum, the sort of thing I used to play myself at one
time, until people took it away from me, and threatened that if they
heard it once again that day they would break it over my own head.
It is cowardly going up and down, playing a drum of this sort, when
there is nobody to stop you.  The man would not dare to do it if his
mother was about.  He does not even play it.  He walks along tapping
it with a little stick.  There's no tune, there's no sense in it.  He
does not even keep time.  I used to think at first, hearing it in the
distance, that it was the work of some young gamin who ought to be at
school, or making himself useful taking the baby out in the
perambulator:  and I would draw back into dark doorways, determined,
as he came by, to dart out and pull his ear for him.  To my
astonishment--for the first week--I learnt it was the Belgian Army,
getting itself accustomed, one supposes, to the horrors of war.  It
had the effect of making me a peace-at-any-price man.

They tell me these armies are necessary to preserve the tranquility
of Europe.  For myself, I should be willing to run the risk of an
occasional row.  Cannot someone tell them they are out of date, with
their bits of feathers and their odds and ends of ironmongery--grown
men that cannot be sent out for a walk unless accompanied by a couple
of nursemen, blowing a tin whistle and tapping a drum out of a toy
shop to keep them in order and prevent their running about:  one
might think they were chickens.  A herd of soldiers with their pots
and pans and parcels, and all their deadly things tied on to them,
prancing about in time to a tune, makes me think always of the White
Knight that Alice met in Wonderland.  I take it that for practical
purposes--to fight for your country, or to fight for somebody else's
country, which is, generally speaking, more popular--the thing
essential is that a certain proportion of the populace should be able
to shoot straight with a gun.  How standing in a line and turning out
your toes is going to assist you, under modern conditions of warfare,
is one of the many things my intellect is incapable of grasping.

In mediaeval days, when men fought hand to hand, there must have been
advantage in combined and precise movement.  When armies were mere
iron machines, the simple endeavour of each being to push the other
off the earth, then the striking simultaneously with a thousand arms
was part of the game.  Now, when we shoot from behind cover with
smokeless powder, brain not brute force--individual sense not
combined solidity is surely the result to be aimed at.  Cannot
somebody, as I have suggested, explain to the military man that the
proper place for the drill sergeant nowadays is under a glass case in
some museum of antiquities?

I lived once near the Hyde Park barracks, and saw much of the drill
sergeant's method.  Generally speaking, he is a stout man with the
walk of an egotistical pigeon.  His voice is one of the most
extraordinary things in nature:  if you can distinguish it from the
bark of a dog, you are clever.  They tell me that the privates, after
a little practice, can--which gives one a higher opinion of their
intelligence than otherwise one might form.  But myself I doubt even
this statement.  I was the owner of a fine retriever dog about the
time of which I am speaking, and sometimes he and I would amuse
ourselves by watching Mr. Sergeant exercising his squad.  One morning
he had been shouting out the usual "Whough, whough, whough!" for
about ten minutes, and all had hitherto gone well.  Suddenly, and
evidently to his intense astonishment, the squad turned their backs
upon him and commenced to walk towards the Serpentine.

"Halt!" yelled the sergeant, the instant his amazed indignation
permitted him to speak, which fortunately happened in time to save
the detachment from a watery grave.

The squad halted.

"Who the thunder, and the blazes, and other things told you to do
that?"

The squad looked bewildered, but said nothing, and were brought back
to the place where they were before.  A minute later precisely the
same thing occurred again.  I really thought the sergeant would
burst.  I was preparing to hasten to the barracks for medical aid.
But the paroxysm passed.  Calling upon the combined forces of heaven
and hell to sustain him in his trouble, he requested his squad, as
man to man, to inform him of the reason why to all appearance they
were dispensing with his services and drilling themselves.

At this moment "Columbus" barked again, and the explanation came to
him.

"Please go away, sir," he requested me.  "How can I exercise my men
with that dog of yours interfering every five minutes?"

It was not only on that occasion.  It happened at other times.  The
dog seemed to understand and take a pleasure in it.  Sometimes
meeting a soldier, walking with his sweetheart, Columbus, from behind
my legs, would bark suddenly.  Immediately the man would let go the
girl and proceed, involuntarily, to perform military tricks.

The War Office authorities accused me of having trained the dog.  I
had not trained him:  that was his natural voice.  I suggested to the
War Office authorities that instead of quarrelling with my dog for
talking his own language, they should train their sergeants to use
English.

They would not see it.  Unpleasantness was in the air, and, living
where I did at the time, I thought it best to part with Columbus.  I
could see what the War Office was driving at, and I did not desire
that responsibility for the inefficiency of the British Army should
be laid at my door.

Some twenty years ago we, in London, were passing through a riotous
period, and a call was made to law-abiding citizens to enrol
themselves as special constables.  I was young, and the hope of
trouble appealed to me more than it does now.  In company with some
five or six hundred other more or less respectable citizens, I found
myself one Sunday morning in the drill yard of the Albany Barracks.
It was the opinion of the authorities that we could guard our homes
and protect our wives and children better if first of all we learned
to roll our "eyes right" or left at the given word of command, and to
walk with our thumbs stuck out.  Accordingly a drill sergeant was
appointed to instruct us on these points.  He came out of the
canteen, wiping his mouth and flicking his leg, according to rule,
with the regulation cane.  But, as he approached us, his expression
changed.  We were stout, pompous-looking gentlemen, the majority of
us, in frock coats and silk hats.  The sergeant was a man with a
sense of the fitness of things.  The idea of shouting and swearing at
us fell from him:  and that gone there seemed to be no happy medium
left to him.  The stiffness departed from his back.  He met us with a
defferential attitude, and spoke to us in the language of social
intercourse.

"Good morning, gentlemen," said the sergeant.

"Good morning," we replied:  and there was a pause.

The sergeant fidgetted upon his feet.  We waited.

"Well, now, gentlemen," said the sergeant, with a pleasant smile,
"what do you say to falling in?"

We agreed to fall in.  He showed us how to do it.  He cast a critical
eye along the back of our rear line.

"A little further forward, number three, if you don't mind, sir," he
suggested.

Number three, who was an important-looking gentleman, stepped
forward.

The sergeant cast his critical eye along the front of the first line.

"A little further back, if you don't mind, sir," he suggested,
addressing the third gentleman from the end.

"Can't," explained the third gentleman, "much as I can do to keep
where I am."

The sergeant cast his critical eye between the lines.

"Ah," said the sergeant, "a little full-chested, some of us.  We will
make the distance another foot, if you please, gentlemen."

In pleasant manner, like to this, the drill proceeded.

"Now then, gentlemen, shall we try a little walk?  Quick march!
Thank you, gentlemen.  Sorry to trouble you, but it may be necessary
to run--forward I mean, of course..  So if you really do not mind, we
will now do the double quick.  Halt!  And if next time you can keep a
little more in line--it has a more imposing appearance, if you
understand me.  The breathing comes with practice."

If the thing must be done at all, why should it not be done in this
way?  Why should not the sergeant address the new recruits politely:

"Now then, you young chaps, are you all ready?  Don't hurry
yourselves:  no need to make hard work of what should be a pleasure
to all of us.  That's right, that's very good indeed--considering you
are only novices.  But there is still something to be desired in your
attitude, Private Bully-boy.  You will excuse my being personal, but
are you knock-kneed naturally?  Or could you, with an effort, do you
think, contrive to give yourself less the appearance of a marionette
whose strings have become loose?  Thank you, that is better.  These
little things appear trivial, I know, but, after all, we may as well
try and look our best -

"Don't you like your boots, Private Montmorency?  Oh, I beg your
pardon.  I thought from the way you were bending down and looking at
them that perhaps their appearance was dissatisfying to you.  My
mistake.

"Are you suffering from indigestion, my poor fellow?  Shall I get you
a little brandy?  It isn't indigestion.  Then what's the matter with
it?  Why are you trying to hide it?  It's nothing to be ashamed of.
We've all got one.  Let it come forward man.  Let's see it."

Having succeeded, with a few such kindly words, in getting his line
into order, he would proceed to recommend healthy exercise.

"Shoulder arms!  Good, gentlemen, very good for a beginning.  Yet
still, if I may be critical, not perfect.  There is more in this
thing than you might imagine, gentlemen.  May I point out to Private
Henry Thompson that a musket carried across the shoulder at right
angles is apt to inconvenience the gentleman behind.  Even from the
point of view of his own comfort, I feel sure that Private Thompson
would do better to follow the usual custom in this matter.

"I would also suggest to Private St. Leonard that we are not here to
practice the art of balancing a heavy musket on the outstretched palm
of the hand.  Private St. Leonard's performance with the musket is
decidedly clever.  But it is not war.

"Believe me, gentlemen, this thing has been carefully worked out, and
no improvement is likely to result from individual effort.  Let our
idea be uniformity.  It is monotonous, but it is safe.  Now, then,
gentlemen, once again."

The drill yard would be converted into a source of innocent delight
to thousands.  "Officer and gentleman" would become a phrase of
meaning.  I present the idea, for what it may be worth, with my
compliments, to Pall Mall.

The fault of the military man is that he studies too much, reads too
much history, is over reflective.  If, instead, he would look about
him more he would notice that things are changing.  Someone has told
the British military man that Waterloo was won upon the playing
fields of Eton.  So he goes to Eton and plays.  One of these days he
will be called upon to fight another Waterloo:  and afterwards--when
it is too late--they will explain to him that it was won not upon the
play field but in the class room.

From the mound on the old Waterloo plain one can form a notion of
what battles, under former conditions, must have been.  The other
battlefields of Europe are rapidly disappearing:  useful Dutch
cabbages, as Carlyle would have pointed out with justifiable
satisfaction, hiding the theatre of man's childish folly.  You find,
generally speaking, cobblers happily employed in cobbling shoes,
women gossipping cheerfully over the washtub on the spot where a
hundred years ago, according to the guide-book, a thousand men
dressed in blue and a thousand men dressed in red rushed together
like quarrelsome fox-terriers, and worried each other to death.

But the field of Waterloo is little changed.  The guide, whose
grandfather was present at the battle--quite an extraordinary number
of grandfathers must have fought at Waterloo:  there must have been
whole regiments composed of grandfathers--can point out to you the
ground across which every charge was delivered, can show you every
ridge, still existing, behind which the infantry crouched.  The whole
business was began and finished within a space little larger than a
square mile.  One can understand the advantage then to be derived
from the perfect moving of the military machine; the uses of the
echelon, the purposes of the linked battalion, the manipulation of
centre, left wing and right wing.  Then it may have been worth while-
-if war be ever worth the while--which grown men of sense are
beginning to doubt--to waste two years of a soldier's training,
teaching him the goose-step.  In the twentieth century, teaching
soldiers the evolutions of the Thirty Years' War is about as sensible
as it would be loading our iron-clads with canvas.

I followed once a company of Volunteers across Blackfriars Bridge on
their way from Southwark to the Temple.  At the bottom of Ludgate
Hill the commanding officer, a young but conscientious gentleman,
ordered "Left wheel!"  At once the vanguard turned down a narrow
alley--I forget its name--which would have led the troop into the
purlieus of Whitefriars, where, in all probability, they would have
been lost for ever.  The whole company had to be halted, right-about-
faced, and retired a hundred yards.  Then the order "Quick march!"
was given.  The vanguard shot across Ludgate Circus, and were making
for the Meat Market.

At this point that young commanding officer gave up being a military
man and talked sense.

"Not that way," he shouted:  "up Fleet Street and through Middle
Temple Lane."

Then without further trouble the army of the future went upon its
way.



OUGHT STORIES TO BE TRUE?



There was once upon a time a charming young lady, possessed of much
taste, who was asked by her anxious parent, the years passing and
family expenditure not decreasing, which of the numerous and eligible
young men then paying court to her she liked the best.  She replied,
that was her difficulty; she could not make up her mind which she
liked the best.  They were all so nice.  She could not possibly
select one to the exclusion of all the others.  What she would have
liked would have been to marry the lot; but that, she presumed, was
impracticable.

I feel I resemble that young lady, not so much in charm and beauty as
in indecision of mind, when the question is that of my favourite
author or my favourite book.  It is as if one were asked one's
favourite food.  There are times when one fancies an egg with one's
tea.  On other occasions one dreams of a kipper.  To-day one clamours
for lobsters.  To-morrow one feels one never wishes to see a lobster
again.  One determines to settle down, for a time, to a diet of bread
and milk and rice pudding.  Asked suddenly to say whether I preferred
ices to soup, or beef-steak to caviare, I should be completely
nonplussed.

There may be readers who care for only one literary diet.  I am a
person of gross appetites, requiring many authors to satisfy me.
There are moods when the savage strength of the Bronte sisters is
companionable to me.  One rejoices in the unrelieved gloom of
"Wuthering Heights," as in the lowering skies of a stormy autumn.
Perhaps part of the marvel of the book comes from the knowledge that
the authoress was a slight, delicate young girl.  One wonders what
her future work would have been, had she lived to gain a wider
experience of life; or was it well for her fame that nature took the
pen so soon from her hand?  Her suppressed vehemence may have been
better suited to those tangled Yorkshire byways than to the more
open, cultivated fields of life.

There is not much similarity between the two books, yet when
recalling Emily Bronte my thoughts always run on to Olive Schreiner.
Here, again, was a young girl with the voice of a strong man.  Olive
Schreiner, more fortunate, has lived; but I doubt if she will ever
write a book that will remind us of her first.  "The Story of an
African Farm" is not a work to be repeated.  We have advanced in
literature of late.  I can well remember the storm of indignation
with which the "African Farm" was received by Mrs. Grundy and her
then numerous, but now happily diminishing, school.  It was a book
that was to be kept from the hands of every young man and woman.  But
the hands of the young men and women stretched out and grasped it, to
their help.  It is a curious idea, this of Mrs. Grundy's, that the
young man and woman must never think--that all literature that does
anything more than echo the conventions must be hidden away.

Then there are times when I love to gallop through history on Sir
Walter's broomstick.  At other hours it is pleasant to sit in
converse with wise George Eliot.  From her garden terrace I look down
on Loamshire and its commonplace people; while in her quiet, deep
voice she tells me of the hidden hearts that beat and throb beneath
these velveteen jackets and lace falls.

Who can help loving Thackeray, wittiest, gentlest of men, in spite of
the faint suspicion of snobbishness that clings to him?  There is
something pathetic in the good man's horror of this snobbishness, to
which he himself was a victim.  May it not have been an affectation,
born unconsciously of self-consciousness?  His heroes and heroines
must needs be all fine folk, fit company for lady and gentlemen
readers.  To him the livery was too often the man.  Under his stuffed
calves even Jeames de la Pluche himself stood upon the legs of a man,
but Thackeray could never see deeper than the silk stockings.
Thackeray lived and died in Clubland.  One feels that the world was
bounded for him by Temple Bar on the east and Park Lane on the west;
but what there was good in Clubland he showed us, and for the sake of
the great gentlemen and sweet ladies that his kindly eyes found in
that narrow region, not too overpeopled with great gentlemen and
sweet women, let us honour him.

"Tom Jones," "Peregrine Pickle," and "Tristram Shandy" are books a
man is the better for reading, if he read them wisely.  They teach
him that literature, to be a living force, must deal with all sides
of life, and that little help comes to us from that silly pretence of
ours that we are perfect in all things, leading perfect lives, that
only the villain of the story ever deviates from the path of
rectitude.

This is a point that needs to be considered by both the makers and
the buyers of stories.  If literature is to be regarded solely as the
amusement of an idle hour, then the less relationship it has to life
the better.  Looking into a truthful mirror of nature we are
compelled to think; and when thought comes in at the window self-
satisfaction goes out by the door.  Should a novel or play call us to
ponder upon the problems of existence, or lure us from the dusty high
road of the world, for a while, into the pleasant meadows of
dreamland?  If only the latter, then let our heroes and our heroines
be not what men and women are, but what they should be.  Let Angelina
be always spotless and Edwin always true.  Let virtue ever triumph
over villainy in the last chapter; and let us assume that the
marriage service answers all the questions of the Sphinx.

Very pleasant are these fairy tales where the prince is always brave
and handsome; where the princess is always the best and most
beautiful princess that ever lived; where one knows the wicked people
at a glance by their ugliness and ill-temper, mistakes being thus
rendered impossible; where the good fairies are, by nature, more
powerful than the bad; where gloomy paths lead ever to fair palaces;
where the dragon is ever vanquished; and where well-behaved husbands
and wives can rely upon living happily ever afterwards.  "The world
is too much with us, late and soon."  It is wise to slip away from it
at times to fairyland.  But, alas, we cannot live in fairyland, and
knowledge of its geography is of little help to us on our return to
the rugged country of reality.

Are not both branches of literature needful?  By all means let us
dream, on midsummer nights, of fond lovers led through devious paths
to happiness by Puck; of virtuous dukes--one finds such in fairyland;
of fate subdued by faith and gentleness.  But may we not also, in our
more serious humours, find satisfaction in thinking with Hamlet or
Coriolanus?  May not both Dickens and Zola have their booths in
Vanity Fair?  If literature is to be a help to us, as well as a
pastime, it must deal with the ugly as well as with the beautiful; it
must show us ourselves, not as we wish to appear, but as we know
ourselves to be.  Man has been described as a animal with aspirations
reaching up to Heaven and instincts rooted--elsewhere.  Is literature
to flatter him, or reveal him to himself?

Of living writers it is not safe, I suppose, to speak except,
perhaps, of those who have been with us so long that we have come to
forget they are not of the past.  Has justice ever been done to
Ouida's undoubted genius by our shallow school of criticism, always
very clever in discovering faults as obvious as pimples on a fine
face?  Her guardsmen "toy" with their food.  Her horses win the Derby
three years running.  Her wicked women throw guinea peaches from the
windows of the Star and Garter into the Thames at Richmond.  The
distance being about three hundred and fifty yards, it is a good
throw.  Well, well, books are not made worth reading by the absence
of absurdities.  Ouida possesses strength, tenderness, truth,
passion; and these be qualities in a writer capable of carrying many
more faults than Ouida is burdened with.  But that is the method of
our little criticism.  It views an artist as Gulliver saw the
Brobdingnag ladies.  It is too small to see them in their entirety:
a mole or a wart absorbs all its vision.

Why was not George Gissing more widely read?  If faithfulness to life
were the key to literary success, Gissing's sales would have been
counted by the million instead of by the hundred.

Have Mark Twain's literary qualities, apart altogether from his
humour, been recognised in literary circles as they ought to have
been? "Huck Finn" would be a great work were there not a laugh in it
from cover to cover.  Among the Indians and some other savage tribes
the fact that a member of the community has lost one of his senses
makes greatly to his advantage; he is then regarded as a superior
person.  So among a school of Anglo-Saxon readers, it is necessary to
a man, if he would gain literary credit, that he should lack the
sense of humour.  One or two curious modern examples occur to me of
literary success secured chiefly by this failing.

All these authors are my favourites; but such catholic taste is held
nowadays to be no taste.  One is told that if one loves Shakespeare,
one must of necessity hate Ibsen; that one cannot appreciate Wagner
and tolerate Beethoven; that if we admit any merit in Dore, we are
incapable of understanding Whistler.  How can I say which is my
favourite novel?  I can only ask myself which lives clearest in my
memory, which is the book I run to more often than to another in that
pleasant half hour before the dinner-bell, when, with all apologies
to good Mr. Smiles, it is useless to think of work.

I find, on examination, that my "David Copperfield" is more
dilapidated than any other novel upon my shelves.  As I turn its dog-
eared pages, reading the familiar headlines "Mr. Micawber in
difficulties," "Mr. Micawber in prison," "I fall in love with Dora,"
"Mr. Barkis goes out with the tide," "My child wife," "Traddles in a
nest of roses"--pages of my own life recur to me; so many of my
sorrows, so many of my joys are woven in my mind with this chapter or
the other.  That day--how well I remember it when I read of "David's"
wooing, but Dora's death I was careful to skip.  Poor, pretty little
Mrs. Copperfield at the gate, holding up her baby in her arms, is
always associated in my memory with a child's cry, long listened for.
I found the book, face downwards on a chair, weeks afterwards, not
moved from where I had hastily laid it.

Old friends, all of you, how many times have I not slipped away from
my worries into your pleasant company!  Peggotty, you dear soul, the
sight of your kind eyes is so good to me.  Our mutual friend, Mr.
Charles Dickens, is prone, we know, just ever so slightly to gush.
Good fellow that he is, he can see no flaw in those he loves, but
you, dear lady, if you will permit me to call you by a name much
abused, he has drawn in true colours.  I know you well, with your big
heart, your quick temper, your homely, human ways of thought.  You
yourself will never guess your worth--how much the world is better
for such as you!  You think of yourself as of a commonplace person,
useful only for the making of pastry, the darning of stockings, and
if a man--not a young man, with only dim half-opened eyes, but a man
whom life had made keen to see the beauty that lies hidden beneath
plain faces--were to kneel and kiss your red, coarse hand, you would
be much astonished.  But he would be a wise man, Peggotty, knowing
what things a man should take carelessly, and for what things he
should thank God, who has fashioned fairness in many forms.

Mr. Wilkins Micawber, and you, most excellent of faithful wives, Mrs.
Emma Micawber, to you I also raise my hat.  How often has the example
of your philosophy saved me, when I, likewise, have suffered under
the temporary pressure of pecuniary liabilities; when the sun of my
prosperity, too, has sunk beneath the dark horizon of the world--in
short, when I, also, have found myself in a tight corner.  I have
asked myself what would the Micawbers have done in my place.  And I
have answered myself.  They would have sat down to a dish of lamb's
fry, cooked and breaded by the deft hands of Emma, followed by a brew
of punch, concocted by the beaming Wilkins, and have forgotten all
their troubles, for the time being.  Whereupon, seeing first that
sufficient small change was in my pocket, I have entered the nearest
restaurant, and have treated myself to a repast of such sumptuousness
as the aforesaid small change would command, emerging from that
restaurant stronger and more fit for battle.  And lo! the sun of my
prosperity has peeped at me from over the clouds with a sly wink, as
if to say "Cheer up; I am only round the corner."

Cheery, elastic Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, how would half the world face
their fate but by the help of a kindly, shallow nature such as yours?
I love to think that your sorrows can be drowned in nothing more
harmful than a bowl of punch.  Here's to you, Emma, and to you,
Wilkins, and to the twins!

May you and such childlike folk trip lightly over the stones upon
your path!  May something ever turn up for you, my dears!  May the
rain of life ever fall as April showers upon your simple bald head,
Micawber!

And you, sweet Dora, let me confess I love you, though sensible
friends deem you foolish.  Ah, silly Dora, fashioned by wise Mother
Nature who knows that weakness and helplessness are as a talisman
calling forth strength and tenderness in man, trouble yourself not
unduly about the oysters and the underdone mutton, little woman.
Good plain cooks at twenty pounds a year will see to these things for
us.  Your work is to teach us gentleness and kindness.  Lay your
foolish curls just here, child.  It is from such as you we learn
wisdom.  Foolish wise folk sneer at you.  Foolish wise folk would
pull up the laughing lilies, the needless roses from the garden,
would plant in their places only useful, wholesome cabbage.  But the
gardener, knowing better, plants the silly, short-lived flowers,
foolish wise folk asking for what purpose.

Gallant Traddles, of the strong heart and the unruly hair; Sophy,
dearest of girls; Betsy Trotwood, with your gentlemanly manners and
your woman's heart, you have come to me in shabby rooms, making the
dismal place seem bright.  In dark hours your kindly faces have
looked out at me from the shadows, your kindly voices have cheered
me.

Little Em'ly and Agnes, it may be my bad taste, but I cannot share my
friend Dickens' enthusiasm for them.  Dickens' good women are all too
good for human nature's daily food.  Esther Summerson, Florence
Dombey, Little Nell--you have no faults to love you by.

Scott's women were likewise mere illuminated texts.  Scott only drew
one live heroine--Catherine Seton.  His other women were merely the
prizes the hero had to win in the end, like the sucking pig or the
leg of mutton for which the yokel climbs the greasy pole.  That
Dickens could draw a woman to some likeness he proved by Bella
Wilfer, and Estella in "Great Expectations."  But real women have
never been popular in fiction.  Men readers prefer the false, and
women readers object to the truth.

From an artistic point of view, "David Copperfield" is undoubtedly
Dickens' best work.  Its humour is less boisterous; its pathos less
highly coloured.

One of Leech's pictures represents a cab-man calmly sleeping in the
gutter.

"Oh, poor dear, he's ill," says a tender-hearted lady in the crowd.
"Ill!" retorts a male bystander indignantly, "Ill! 'E's 'ad too much
of what I ain't 'ad enough of."

Dickens suffered from too little of what some of us have too much of-
-criticism.  His work met with too little resistance to call forth
his powers.  Too often his pathos sinks to bathos, and this not from
want of skill, but from want of care.  It is difficult to believe
that the popular writer who allowed his sentimentality--or rather the
public's sentimentality--to run away with him in such scenes as the
death of Paul Dombey and Little Nell was the artist who painted the
death of Sidney Carton and of Barkis, the willing.  The death of
Barkis, next to the passing of Colonel Newcome, is, to my thinking,
one of the most perfect pieces of pathos in English literature.  No
very deep emotion is concerned.  He is a commonplace old man,
clinging foolishly to a commonplace box.  His simple wife and the old
boatmen stand by, waiting calmly for the end.  There is no straining
after effect.  One feels death enter, dignifying all things; and
touched by that hand, foolish old Barkis grows great.

In Uriah Heap and Mrs. Gummidge, Dickens draws types rather than
characters.  Pecksniff, Podsnap, Dolly Varden, Mr. Bumble, Mrs. Gamp,
Mark Tapley, Turveydrop, Mrs. Jellyby--these are not characters; they
are human characteristics personified.

We have to go back to Shakespeare to find a writer who, through
fiction, has so enriched the thought of the people.  Admit all
Dickens' faults twice over, we still have one of the greatest writers
of modern times.  Such people as these creations of Dickens never
lived, says your little critic.  Nor was Prometheus, type of the
spirit of man, nor was Niobe, mother of all mothers, a truthful
picture of the citizen one was likely to meet often during a
morning's stroll through Athens.  Nor grew there ever a wood like to
the Forest of Arden, though every Rosalind and Orlando knows the path
to glades having much resemblance thereto.

Steerforth, upon whom Dickens evidently prided himself, I must
confess, never laid hold of me.  He is a melodramatic young man.  The
worst I could have wished him would have been that he should marry
Rose Dartle and live with his mother.  It would have served him right
for being so attractive.  Old Peggotty and Ham are, of course,
impossible.  One must accept them also as types.  These Brothers
Cheeryble, these Kits, Joe Gargeries, Boffins, Garlands, John
Peerybingles, we will accept as types of the goodness that is in men-
-though in real life the amount of virtue that Dickens often wastes
upon a single individual would by more economically minded nature, be
made to serve for fifty.

To sum up, "David Copperfield" is a plain tale, simply told; and such
are all books that live.  Eccentricities of style, artistic trickery,
may please the critic of a day, but literature is a story that
interests us, boys and girls, men and women.  It is a sad book; and
that, again, gives it an added charm in these sad later days.
Humanity is nearing its old age, and we have come to love sadness, as
the friend who has been longest with us.  In the young days of our
vigour we were merry.  With Ulysses' boatmen, we took alike the
sunshine and the thunder with frolic welcome.  The red blood flowed
in our veins, and we laughed, and our tales were of strength and
hope.  Now we sit like old men, watching faces in the fire; and the
stories that we love are sad stories--like the stories we ourselves
have lived.



CREATURES THAT ONE DAY SHALL BE MEN.



I ought to like Russia better than I do, if only for the sake of the
many good friends I am proud to possess amongst the Russians.  A
large square photograph I keep always on my mantel-piece; it helps me
to maintain my head at that degree of distention necessary for the
performance of all literary work.  It presents in the centre a
neatly-written address in excellent English that I frankly confess I
am never tired of reading, around which are ranged some hundreds of
names I am quite unable to read, but which, in spite of their strange
lettering, I know to be the names of good Russian men and women to
whom, a year or two ago, occurred the kindly idea of sending me as a
Christmas card this message of encouragement.  The individual Russian
is one of the most charming creatures living.  If he like you he does
not hesitate to let you know it; not only by every action possible,
but, by what perhaps is just as useful in this grey old world, by
generous, impulsive speech.

We Anglo-Saxons are apt to pride ourselves upon being
undemonstrative.  Max Adeler tells the tale of a boy who was sent out
by his father to fetch wood.  The boy took the opportunity of
disappearing and did not show his face again beneath the paternal
roof for over twenty years.  Then one evening, a smiling, well-
dressed stranger entered to the old couple, and announced himself as
their long-lost child, returned at last.

"Well, you haven't hurried yourself," grumbled the old man, "and
blarm me if now you haven't forgotten the wood."

I was lunching with an Englishman in a London restaurant one day.  A
man entered and took his seat at a table near by.  Glancing round,
and meeting my friend's eyes, he smiled and nodded.

"Excuse me a minute," said my friend, "I must just speak to my
brother--haven't seen him for over five years."

He finished his soup and leisurely wiped his moustache before
strolling across and shaking hands.  They talked for a while.  Then
my friend returned to me.

"Never thought to see him again," observed my friend, "he was one of
the garrison of that place in Africa--what's the name of it?--that
the Mahdi attacked.  Only three of them escaped.  Always was a lucky
beggar, Jim."

"But wouldn't you like to talk to him some more?" I suggested; "I can
see you any time about this little business of ours."

"Oh, that's all right," he answered, "we have just fixed it up--shall
be seeing him again to-morrow."

I thought of this scene one evening while dining with some Russian
friends in a St. Petersburg Hotel.  One of the party had not seen his
second cousin, a mining engineer, for nearly eighteen months.  They
sat opposite to one another, and a dozen times at least during the
course of the dinner one of them would jump up from his chair, and
run round to embrace the other.  They would throw their arms about
one another, kissing one another on both cheeks, and then sit down
again, with moist eyes.  Their behaviour among their fellow
countrymen excited no astonishment whatever.

But the Russians's anger is as quick and vehement as his love.  On
another occasion I was supping with friends in one of the chief
restaurants on the Nevsky.  Two gentlemen at an adjoining table, who
up till the previous moment had been engaged in amicable
conversation, suddenly sprang to their feet, and "went for" one
another.  One man secured the water-bottle, which he promptly broke
over the other's head.  His opponent chose for his weapon a heavy
mahogany chair, and leaping back for the purpose of securing a good
swing, lurched against my hostess.

"Do please be careful," said the lady.

"A thousand pardons, madame," returned the stranger, from whom blood
and water were streaming in equal copiousness; and taking the utmost
care to avoid interfering with our comfort, he succeeded adroitly in
flooring his antagonist by a well-directed blow.

A policeman appeared upon the scene.  He did not attempt to
interfere, but running out into the street communicated the glad
tidings to another policeman.

"This is going to cost them a pretty penny," observed my host, who
was calmly continuing his supper; "why couldn't they wait?"

It did cost them a pretty penny.  Some half a dozen policemen were
round about before as many minutes had elapsed, and each one claimed
his bribe.  Then they wished both combatants good-night, and trooped
out evidently in great good humour and the two gentlemen, with wet
napkins round their heads, sat down again, and laughter and amicable
conversation flowed freely as before.

They strike the stranger as a childlike people, but you are possessed
with a haunting sense of ugly traits beneath.  The workers--slaves it
would be almost more correct to call them--allow themselves to be
exploited with the uncomplaining patience of intelligent animals.
Yet every educated Russian you talk to on the subject knows that
revolution is coming.

But he talks to you about it with the door shut, for no man in Russia
can be sure that his own servants are not police spies.  I was
discussing politics with a Russian official one evening in his study
when his old housekeeper entered the room--a soft-eyed grey-haired
woman who had been in his service over eight years, and whose
position in the household was almost that of a friend.  He stopped
abruptly and changed the conversation.  So soon as the door was
closed behind her again, he explained himself.

"It is better to chat upon such matters when one is quite alone," he
laughed.

"But surely you can trust her," I said, "She appears to be devoted to
you all."

"It is safer to trust no one," he answered.  And then he continued
from the point where we had been interrupted.

"It is gathering," he said; "there are times when I almost smell
blood in the air.  I am an old man and may escape it, but my children
will have to suffer--suffer as children must for the sins of their
fathers.  We have made brute beasts of the people, and as brute
beasts they will come upon us, cruel, and undiscriminating; right and
wrong indifferently going down before them.  But it has to be.  It is
needed."

It is a mistake to speak of the Russian classes opposing to all
progress a dead wall of selfishness.  The history of Russia will be
the history of the French Revolution over again, but with this
difference:  that the educated classes, the thinkers, who are pushing
forward the dumb masses are doing so with their eyes open.  There
will be no Maribeau, no Danton to be appalled at a people's
ingratitude.  The men who are to-day working for revolution in Russia
number among their ranks statesmen, soldiers, delicately-nurtured
women, rich landowners, prosperous tradesmen, students familiar with
the lessons of history.  They have no misconceptions concerning the
blind Monster into which they are breathing life.  He will crush
them, they know it; but with them he will crush the injustice and
stupidity they have grown to hate more than they love themselves.

The Russian peasant, when he rises, will prove more terrible, more
pitiless than were the men of 1790.  He is less intelligent, more
brutal.  They sing a wild, sad song, these Russian cattle, the while
they work.  They sing it in chorus on the quays while hauling the
cargo, they sing it in the factory, they chant on the weary, endless
steppes, reaping the corn they may not eat.  It is of the good time
their masters are having, of the feastings and the merrymakings, of
the laughter of the children, of the kisses of the lovers.

But the last line of every verse is the same.  When you ask a Russian
to translate it for you he shrugs his shoulders.

"Oh, it means," he says, "that their time will also come--some day."

It is a pathetic, haunting refrain.  They sing it in the drawing-
rooms of Moscow and St. Petersburg, and somehow the light talk and
laughter die away, and a hush, like a chill breath, enters by the
closed door and passes through.  It is a curious song, like the
wailing of a tired wind, and one day it will sweep over the land
heralding terror.

A Scotsman I met in Russia told me that when he first came out to act
as manager of a large factory in St. Petersburg, belonging to his
Scottish employers, he unwittingly made a mistake the first week when
paying his workpeople.  By a miscalculation of the Russian money he
paid the men, each one, nearly a rouble short.  He discovered his
error before the following Saturday, and then put the matter right.
The men accepted his explanation with perfect composure and without
any comment whatever.  The thing astonished him.

"But you must have known I was paying you short," he said to one of
them.  "Why didn't you tell me of it?"

"Oh," answered the man, "we thought you were putting it in your own
pocket and then if we had complained it would have meant dismissal
for us.  No one would have taken our word against yours."

Corruption appears to be so general throughout the whole of Russia
that all classes have come to accept it as part of the established
order of things.  A friend gave me a little dog to bring away with
me.  It was a valuable animal, and I wished to keep it with me.  It
is strictly forbidden to take dogs into railway carriages.  The list
of the pains and penalties for doing so frightened me considerably.

"Oh, that will be all right," my friend assured me; "have a few
roubles loose in your pocket."

I tipped the station master and I tipped the guard, and started
pleased with myself.  But I had not anticipated what was in store for
me.  The news that an Englishman with a dog in a basket and roubles
in his pocket was coming must have been telegraphed all down the
line.  At almost every stopping-place some enormous official, wearing
generally a sword and a helmet, boarded the train.  At first these
fellows terrified me.  I took them for field-marshals at least.

Visions of Siberia crossed my mind.  Anxious and trembling, I gave
the first one a gold piece.  He shook me warmly by the hand--I
thought he was going to kiss me.  If I had offered him my cheek I am
sure he would have done so.  With the next one I felt less
apprehensive.  For a couple of roubles he blessed me, so I gathered;
and, commending me to the care of the Almighty, departed.  Before I
had reached the German frontier, I was giving away the equivalent of
English sixpences to men with the dress and carriage of major-
generals; and to see their faces brighten up and to receive their
heartfelt benediction was well worth the money.

But to the man without roubles in his pocket, Russian officialdom is
not so gracious.  By the expenditure of a few more coins I got my dog
through the Customs without trouble, and had leisure to look about
me.  A miserable object was being badgered by half a dozen men in
uniform, and he--his lean face puckered up into a snarl--was
returning them snappish answers; the whole scene suggested some half-
starved mongrel being worried by school-boys.  A slight informality
had been discovered in his passport, so a fellow traveller with whom
I had made friends informed me.  He had no roubles in his pocket, and
in consequence they were sending him back to St. Petersburg--some
eighteen hours' journey--in a wagon that in England would not be
employed for the transport of oxen.

It seemed a good joke to Russian officialdom; they would drop in
every now and then, look at him as he sat crouched in a corner of the
waiting-room, and pass out again, laughing.  The snarl had died from
his face; a dull, listless indifference had taken its place--the look
one sees on the face of a beaten dog, after the beating is over, when
it is lying very still, its great eyes staring into nothingness, and
one wonders whether it is thinking.

The Russian worker reads no newspaper, has no club, yet all things
seem to be known to him.  There is a prison on the banks of the Neva,
in St. Petersburg.  They say such things are done with now, but up
till very recently there existed a small cell therein, below the
level of the ice, and prisoners placed there would be found missing a
day or two afterwards, nothing ever again known of them, except,
perhaps, to the fishes of the Baltic.  They talk of such like things
among themselves:  the sleigh-drivers round their charcoal fire, the
field-workers going and coming in the grey dawn, the factory workers,
their whispers deadened by the rattle of the looms.

I was searching for a house in Brussels some winters ago, and there
was one I was sent to in a small street leading out of the Avenue
Louise.  It was poorly furnished, but rich in pictures, large and
small.  They covered the walls of every room.

"These pictures," explained to me the landlady, an old, haggard-
looking woman, "will not be left, I am taking them with me to London.
They are all the work of my husband.  He is arranging an exhibition."

The friend who had sent me had told me the woman was a widow, who had
been living in Brussels eking out a precarious existence as a
lodging-house keeper for the last ten years.

"You have married again?" I questioned her.

The woman smiled.

"Not again.  I was married eighteen years ago in Russia.  My husband
was transported to Siberia a few days after we were married, and I
have never seen him since."

"I should have followed him," she added, "only every year we thought
he was going to be set free."

"He is really free now?" I asked.

"Yes," she answered.  "They set him free last week.  He will join me
in London.  We shall be able to finish our honeymoon."

She smiled, revealing to me that once she had been a girl.

I read in the English papers of the exhibition in London.  It was
said the artist showed much promise.  So possibly a career may at
last be opening out for him.

Nature has made life hard to Russian rich and poor alike.  To the
banks of the Neva, with its ague and influenza-bestowing fogs and
mists, one imagines that the Devil himself must have guided Peter the
Great.

"Show me in all my dominions the most hopelessly unattractive site on
which to build a city," Peter must have prayed; and the Devil having
discovered the site on which St. Petersburg now stands, must have
returned to his master in high good feather.

"I think, my dear Peter, I have found you something really unique.
It is a pestilent swamp to which a mighty river brings bitter blasts
and marrow-chilling fogs, while during the brief summer time the wind
will bring you sand.  In this way you will combine the disadvantages
of the North Pole with those of the desert of Sahara."

In the winter time the Russians light their great stoves, and doubly
barricade their doors and windows; and in this atmosphere, like to
that of a greenhouse, many of their women will pass six months, never
venturing out of doors.  Even the men only go out at intervals.
Every office, every shop is an oven.  Men of forty have white hair
and parchment faces; and the women are old at thirty.  The farm
labourers, during the few summer months, work almost entirely without
sleep.  They leave that for the winter, when they shut themselves up
like dormice in their hovels, their store of food and vodka buried
underneath the floor.  For days together they sleep, then wake and
dig, then sleep again.

The Russian party lasts all night.  In an adjoining room are beds and
couches; half a dozen guests are always sleeping.  An hour contents
them, then they rejoin the company, and other guests take their
places.  The Russian eats when he feels so disposed; the table is
always spread, the guests come and go.  Once a year there is a great
feast in Moscow.  The Russian merchant and his friends sit down early
in the day, and a sort of thick, sweet pancake is served up hot.  The
feast continues for many hours, and the ambition of the Russian
merchant is to eat more than his neighbour.  Fifty or sixty of these
hot cakes a man will consume at a sitting, and a dozen funerals in
Moscow is often the result.

An uncivilised people, we call them in our lordly way, but they are
young.  Russian history is not yet three hundred years old.  They
will see us out, I am inclined to think.  Their energy, their
intelligence--when these show above the groundwork--are monstrous.  I
have known a Russian learn Chinese within six months.  English! they
learn it while you are talking to them.  The children play at chess
and study the violin for their own amusement.

The world will be glad of Russia--when she has put her house in
order.



HOW TO BE HAPPY THOUGH LITTLE.



Folks suffering from Jingoism, Spreadeagleism, Chauvinism--all such
like isms, to whatever country they belong--would be well advised to
take a tour in Holland.  It is the idea of the moment that size
spells happiness.  The bigger the country the better one is for
living there.  The happiest Frenchman cannot possibly be as happy as
the most wretched Britisher, for the reason that Britain owns many
more thousands of square miles than France possesses.  The Swiss
peasant, compared with the Russian serf, must, when he looks at the
map of Europe and Asia, feel himself to be a miserable creature.  The
reason that everybody in America is happy and good is to be explained
by the fact that America has an area equal to that of the entire
moon.  The American citizen who has backed the wrong horse, missed
his train and lost his bag, remembers this and feels bucked up again.

According to this argument, fishes should be the happiest of mortals,
the sea consisting--at least, so says my atlas:  I have not measured
it myself--of a hundred and forty-four millions of square miles.
But, maybe, the sea is also divided in ways we wot not of.  Possibly
the sardine who lives near the Brittainy coast is sad and
discontented because the Norwegian sardine is the proud inhabitant of
a larger sea.  Perhaps that is why he has left the Brittainy coast.
Ashamed of being a Brittainy sardine, he has emigrated to Norway, has
become a naturalized Norwegian sardine, and is himself again.

The happy Londoner on foggy days can warm himself with the reflection
that the sun never sets on the British Empire.  He does not often see
the sun, but that is a mere detail.  He regards himself as the owner
of the sun; the sun begins his little day in the British Empire, ends
his little day in the British Empire:  for all practical purposes the
sun is part of the British Empire.  Foolish people in other countries
sit underneath it and feel warm, but that is only their ignorance.
They do not know it is a British possession; if they did they would
feel cold.

My views on this subject are, I know, heretical.  I cannot get it
into my unpatriotic head that size is the only thing worth worrying
about.  In England, when I venture to express my out-of-date
opinions, I am called a Little Englander.  It fretted me at first; I
was becoming a mere shadow.  But by now I have got used to it.  It
would be the same, I feel, wherever I went.  In New York I should be
a Little American; in Constantinople a Little Turk.  But I wanted to
talk about Holland.  A holiday in Holland serves as a corrective to
exaggerated Imperialistic notions.

There are no poor in Holland.  They may be an unhappy people, knowing
what a little country it is they live in; but, if so, they hide the
fact.  To all seeming, the Dutch peasant, smoking his great pipe, is
as much a man as the Whitechapel hawker or the moocher of the Paris
boulevard.  I saw a beggar once in Holland--in the townlet of
Enkhuisen.  Crowds were hurrying up from the side streets to have a
look at him; the idea at first seemed to be that he was doing it for
a bet.  He turned out to be a Portuguese.  They offered him work in
the docks--until he could get something better to do--at wages equal
in English money to about ten shillings a day.  I inquired about him
on my way back, and was told he had borrowed a couple of forms from
the foreman and had left by the evening train.  It is not the country
for the loafer.

In Holland work is easily found; this takes away the charm of looking
for it.  A farm labourer in Holland lives in a brick-built house of
six rooms, which generally belongs to him, with an acre or so of
ground, and only eats meat once a day.  The rest of his time he fills
up on eggs and chicken and cheese and beer.  But you rarely hear him
grumble.  His wife and daughter may be seen on Sundays wearing gold
and silver jewellery worth from fifty to one hundred pounds, and
there is generally enough old delft and pewter in the house to start
a local museum anywhere outside Holland.  On high days and holidays,
of which in Holland there are plenty, the average Dutch vrouw would
be well worth running away with.  The Dutch peasant girl has no need
of an illustrated journal once a week to tell her what the fashion
is; she has it in the portrait of her mother, or of her grandmother,
hanging over the glittering chimney-piece.

When the Dutchwoman builds a dress she builds it to last; it descends
from mother to daughter, but it is made of sound material in the
beginning.  A lady friend of mine thought the Dutch costume would
serve well for a fancy-dress ball, so set about buying one, but
abandoned the notion on learning what it would cost her.  A Dutch
girl in her Sunday clothes must be worth fifty pounds before you come
to ornaments.  In certain provinces she wears a close-fitting helmet,
made either of solid silver or of solid gold.  The Dutch gallant,
before making himself known, walks on tiptoe a little while behind
the Loved One, and looks at himself in her head-dress just to make
sure that his hat is on straight and his front curl just where it
ought to be.

In most other European countries national costume is dying out.  The
slop-shop is year by year extending its hideous trade.  But the
country of Rubens and Rembrandt, of Teniers and Gerard Dow, remains
still true to art.  The picture post-card does not exaggerate.  The
men in those wondrous baggy knickerbockers, from the pockets of which
you sometimes see a couple of chicken's heads protruding; in gaudy
coloured shirts, in worsted hose and mighty sabots, smoking their
great pipes--the women in their petticoats of many hues, in
gorgeously embroidered vest, in chemisette of dazzling white, crowned
with a halo of many frills, glittering in gold and silver--are not
the creatures of an artist's fancy.  You meet them in their thousands
on holiday afternoons, walking gravely arm in arm, flirting with
sober Dutch stolidity.

On colder days the women wear bright-coloured capes made of fine spun
silk, from underneath the ample folds of which you sometimes hear a
little cry; and sometimes a little hooded head peeps out, regards
with preternatural thoughtfulness the toy-like world without, then
dives back into shelter.  As for the children--women in miniature,
the single difference in dress being the gay pinafore--you can only
say of them that they look like Dutch dolls.  But such plump,
contented, cheerful little dolls!  You remember the hollow-eyed,
pale-faced dolls you see swarming in the great, big and therefore
should be happy countries, and wish that mere land surface were of
less importance to our statesmen and our able editors, and the
happiness and well-being of the mere human items worth a little more
of their thought.

The Dutch peasant lives surrounded by canals, and reaches his cottage
across a drawbridge.  I suppose it is in the blood of the Dutch child
not to tumble into a canal, and the Dutch mother never appears to
anticipate such possibility.  One can imagine the average English
mother trying to bring up a family in a house surrounded by canals.
She would never have a minute's peace until the children were in bed.
But then the mere sight of a canal to the English child suggests the
delights of a sudden and unexpected bath.  I put it to a Dutchman
once.  Did the Dutch child by any chance ever fall into a canal?

"Yes," he replied, "cases have been known."

"Don't you do anything for it?" I enquired.

"Oh, yes," he answered, "we haul them out again."

"But what I mean is," I explained, "don't you do anything to prevent
their falling in--to save them from falling in again?"

"Yes," he answered, "we spank 'em."

There is always a wind in Holland; it comes from over the sea.  There
is nothing to stay its progress.  It leaps the low dykes and sweeps
with a shriek across the sad, soft dunes, and thinks it is going to
have a good time and play havoc in the land.  But the Dutchman laughs
behind his great pipe as it comes to him shouting and roaring.
"Welcome, my hearty, welcome," he chuckles, "come blustering and
bragging; the bigger you are the better I like you."  And when it is
once in the land, behind the long, straight dykes, behind the waving
line of sandy dunes, he seizes hold of it, and will not let it go
till it has done its tale of work.

The wind is the Dutchman's; servant before he lets it loose again it
has turned ten thousand mills, has pumped the water and sawn the
wood, has lighted the town and worked the loom, and forged the iron,
and driven the great, slow, silent wherry, and played with the
children in the garden.  It is a sober wind when it gets back to sea,
worn and weary, leaving the Dutchman laughing behind his everlasting
pipe.  There are canals in Holland down which you pass as though a
field of wind-blown corn; a soft, low, rustling murmur ever in your
ears.  It is the ceaseless whirl of the great mill sails.  Far out at
sea the winds are as foolish savages, fighting, shrieking, tearing--
purposeless.  Here, in the street of mills, it is a civilized wind,
crooning softly while it labours.

What charms one in Holland is the neatness and cleanliness of all
about one.  Maybe to the Dutchman there are drawbacks.  In a Dutch
household life must be one long spring-cleaning.  No milk-pail is
considered fit that cannot just as well be used for a looking-glass.
The great brass pans, hanging under the pent house roof outside the
cottage door, flash like burnished gold.  You could eat your dinner
off the red-tiled floor, but that the deal table, scrubbed to the
colour of cream cheese, is more convenient.  By each threshold stands
a row of empty sabots, and woe-betide the Dutchman who would dream of
crossing it in anything but his stockinged feet.

There is a fashion in sabots.  Every spring they are freshly painted.
One district fancies an orange yellow, another a red, a third white,
suggesting purity and innocence.  Members of the Smart Set indulge in
ornamentation; a frieze in pink, a star upon the toe.  Walking in
sabots is not as easy as it looks.  Attempting to run in sabots I do
not recommend to the beginner.

"How do you run in sabots?" I asked a Dutchman once.  I had been
experimenting, and had hurt myself.

"We don't run," answered the Dutchman.

And observation has proved to me he was right.  The Dutch boy, when
he runs, puts them for preference on his hands, and hits other Dutch
boys over the head with them as he passes.

The roads in Holland, straight and level, and shaded all the way with
trees, look, from the railway-carriage window, as if they would be
good for cycling; but this is a delusion.  I crossed in the boat from
Harwich once, with a well-known black and white artist, and an
equally well-known and highly respected humorist.  They had their
bicycles with them, intending to tour Holland.  I met them a
fortnight later in Delft, or, rather, I met their remains.  I was
horrified at first.  I thought it was drink.  They could not stand
still, they could not sit still, they trembled and shook in every
limb, their teeth chattered when they tried to talk.  The humorist
hadn't a joke left in him.  The artist could not have drawn his own
salary; he would have dropped it on the way to his pocket.  The Dutch
roads are paved their entire length with cobbles--big, round cobbles,
over which your bicycle leaps and springs and plunges.

If you would see Holland outside the big towns a smattering of Dutch
is necessary.  If you know German there is not much difficulty.
Dutch--I speak as an amateur--appears to be very bad German mis-
pronounced.  Myself, I find my German goes well in Holland, even
better than in Germany.  The Anglo-Saxon should not attempt the Dutch
G.  It is hopeless to think of succeeding, and the attempt has been
known to produce internal rupture.  The Dutchman appears to keep his
G in his stomach, and to haul it up when wanted.  Myself, I find the
ordinary G, preceded by a hiccough and followed by a sob, the nearest
I can get to it.  But they tell me it is not quite right, yet.

One needs to save up beforehand if one desires to spend any length of
time in Holland.  One talks of dear old England, but the dearest land
in all the world is little Holland.  The florin there is equal to the
franc in France and to the shilling in England.  They tell you that
cigars are cheap in Holland.  A cheap Dutch cigar will last you a
day.  It is not until you have forgotten the taste of it that you
feel you ever want to smoke again.  I knew a man who reckoned that he
had saved hundreds of pounds by smoking Dutch cigars for a month
steadily.  It was years before he again ventured on tobacco.

Watching building operations in Holland brings home to you forcibly,
what previously you have regarded as a meaningless formula--namely,
that the country is built upon piles.  A dozen feet below the level
of the street one sees the labourers working in fishermen's boots up
to their knees in water, driving the great wooden blocks into the
mud.  Many of the older houses slope forward at such an angle that
you almost fear to pass beneath them.  I should be as nervous as a
kitten, living in one of the upper storeys.  But the Dutchman leans
out of a window that is hanging above the street six feet beyond the
perpendicular, and smokes contentedly.

They have a merry custom in Holland of keeping the railway time
twenty minutes ahead of the town time--or is it twenty minutes
behind?  I never can remember when I'm there, and I am not sure now.
The Dutchman himself never knows.

"You've plenty of time," he says

"But the train goes at ten," you say; "the station is a mile away,
and it is now half-past nine."

"Yes, but that means ten-twenty," he answers, "you have nearly an
hour."

Five minutes later he taps you on the shoulder.

"My mistake, it's twenty to ten.  I was thinking it was the other way
about."

Another argues with him that his first idea was right.  They work it
out by scientific methods.  Meanwhile you have dived into a cab.  The
result is always the same:  you are either forty minutes too soon, or
you have missed the train by twenty minutes.  A Dutch platform is
always crowded with women explaining volubly to their husbands either
that there was not any need to have hurried, or else that the thing
would have been to have started half an hour before they did, the man
in both cases being, of course, to blame.  The men walk up and down
and swear.

The idea has been suggested that the railway time and the town time
should be made to conform.  The argument against the idea is that if
it were carried out there would be nothing left to put the Dutchman
out and worry him.



SHOULD WE SAY WHAT WE THINK, OR THINK WHAT WE SAY?



A mad friend of mine will have it that the characteristic of the age
is Make-Believe.  He argues that all social intercourse is founded on
make-believe.  A servant enters to say that Mr. and Mrs. Bore are in
the drawing-room.

"Oh, damn!" says the man.

"Hush!" says the woman.  "Shut the door, Susan.  How often am I to
tell you never to leave the door open?"

The man creeps upstairs on tiptoe and shuts himself in his study.
The woman does things before a looking-glass, waits till she feels
she is sufficiently mistress of herself not to show her feelings, and
then enters the drawing-room with outstretched hands and the look of
one welcoming an angel's visit.  She says how delighted she is to see
the Bores--how good it was of them to come.  Why did they not bring
more Bores with them?  Where is naughty Bore junior?  Why does he
never come to see her now?  She will have to be really angry with
him.  And sweet little Flossie Bore?  Too young to pay calls!
Nonsense.  An "At Home" day is not worth having where all the Bores
are not.

The Bores, who had hoped that she was out--who have only called
because the etiquette book told them that they must call at least
four times in the season, explain how they have been trying and
trying to come.

"This afternoon," recounts Mrs. Bore, "we were determined to come.
'John, dear,' I said this morning, 'I shall go and see dear Mrs.
Bounder this afternoon, no matter what happens.'"

The idea conveyed is that the Prince of Wales, on calling at the
Bores, was told that he could not come in.  He might call again in
the evening or come some other day.

That afternoon the Bores were going to enjoy themselves in their own
way; they were going to see Mrs. Bounder.

"And how is Mr. Bounder?" demands Mrs. Bore.

Mrs. Bounder remains mute for a moment, straining her ears.  She can
hear him creeping past the door on his way downstairs.  She hears the
front door softly opened and closed-to.  She wakes, as from a dream.
She has been thinking of the sorrow that will fall on Bounder when he
returns home later and learns what he has missed.

And thus it is, not only with the Bores and Bounders, but even with
us who are not Bores or Bounders.  Society in all ranks is founded on
the make-believe that everybody is charming; that we are delighted to
see everybody; that everybody is delighted to see us; that it is so
good of everybody to come; that we are desolate at the thought that
they really must go now.

Which would we rather do--stop and finish our cigar or hasten into
the drawing-room to hear Miss Screecher sing?  Can you ask us?  We
tumble over each other in our hurry.  Miss Screecher would really
rather not sing; but if we insist--We do insist.  Miss Screecher,
with pretty reluctance, consents.  We are careful not to look at one
another.  We sit with our eyes fixed on the ceiling.  Miss Screecher
finishes, and rises.

"But it was so short," we say, so soon as we can be heard above the
applause.  Is Miss Screecher quite sure that was the whole of it?  Or
has she been playing tricks upon us, the naughty lady, defrauding us
of a verse?  Miss Screecher assures us that the fault is the
composer's.  But she knows another.  At this hint, our faces lighten
again with gladness.  We clamour for more.

Our host's wine is always the most extraordinary we have ever tasted.
No, not another glass; we dare not--doctor's orders, very strict.
Our host's cigar!  We did not know they made such cigars in this
workaday world.  No, we really could not smoke another.  Well, if he
will be so pressing, may we put it in our pocket?  The truth is, we
are not used to high smoking.  Our hostess's coffee!  Would she
confide to us her secret?  The baby!  We hardly trust ourselves to
speak.  The usual baby--we have seen it.  As a rule, to be candid, we
never could detect much beauty in babies--have always held the usual
gush about them to be insincere.  But this baby!  We are almost on
the point of asking them where they got it.  It is just the kind we
wanted for ourselves.  Little Janet's recitation:  "A Visit to the
Dentist!"  Hitherto the amateur reciter has not appealed to us.  But
this is genius, surely.  She ought to be trained for the stage.  Her
mother does not altogether approve of the stage.  We plead for the
stage--that it may not be deprived of such talent.

Every bride is beautiful.  Every bride looks charming in a simple
costume of--for further particulars see local papers.  Every marriage
is a cause for universal rejoicing.  With our wine-glass in our hand
we picture the ideal life we know to be in store for them.  How can
it be otherwise?  She, the daughter of her mother.  (Cheers.)  He--
well, we all know him.  (More cheers.)  Also involuntary guffaw from
ill-regulated young man at end of table, promptly suppressed.

We carry our make-believe even into our religion.  We sit in church,
and in voices swelling with pride, mention to the Almighty, at stated
intervals, that we are miserable worms--that there is no good in us.
This sort of thing, we gather, is expected of us; it does us no harm,
and is supposed to please.

We make-believe that every woman is good, that every man is honest--
until they insist on forcing us, against our will, to observe that
they are not.  Then we become very angry with them, and explain to
them that they, being sinners, are not folk fit to mix with us
perfect people.  Our grief, when our rich aunt dies, is hardly to be
borne.  Drapers make fortunes, helping us to express feebly our
desolation.  Our only consolation is that she has gone to a better
world.

Everybody goes to a better world when they have got all they can out
of this one.

We stand around the open grave and tell each other so.  The clergyman
is so assured of it that, to save time, they have written out the
formula for him and had it printed in a little book.  As a child it
used to surprise me--this fact that everybody went to heaven.
Thinking of all the people that had died, I pictured the place
overcrowded.  Almost I felt sorry for the Devil, nobody ever coming
his way, so to speak.  I saw him in imagination, a lonely old
gentleman, sitting at his gate day after day, hoping against hope,
muttering to himself maybe that it hardly seemed worth while, from
his point of view, keeping the show open.  An old nurse whom I once
took into my confidence was sure, if I continued talking in this sort
of way, that he would get me anyhow.  I must have been an evil-
hearted youngster.  The thought of how he would welcome me, the only
human being that he had seen for years, had a certain fascination for
me; for once in my existence I should be made a fuss about.

At every public meeting the chief speaker is always "a jolly good
fellow."  The man from Mars, reading our newspapers, would be
convinced that every Member of Parliament was a jovial, kindly, high-
hearted, generous-souled saint, with just sufficient humanity in him
to prevent the angels from carrying him off bodily.  Do not the
entire audience, moved by one common impulse, declare him three times
running, and in stentorian voice, to be this "jolly good fellow"?  So
say all of them.  We have always listened with the most intense
pleasure to the brilliant speech of our friend who has just sat down.
When you thought we were yawning, we were drinking in his eloquence,
open-mouthed.

The higher one ascends in the social scale, the wider becomes this
necessary base of make-believe.  When anything sad happens to a very
big person, the lesser people round about him hardly care to go on
living.  Seeing that the world is somewhat overstocked with persons
of importance, and that something or another generally is happening
to them, one wonders sometimes how it is the world continues to
exist.

Once upon a time there occurred an illness to a certain good and
great man.  I read in my daily paper that the whole nation was
plunged in grief.  People dining in public restaurants, on being told
the news by the waiter, dropped their heads upon the table and
sobbed.  Strangers, meeting in the street, flung their arms about one
another and cried like little children.  I was abroad at the time,
but on the point of returning home.  I almost felt ashamed to go.  I
looked at myself in the glass, and was shocked at my own appearance:
it was that of a man who had not been in trouble for weeks.  I felt
that to burst upon this grief-stricken nation with a countenance such
as mine would be to add to their sorrow.  It was borne in upon me
that I must have a shallow, egotistical nature.  I had had luck with
a play in America, and for the life of me I could not look grief-
stricken.  There were moments when, if I was not keeping a watch over
myself, I found myself whistling.

Had it been possible I would have remained abroad till some stroke of
ill-fortune had rendered me more in tune with my fellow-countrymen.
But business was pressing.  The first man I talked to on Dover pier
was a Customs House official.  You might have thought sorrow would
have made him indifferent to a mere matter of forty-eight cigars.
Instead of which, he appeared quite pleased when he found them.  He
demanded three-and-fourpence, and chuckled when he got it.  On Dover
platform a little girl laughed because a lady dropped a handbox on a
dog; but then children are always callous--or, perhaps, she had not
heard the news.

What astonished me most, however, was to find in the railway carriage
a respectable looking man reading a comic journal.  True, he did not
laugh much:  he had got decency enough for that; but what was a
grief-stricken citizen doing with a comic journal, anyhow?  Before I
had been in London an hour I had come to the conclusion that we
English must be a people of wonderful self-control.  The day before,
according to the newspapers, the whole country was in serious danger
of pining away and dying of a broken heart.  In one day the nation
had pulled itself together.  "We have cried all day," they had said
to themselves, "we have cried all night.  It does not seem to have
done much good.  Now let us once again take up the burden of life."
Some of them--I noticed it in the hotel dining-room that evening--
were taking quite kindly to their food again.

We make believe about quite serious things.  In war, each country's
soldiers are always the most courageous in the world.  The other
country's soldiers are always treacherous and tricky; that is why
they sometimes win.  Literature is the art of make-believe.

"Now all of you sit round and throw your pennies in the cap," says
the author, "and I will pretend that there lives in Bayswater a young
lady named Angelina, who is the most beautiful young lady that ever
existed.  And in Notting Hill, we will pretend, there resides a young
man named Edwin, who is in love with Angelina."

And then, there being sufficient pennies in the cap, the author
starts away, and pretends that Angelina thought this and said that,
and that Edwin did all sorts of wonderful things.  We know he is
making it all up as he goes along.  We know he is making up just what
he thinks will please us.  He, on the other hand, has to make-believe
that he is doing it because he cannot help it, he being an artist.
But we know well enough that, were we to stop throwing the pennies
into the cap, he would find out precious soon that he could.

The theatrical manager bangs his drum.

"Walk up! walk up!" he cries, "we are going to pretend that Mrs.
Johnson is a princess, and old man Johnson is going to pretend to be
a pirate.  Walk up, walk up, and be in time!"

So Mrs. Johnson, pretending to be a princess, comes out of a wobbly
thing that we agree to pretend is a castle; and old man Johnson,
pretending to be a pirate, is pushed up and down on another wobbly
thing that we agree to pretend is the ocean.  Mrs. Johnson pretends
to be in love with him, which we know she is not.  And Johnson
pretends to be a very terrible person; and Mrs. Johnson pretends,
till eleven o'clock, to believe it.  And we pay prices, varying from
a shilling to half-a-sovereign, to sit for two hours and listen to
them.

But as I explained at the beginning, my friend is a mad sort of
person.



IS THE AMERICAN HUSBAND MADE ENTIRELY OF STAINED GLASS.



I am glad I am not an American husband.  At first sight this may
appear a remark uncomplimentary to the American wife.  It is nothing
of the sort.  It is the other way about.  We, in Europe, have plenty
of opportunity of judging the American wife.  In America you hear of
the American wife, you are told stories about the American wife, you
see her portrait in the illustrated journals.  By searching under the
heading "Foreign Intelligence," you can find out what she is doing.
But here in Europe we know her, meet her face to face, talk to her,
flirt with her.  She is charming, delightful.  That is why I say I am
glad I am not an American husband.  If the American husband only knew
how nice was the American wife, he would sell his business and come
over here, where now and then he could see her.

Years ago, when I first began to travel about Europe, I argued to
myself that America must be a deadly place to live in.  How sad it
is, I thought to myself, to meet thus, wherever one goes, American
widows by the thousand.  In one narrow by-street of Dresden I
calculated fourteen American mothers, possessing nine-and-twenty
American children, and not a father among them--not a single husband
among the whole fourteen.  I pictured fourteen lonely graves,
scattered over the United States.  I saw as in a vision those
fourteen head-stones of best material, hand-carved, recording the
virtues of those fourteen dead and buried husbands.

Odd, thought I to myself, decidedly odd.  These American husbands,
they must be a delicate type of humanity.  The wonder is their
mothers ever reared them.  They marry fine girls, the majority of
them; two or three sweet children are born to them, and after that
there appears to be no further use for them, as far as this world is
concerned.  Can nothing be done to strengthen their constitutions?
Would a tonic be of any help to them?  Not the customary tonic, I
don't mean, the sort of tonic merely intended to make gouty old
gentlemen feel they want to buy a hoop, but the sort of tonic for
which it was claimed that three drops poured upon a ham sandwich and
the thing would begin to squeak.

It struck me as pathetic, the picture of these American widows
leaving their native land, coming over in shiploads to spend the rest
of their blighted lives in exile.  The mere thought of America, I
took it, had for ever become to them distasteful.  The ground that
once his feet had pressed!  The old familiar places once lighted by
his smile!  Everything in America would remind them of him.
Snatching their babes to their heaving bosoms they would leave the
country where lay buried all the joy of their lives, seek in the
retirement of Paris, Florence or Vienna, oblivion of the past.

Also, it struck me as beautiful, the noble resignation with which
they bore their grief, hiding their sorrow from the indifferent
stranger.  Some widows make a fuss, go about for weeks looking gloomy
and depressed, making not the slightest effort to be merry.  These
fourteen widows--I knew them personally, all of them, I lived in the
same street--what a brave show of cheerfulness they put on!  What a
lesson to the common or European widow, the humpy type of widow!  One
could spend whole days in their company--I had done it--commencing
quite early in the morning with a sleighing excursion, finishing up
quite late in the evening with a little supper party, followed by an
impromptu dance; and never detect from their outward manner that they
were not thoroughly enjoying themselves.

From the mothers I turned my admiring eyes towards the children.
This is the secret of American success, said I to myself; this high-
spirited courage, this Spartan contempt for suffering.  Look at them!
the gallant little men and women.  Who would think that they had lost
a father?  Why, I have seen a British child more upset at losing
sixpence.

Talking to a little girl one day, I enquired of her concerning the
health of her father.  The next moment I could have bitten my tongue
out, remembering that there wasn't such a thing as a father--not an
American father--in the whole street.  She did not burst into tears
as they do in the story-books.  She said:

"He is quite well, thank you," simply, pathetically, just like that.

"I am sure of it," I replied with fervour, "well and happy as he
deserves to be, and one day you will find him again; you will go to
him."

"Ah, yes," she answered, a shining light, it seemed to me, upon her
fair young face.  "Momma says she is getting just a bit tired of this
one-horse sort of place.  She is quite looking forward to seeing him
again."

It touched me very deeply:  this weary woman, tired of her long
bereavement, actually looking forward to the fearsome passage leading
to where her loved one waited for her in a better land.

For one bright breezy creature I grew to feel a real regard.  All the
months that I had known her, seen her almost daily, never once had I
heard a single cry of pain escape her lips, never once had I heard
her cursing fate.  Of the many who called upon her in her charming
flat, not one had ever, to my knowledge, offered her consolation or
condolence.  It seemed to me cruel, callous.  The over-burdened
heart, finding no outlet for its imprisoned grief, finding no
sympathetic ear into which to pour its tale of woe, breaks, we are
told; anyhow, it isn't good for it.  I decided--no one else seeming
keen--that I would supply that sympathetic ear.  The very next time I
found myself alone with her I introduced the subject.

"You have been living here in Dresden a long time, have you not?" I
asked.

"About five years," she answered, "on and off."

"And all alone," I commented, with a sigh intended to invite to
confidence.

"Well, hardly alone," she corrected me, while a look of patient
resignation added dignity to her piquant features.  "You see, there
are the dear children always round about me, during the holidays."

"Besides," she added, "the people here are real kind to me; they
hardly ever let me feel myself alone.  We make up little parties, you
know, picnics and excursions.  And then, of course, there is the
Opera and the Symphony Concerts, and the subscription dances.  The
dear old king has been doing a good deal this winter, too; and I must
say the Embassy folks have been most thoughtful, so far as I am
concerned.  No, it would not be right for me to complain of
loneliness, not now that I have got to know a few people, as it
were."

"But don't you miss your husband?" I suggested.

A cloud passed over her usually sunny face.  "Oh, please don't talk
of him," she said, "it makes me feel real sad, thinking about him."

But having commenced, I was determined that my sympathy should not be
left to waste.

"What did he die of?" I asked.

She gave me a look the pathos of which I shall never forget.

"Say, young man," she cried, "are you trying to break it to me
gently?  Because if so, I'd rather you told me straight out.  What
did he die of?"

"Then isn't he dead?" I asked, "I mean so far as you know."

"Never heard a word about his being dead till you started the idea,"
she retorted.  "So far as I know he's alive and well."

I said that I was sorry.  I went on to explain that I did not mean I
was sorry to hear that in all probability he was alive and well.
What I meant was I was sorry I had introduced a painful subject.

"What's a painful subject?"

"Why, your husband," I replied.

"But why should you call him a painful subject?"

I had an idea she was getting angry with me.  She did not say so.  I
gathered it.  But I had to explain myself somehow.

"Well," I answered, "I take it, you didn't get on well together, and
I am sure it must have been his fault."

"Now look here," she said, "don't you breathe a word against my
husband or we shall quarrel.  A nicer, dearer fellow never lived."

"Then what did you divorce him for?" I asked.  It was impertinent, it
was unjustifiable.  My excuse is that the mystery surrounding the
American husband had been worrying me for months.  Here had I
stumbled upon the opportunity of solving it.  Instinctively I clung
to my advantage.

"There hasn't been any divorce," she said.  "There isn't going to be
any divorce.  You'll make me cross in another minute."

But I was becoming reckless.  "He is not dead.  You are not divorced
from him.  Where is he?" I demanded with some heat.

"Where is he?" she replied, astonished.  Where should he be?  At
home, of course."  I looked around the luxuriously-furnished room
with its air of cosy comfort, of substantial restfulness.

"What home?" I asked.

"What home!  Why, our home, in Detroit."

"What is he doing there?"  I had become so much in earnest that my
voice had assumed unconsciously an authoritative tone.  Presumably,
it hypnotised her, for she answered my questions as though she had
been in the witness-box.

"How do I know?  How can I possibly tell you what he is doing?  What
do people usually do at home?"

"Answer the questions, madam, don't ask them.  What are you doing
here?  Quite truthfully, if you please."  My eyes were fixed upon
her.

"Enjoying myself.  He likes me to enjoy myself.  Besides, I am
educating the children."

"You mean they are here at boarding-school while you are gadding
about.  What is wrong with American education?  When did you see your
husband last?"

"Last?  Let me see.  No, last Christmas I was in Berlin.  It must
have been the Christmas before, I think."

"If he is the dear kind fellow you say he is, how is it you haven't
seen him for two years?"

"Because, as I tell you, he is at home, in Detroit.  How can I see
him when I am here in Dresden and he is in Detroit?  You do ask
foolish questions.  He means to try and come over in the summer, if
he can spare the time, and then, of course -

"Answer my questions, please.  I've spoken to you once about it.  Do
you think you are performing your duty as a wife, enjoying yourself
in Dresden and Berlin while your husband is working hard in Detroit?"

"He was quite willing for me to come.  The American husband is a good
fellow who likes his wife to enjoy herself."

"I am not asking for your views on the American husband.  I am asking
your views on the American wife--on yourself.  The American husband
appears to be a sort of stained-glass saint, and you American wives
are imposing upon him.  It is doing you no good, and it won't go on
for ever.  There will come a day when the American husband will wake
up to the fact he is making a fool of himself, and by over-
indulgence, over-devotion, turning the American woman into a
heartless, selfish creature.  What sort of a home do you think it is
in Detroit, with you and the children over here?  Tell me, is the
American husband made entirely of driven snow, with blood distilled
from moonbeams, or is he composed of the ordinary ingredients?
Because, if the latter, you take my advice and get back home.  I take
it that in America, proper, there are millions of real homes where
the woman does her duty and plays the game.  But also it is quite
clear there are thousands of homes in America, mere echoing rooms,
where the man walks by himself, his wife and children scattered over
Europe.  It isn't going to work, it isn't right that it should work."

"You take the advice of a sincere friend.  Pack up--you and the
children--and get home."

I left.  It was growing late.  I felt it was time to leave.  Whether
she took my counsel I cannot say.  I only know that there still
remain in Europe a goodly number of American wives to whom it is
applicable.



DOES THE YOUNG MAN KNOW EVERYTHING WORTH KNOWING?



I am told that American professors are "mourning the lack of ideals"
at Columbia University--possibly also at other universities scattered
through the United States.  If it be any consolation to these
mourning American professors, I can assure them that they do not
mourn alone.  I live not far from Oxford, and enjoy the advantage of
occasionally listening to the jeremiads of English University
professors.  More than once a German professor has done me the honour
to employ me as an object on which to sharpen his English.  He also
has mourned similar lack of ideals at Heidelberg, at Bonn.  Youth is
youth all the world over; it has its own ideals; they are not those
of the University professor.  The explanation is tolerably simple.
Youth is young, and the University professor, generally speaking, is
middle-aged.

I can sympathise with the mourning professor.  I, in my time, have
suffered like despair.  I remember the day so well; it was my twelfth
birthday.  I recall the unholy joy with which I reflected that for
the future my unfortunate parents would be called upon to pay for me
full railway fare; it marked a decided step towards manhood.  I was
now in my teens.  That very afternoon there came to visit us a
relative of ours.  She brought with her three small children:  a
girl, aged six; a precious, golden-haired thing in a lace collar that
called itself a boy, aged five; and a third still smaller creature,
it might have been male, it might have been female; I could not have
told you at the time, I cannot tell you now.  This collection of
atoms was handed over to me.

"Now, show yourself a man," said my dear mother, "remember you are in
your teens.  Take them out for a walk and amuse them; and mind
nothing happens to them."

To the children themselves their own mother gave instructions that
they were to do everything that I told them, and not to tear their
clothes or make themselves untidy.  These directions, even to myself,
at the time, appeared contradictory.  But I said nothing.  And out
into the wilds the four of us departed.

I was an only child.  My own infancy had passed from my memory.  To
me, at twelve, the ideas of six were as incomprehensible as are those
of twenty to the University professor of forty.  I wanted to be a
pirate.  Round the corner and across the road building operations
were in progress.  Planks and poles lay ready to one's hand.  Nature,
in the neighbourhood, had placed conveniently a shallow pond.  It was
Saturday afternoon.  The nearest public-house was a mile away.
Immunity from interference by the British workman was thus assured.
It occurred to me that by placing my three depressed looking
relatives on one raft, attacking them myself from another, taking the
eldest girl's sixpence away from her, disabling their raft, and
leaving them to drift without a rudder, innocent amusement would be
provided for half an hour at least.

They did not want to play at pirates.  At first sight of the pond the
thing that called itself a boy began to cry.  The six-year-old lady
said she did not like the smell of it.  Not even after I had
explained the game to them were they any the more enthusiastic for
it.

I proposed Red Indians.  They could go to sleep in the unfinished
building upon a sack of lime, I would creep up through the grass, set
fire to the house, and dance round it, whooping and waving my
tomahawk, watching with fiendish delight the frantic but futile
efforts of the palefaces to escape their doom.

It did not "catch on"--not even that.  The precious thing in the lace
collar began to cry again.  The creature concerning whom I could not
have told you whether it was male or female made no attempt at
argument, but started to run; it seemed to have taken a dislike to
this particular field.  It stumbled over a scaffolding pole, and then
it also began to cry.  What could one do to amuse such people?  I
left it to them to propose something.  They thought they would like
to play at "Mothers"--not in this field, but in some other field.

The eldest girl would be mother.  The other two would represent her
children.  They had been taken suddenly ill.  "Waterworks," as I had
christened him, was to hold his hands to his middle and groan.  His
face brightened up at the suggestion.  The nondescript had the
toothache.  It took up its part without a moment's hesitation, and
set to work to scream.  I could be the doctor and look at their
tongues.

That was their "ideal" game.  As I have said, remembering that
afternoon, I can sympathise with the University professor mourning
the absence of University ideals in youth.  Possibly at six my own
ideal game may have been "Mothers."  Looking back from the pile of
birthdays upon which I now stand, it occurs to me that very probably
it was.  But from the perspective of twelve, the reflection that
there were beings in the world who could find recreation in such
fooling saddened me.

Eight years later, his father not being able to afford the time, I
conducted Master "Waterworks," now a healthy, uninteresting, gawky
lad, to a school in Switzerland.  It was my first Continental trip.
I should have enjoyed it better had he not been with me.  He thought
Paris a "beastly hole."  He did not share my admiration for the
Frenchwoman; he even thought her badly dressed.

"Why she's so tied up, she can't walk straight," was the only
impression she left upon him.

We changed the subject; it irritated me to hear him talk.  The
beautiful Juno-like creatures we came across further on in Germany,
he said were too fat.  He wanted to see them run.  I found him
utterly soulless.

To expect a boy to love learning and culture is like expecting him to
prefer old vintage claret to gooseberry wine.  Culture for the
majority is an acquired taste.  Speaking personally, I am entirely in
agreement with the University professor.  I find knowledge, prompting
to observation and leading to reflection, the most satisfactory
luggage with which a traveller through life can provide himself.  I
would that I had more of it.  To be able to enjoy a picture is of
more advantage than to be able to buy it.

All that the University professor can urge in favour of idealism I am
prepared to endorse.  But then I am--let us say, thirty-nine.  At
fourteen my candid opinion was that he was talking "rot."  I looked
at the old gentleman himself--a narrow-chested, spectacled old
gentleman, who lived up a by street.  He did not seem to have much
fun of any sort.  It was not my ideal.  He told me things had been
written in a language called Greek that I should enjoy reading, but I
had not even read all Captain Marryat.  There were tales by Sir
Walter Scott and "Jack Harkaway's Schooldays!"  I felt I could wait a
while.  There was a chap called Aristophanes who had written
comedies, satirising the political institutions of a country that had
disappeared two thousand years ago.  I say, without shame, Drury Lane
pantomime and Barnum's Circus called to me more strongly.

Wishing to give the old gentleman a chance, I dipped into
translations.  Some of these old fellows were not as bad as I had
imagined them.  A party named Homer had written some really
interesting stuff.  Here and there, maybe, he was a bit long-winded,
but, taking him as a whole, there was "go" in him.  There was another
of them--Ovid was his name.  He could tell a story, Ovid could.  He
had imagination.  He was almost as good as "Robinson Crusoe."  I
thought it would please my professor, telling him that I was reading
these, his favourite authors.

"Reading them!" he cried, "but you don't know Greek or Latin."

"But I know English," I answered; "they have all been translated into
English.  You never told me that!"

It appeared it was not the same thing.  There were subtle delicacies
of diction bound to escape even the best translator.  These subtle
delicacies of diction I could enjoy only by devoting the next seven
or eight years of my life to the study of Greek and Latin.  It will
grieve the University professor to hear it, but the enjoyment of
those subtle delicacies of diction did not appear to me--I was only
fourteen at the time, please remember--to be worth the time and
trouble.

The boy is materially inclined--the mourning American professor has
discovered it.  I did not want to be an idealist living up a back
street.  I wanted to live in the biggest house in the best street of
the town.  I wanted to ride a horse, wear a fur coat, and have as
much to eat and drink as ever I liked.  I wanted to marry the most
beautiful woman in the world, to have my name in the newspaper, and
to know that everybody was envying me.

Mourn over it, my dear professor, as you will--that is the ideal of
youth; and, so long as human nature remains what it is, will continue
to be so.  It is a materialistic ideal--a sordid ideal.  Maybe it is
necessary.  Maybe the world would not move much if the young men
started thinking too early.  They want to be rich, so they fling
themselves frenziedly into the struggle.  They build the towns, and
make the railway tracks, hew down the forests, dig the ore out of the
ground.  There comes a day when it is borne in upon them that trying
to get rich is a poor sort of game--that there is only one thing more
tiresome than being a millionaire, and that is trying to be a
millionaire.  But, meanwhile, the world has got its work done.

The American professor fears that the artistic development of America
leaves much to be desired.  I fear the artistic development of most
countries leaves much to be desired.  Why the Athenians themselves
sandwiched their drama between wrestling competitions and boxing
bouts.  The plays of Sophocles, or Euripides, were given as "side
shows."  The chief items of the fair were the games and races.
Besides, America is still a young man.  It has been busy "getting on
in the world."  It has not yet quite finished.  Yet there are signs
that young America is approaching the thirty-nines.  He is finding a
little time, a little money to spare for art.  One can almost hear
young America--not quite so young as he was--saying to Mrs. Europe as
he enters and closes the shop door:

"Well, ma'am, here I am, and maybe you'll be glad to hear I've a
little money to spend.  Yes, ma'am, I've fixed things all right
across the water; we shan't starve.  So now, ma'am, you and I can
have a chat concerning this art I've been hearing so much about.
Let's have a look at it, ma'am, trot it out, and don't you be afraid
of putting a fair price upon it."

I am inclined to think that Mrs. Europe has not hesitated to put a
good price upon the art she has sold to Uncle Sam.  I am afraid Mrs.
Europe has occasionally "unloaded" on Uncle Sam.  I talked to a
certain dealer one afternoon, now many years ago, at the Uwantit
Club.

"What is the next picture likely to be missing?" I asked him in the
course of general conversation.

"Thome little thing of Hoppner'th, if it mutht be," he replied with
confidence.

"Hoppner," I murmured, "I seem to have heard the name."

"Yeth; you'll hear it a bit oftener during the next eighteen month or
tho.  You take care you don't get tired of hearing it, thath all," he
laughed.  "Yeth," he continued, thoughtfully, "Reynoldth ith played
out.  Nothing much to be made of Gainthborough, either.  Dealing in
that lot now, why, it'th like keeping a potht offith.  Hoppner'th the
coming man."

"You've been buying Hoppners up cheap," I suggested.

"Between uth," he answered, "yeth, I think we've got them all.  Maybe
a few more.  I don't think we've mithed any."

"You will sell them for more than you gave for them," I hinted.

"You're thmart," he answered, regarding me admiringly, "you thee
through everything you do."

"How do you work it?" I asked him.  There is a time in the day when
he is confidential.  "Here is this man, Hoppner.  I take it that you
have bought him up at an average of a hundred pounds a picture, and
that at that price most owners were fairly glad to sell.  Few folks
outside the art schools have ever heard of him.  I bet that at the
present moment there isn't one art critic who could spell his name
without reference to a dictionary.  In eighteen months you will be
selling him for anything from one thousand to ten thousand pounds.
How is it done?"

"How ith everything done that'th done well?" he answered.  "By
earnetht effort."  He hitched his chair nearer to me, "I get a chap--
one of your thort of chapth--he writ'th an article about Hoppner.  I
get another to anthwer him.  Before I've done there'll be a hundred
articleth about Hoppner--hith life, hith early thruggie, anecdo'th
about hith wife.  Then a Hoppner will be thold at public auchtion for
a thouthand guineath."

"But how can you be certain it will fetch a thousand guineas?" I
interrupted.

"I happen to know the man whoth going to buy it."  He winked, and I
understood.

"A fortnight later there will be a thale of half-a-dothen, and the
prithe will be gone up by that time."

"And after that?" I said.

"After that," he replied, rising, "the American millionaire!  He'll
jutht be waiting on the door-thtep for the thale-room to open."

"If by any chance I come across a Hoppner?" I said, laughing, as I
turned to go.

"Don't you hold on to it too long, that'th all," was his advice.



HOW MANY CHARMS HATH MUSIC, WOULD YOU SAY?



The argument of the late Herr Wagner was that grand opera--the music
drama, as he called it--included, and therefore did away with the
necessity for--all other arts.  Music in all its branches, of course,
it provides:  so much I will concede to the late Herr Wagner.  There
are times, I confess, when my musical yearnings might shock the late
Herr Wagner--times when I feel unequal to following three distinct
themes at one and the same instant.

"Listen," whispers the Wagnerian enthusiast to me, "the cornet has
now the Brunnhilda motive."  It seems to me, in my then state of
depravity, as if the cornet had even more than this the matter with
him.

"The second violins," continues the Wagnerian enthusiast, "are
carrying on the Wotan theme."  That they are carrying on goes without
saying:  the players' faces are streaming with perspiration.

"The brass," explains my friend--his object is to cultivate my ear--
"is accompanying the singers."  I should have said drowning them.
There are occasions when I can rave about Wagner with the best of
them.  High class moods come to all of us.  The difference between
the really high-class man and us commonplace, workaday men is the
difference between, say, the eagle and the barnyard chicken.  I am
the barnyard chicken.  I have my wings.  There are ecstatic moments
when I feel I want to spurn the sordid earth and soar into the realms
of art.  I do fly a little, but my body is heavy, and I only get as
far as the fence.  After a while I find it lonesome on the fence, and
I hop down again among my fellows.

Listening to Wagner, during such temporary Philistinic mood, my sense
of fair play is outraged.  A lone, lorn woman stands upon the stage
trying to make herself heard.  She has to do this sort of thing for
her living; maybe an invalid mother, younger brothers and sisters are
dependent upon her.  One hundred and forty men, all armed with
powerful instruments, well-organised, and most of them looking well-
fed, combine to make it impossible for a single note of that poor
woman's voice to be heard above their din.  I see her standing there,
opening and shutting her mouth, getting redder and redder in the
face.  She is singing, one feels sure of it; one could hear her if
only those one hundred and forty men would ease up for a minute.  She
makes one mighty, supreme effort; above the banging of the drums, the
blare of the trumpets, the shrieking of the strings, that last
despairing note is distinctly heard.

She has won, but the victory has cost her dear.  She sinks down
fainting on the stage and is carried off by supers.  Chivalrous
indignation has made it difficult for me to keep my seat watching the
unequal contest.  My instinct was to leap the barrier, hurl the bald-
headed chief of her enemies from his high chair, and lay about me
with the trombone or the clarionet--whichever might have come the
easier to my snatch.

"You cowardly lot of bullies," I have wanted to cry, "are you not
ashamed of yourselves?  A hundred and forty of you against one, and
that one a still beautiful and, comparatively speaking, young lady.
Be quiet for a minute--can't you?  Give the poor girl a chance."

A lady of my acquaintance says that sitting out a Wagnerian opera
seems to her like listening to a singer accompanied by four
orchestras playing different tunes at the same time.  As I have said,
there are times when Wagner carries me along with him, when I exult
in the crash and whirl of his contending harmonies.  But, alas! there
are those other moods--those after dinner moods--when my desire is
for something distinctly resembling a tune.  Still, there are other
composers of grand opera besides Wagner.  I grant to the late Herr
Wagner, that, in so far as music is concerned, opera can supply us
with all we can need.

But it was also Wagner's argument that grand opera could supply us
with acting, and there I am compelled to disagree with him.  Wagner
thought that the arts of acting and singing could be combined.  I
have seen artists the great man has trained himself.  As singers they
left nothing to be desired, but the acting in grand opera has never
yet impressed me.  Wagner never succeeded in avoiding the operatic
convention and nobody else ever will.  When the operatic lover meets
his sweetheart he puts her in a corner and, turning his back upon
her, comes down to the footlights and tells the audience how he
adores her.  When he has finished, he, in his turn, retires into the
corner, and she comes down and tells the audience that she is simply
mad about him.

Overcome with joy at finding she really cares for him, he comes down
right and says that this is the happiest moment of his life; and she
stands left, twelve feet away from him, and has the presentiment that
all this sort of thing is much too good to last.  They go off
together, backwards, side by side.  If there is any love-making, such
as I understand by the term, it is done "off."  This is not my idea
of acting.  But I do not see how you are going to substitute for it
anything more natural.  When you are singing at the top of your
voice, you don't want a heavy woman hanging round your neck.  When
you are killing a man and warbling about it at the same time, you
don't want him fooling around you defending himself.  You want him to
have a little reasonable patience, and to wait in his proper place
till you have finished, telling him, or rather telling the crowd, how
much you hate and despise him.

When the proper time comes, and if he is where you expect to find him
while thinking of your upper C, you will hit him lightly on the
shoulder with your sword, and then he can die to his own particular
tune.  If you have been severely wounded in battle, or in any other
sort of row, and have got to sing a long ballad before you finally
expire, you don't want to have to think how a man would really behave
who knew he had only got a few minutes to live and was feeling bad
about it.  The chances are that he would not want to sing at all.
The woman who really loved him would not encourage him to sing.  She
would want him to keep quiet while she moved herself about a bit, in
case there was anything that could be done for him.

If a mob is climbing the stairs thirsting for your blood, you do not
want to stand upright with your arms stretched out, a good eighteen
inches from the door, while you go over at some length the varied
incidents leading up to the annoyance.  If your desire were to act
naturally you would push against that door for all you were worth,
and yell for somebody to bring you a chest of drawers and a bedstead,
and things like that, to pile up against it.  If you were a king, and
were giving a party, you would not want your guests to fix you up at
the other end of the room and leave you there, with nobody to talk to
but your own wife, while they turned their backs upon you, and had a
long and complicated dance all to themselves.  You would want to be
in it; you would want to let them know that you were king.

In acting, all these little points have to be considered.  In opera,
everything is rightly sacrificed to musical necessity.  I have seen
the young, enthusiastic opera-singer who thought that he or she could
act and sing at the same time.  The experienced artist takes the
centre of the stage and husbands his resources.  Whether he is
supposed to be indignant because somebody has killed his mother, or
cheerful because he is going out to fight his country's foes, who are
only waiting until he has finished singing to attack the town, he
leaves it to the composer to make clear.

Also it was Herr Wagner's idea that the back cloth would leave the
opera-goer indifferent to the picture gallery.  The castle on the
rock, accessible only by balloon, in which every window lights up
simultaneously and instantaneously, one minute after sunset, while
the full moon is rushing up the sky at the pace of a champion comet--
that wonderful sea that suddenly opens and swallows up the ship--
those snow-clad mountains, over which the shadow of the hero passes
like a threatening cloud--the grand old chateau, trembling in the
wind--what need, will ask the opera-goer of the future, of your
Turners and your Corots, when, for prices ranging from a shilling
upwards, we can have a dozen pictures such as these rolled up and
down before us every evening?

But perhaps the most daring hope of all was the dream that came to
Herr Wagner that his opera singers, his grouped choruses, would
eventually satisfy the craving of the public for high class statuary.
I am not quite sure the general public does care for statuary.  I do
not know whether the idea has ever occurred to the Anarchist, but,
were I myself organising secret committee meetings for unholy
purposes, I should invite my comrades to meet in that section of the
local museum devoted to statuary.  I can conceive of no place where
we should be freer from prying eyes and listening ears.  A select
few, however, do appreciate statuary; and such, I am inclined to
think, will not be weaned from their passion by the contemplation of
the opera singer in his or her various quaint costumes.

And even if the tenor always satisfied our ideal of Apollo, and the
soprano were always as sylph-like as she is described in the
libretto, even then I should doubt the average operatic chorus being
regarded by the connoisseur as a cheap and pleasant substitute for a
bas relief from the Elgin marbles.  The great thing required of that
operatic chorus is experience.  The young and giddy-pated the chorus
master has no use for.  The sober, honest, industrious lady or
gentleman, with a knowledge of music is very properly his ideal.

What I admire about the chorus chiefly is its unity.  The whole
village dresses exactly alike.  In wicked, worldly villages there is
rivalry, leading to heartburn and jealously.  One lady comes out
suddenly, on, say, a Bank Holiday, in a fetching blue that conquers
every male heart.  Next holiday her rival cuts her out with a green
hat.  In the operatic village it must be that the girls gather
together beforehand to arrange this thing.  There is probably a
meeting called.

"The dear Count's wedding," announces the chairwoman, "you will all
be pleased to hear, has been fixed for the fourteenth, at eleven
o'clock in the morning.  The entire village will be assembled at ten-
thirty to await the return of the bridal cortege from the church, and
offer its felicitations.  Married ladies, will, of course, come
accompanied by their husbands.  Unmarried ladies must each bring a
male partner as near their own height as possible.  Fortunately, in
this village the number of males is exactly equal to that of females,
so that the picture need not be spoiled.  The children will organise
themselves into an independent body and will group themselves
picturesquely.  It has been thought advisable," continues the
chairwoman, "that the village should meet the dear Count and his
bride at some spot not too far removed from the local alehouse.  The
costume to be worn by the ladies will consist of a short pink skirt
terminating at the knees and ornamented with festoons of flowers;
above will be worn a bolero in mauve silk without sleeves and cut
decollete.  The shoes should be of yellow satin over flesh-coloured
stockings.  Ladies who are 'out' will wear pearl necklaces, and a
simple device in emeralds to decorate the hair.  Thank God, we can
all of us afford it, and provided the weather holds up and nothing
unexpected happens--he is not what I call a lucky man, our Count, and
it is always as well to be prepared for possibilities--well, I think
we may look forward to a really pleasant day."

It cannot be done, Herr Wagner, believe me.  You cannot substitute
the music drama for all the arts combined.  The object to be aimed at
by the wise composer should be to make us, while listening to his
music, forgetful of all remaining artistic considerations.



THE WHITE MAN'S BURDEN!  NEED IT BE SO HEAVY?



It is a delightful stroll on a sunny summer morning from the Hague to
the Huis ten Bosch, the little "house in the wood," built for
Princess Amalia, widow of Stadtholter Frederick Henry, under whom
Holland escaped finally from the bondage of her foes and entered into
the promised land of Liberty.  Leaving the quiet streets, the tree-
bordered canals, with their creeping barges, you pass through a
pleasant park, where the soft-eyed deer press round you, hurt and
indignant if you have brought nothing in your pocket--not even a
piece of sugar--to offer them.  It is not that they are grasping--it
is the want of attention that wounds them.

"I thought he was a gentleman," they seem to be saying to one
another, if you glance back, "he looked like a gentleman."

Their mild eyes haunt you; on the next occasion you do not forget.
The Park merges into the forest; you go by winding ways till you
reach the trim Dutch garden, moat-encircled, in the centre of which
stands the prim old-fashioned villa, which, to the simple Dutchman,
appears a palace.  The concierge, an old soldier, bows low to you and
introduces you to his wife--a stately, white-haired dame, who talks
most languages a little, so far as relates to all things within and
appertaining to this tiny palace of the wood.  To things without,
beyond the wood, her powers of conversation do not extend:
apparently such matters do not interest her.

She conducts you to the Chinese Room; the sun streams through the
windows, illuminating the wondrous golden dragons standing out in
bold relief from the burnished lacquer work, decorating still further
with light and shade the delicate silk embroideries thin taper hands
have woven with infinite pains.  The walls are hung with rice paper,
depicting the conventional scenes of the conventional Chinese life.

You find your thoughts wandering.  These grotesque figures, these
caricatures of humanity!  A comical creature, surely, this Chinaman,
the pantaloon of civilization.  How useful he has been to us for our
farces, our comic operas!  This yellow baby, in his ample pinafore,
who lived thousands of years ago, who has now passed into this
strange second childhood.

But is he dying--or does the life of a nation wake again, as after
sleep?  Is he this droll, harmless thing he here depicts himself?
And if not?  Suppose fresh sap be stirring through his three hundred
millions?  We thought he was so very dead; we thought the time had
come to cut him up and divide him, the only danger being lest we
should quarrel over his carcase among ourselves.

Suppose it turns out as the fable of the woodcutter and the bear?
The woodcutter found the bear lying in the forest.  At first he was
much frightened, but the bear lay remarkably still.  So the woodman
crept nearer, ventured to kick the bear--very gently, ready to run if
need be.  Surely the bear was dead!  And parts of a bear are good to
eat, and bearskin to poor woodfolk on cold winter nights is grateful.
So the woodman drew his knife and commenced the necessary
preliminaries.  But the bear was not dead.

If the Chinaman be not dead?  If the cutting-up process has only
served to waken him?  In a little time from now we shall know.

From the Chinese Room the white-haired dame leads us to the Japanese
Room.  Had gentle-looking Princess Amalia some vague foreshadowing of
the future in her mind when she planned these two rooms leading into
one another?  The Japanese decorations are more grotesque, the
designs less cheerfully comical than those of cousin Chinaman.  These
monstrous, mis-shapen wrestlers, these patient-looking gods, with
their inscrutable eyes!  Was it always there, or is it only by the
light of present events that one reads into the fantastic fancies of
the artist working long ago in the doorway of his paper house, a
meaning that has hitherto escaped us?

But the chief attraction of the Huis ten Bosch is the gorgeous Orange
Saloon, lighted by a cupola, fifty feet above the floor, the walls
one blaze of pictures, chiefly of the gorgeous Jordaen school--"The
Defeat of the Vices," "Time Vanquishing Slander"--mostly allegorical,
in praise of all the virtues, in praise of enlightenment and
progress.  Aptly enough in a room so decorated, here was held the
famous Peace Congress that closed the last century.  One can hardly
avoid smiling as one thinks of the solemn conclave of grandees
assembled to proclaim the popularity of Peace.

It was in the autumn of the same year that Europe decided upon the
dividing-up of China, that soldiers were instructed by Christian
monarchs to massacre men, women and children, the idea being to
impress upon the Heathen Chinee the superior civilization of the
white man.  The Boer war followed almost immediately.  Since when the
white man has been pretty busy all over the world with his
"expeditions" and his "missions."  The world is undoubtedly growing
more refined.  We do not care for ugly words.  Even the burglar
refers airily to the "little job" he has on hand.  You would think he
had found work in the country.  I should not be surprised to learn
that he says a prayer before starting, telegraphs home to his anxious
wife the next morning that his task has been crowned with blessing.

Until the far-off date of Universal Brotherhood war will continue.
Matters considered unimportant by both parties will--with a mighty
flourish of trumpets--be referred to arbitration.  I was talking of a
famous financier a while ago with a man who had been his secretary.
Amongst other anecdotes, he told me of a certain agreement about
which dispute had arisen.  The famous financier took the paper into
his own hands and made a few swift calculations.

"Let it go," he concluded, "it is only a thousand pounds at the
outside.  May as well be honest."

Concerning a dead fisherman or two, concerning boundaries through
unproductive mountain ranges we shall arbitrate and feel virtuous.
For gold mines and good pasture lands, mixed up with a little honour
to give respectability to the business, we shall fight it out, as
previously.  War being thus inevitable, the humane man will rejoice
that by one of those brilliant discoveries, so simple when they are
explained, war in the future is going to be rendered equally
satisfactory to victor and to vanquished.

In by-elections, as a witty writer has pointed out, there are no
defeats--only victories and moral victories.  The idea seems to have
caught on.  War in the future is evidently going to be conducted on
the same understanding.  Once upon a time, from a far-off land, a
certain general telegraphed home congratulating his Government that
the enemy had shown no inclination whatever to prevent his running
away.  The whole country rejoiced.

"Why, they never even tried to stop him," citizens, meeting other
citizens in the street, told each other.  "Ah, they've had enough of
him.  I bet they are only too glad to get rid of him.  Why, they say
he ran for miles without seeing a trace of the foe."

The enemy's general, on the other hand, also wrote home
congratulating his Government.  In this way the same battle can be
mafficked over by both parties.  Contentment is the great secret of
happiness.  Everything happens for the best, if only you look at it
the right way.  That is going to be the argument.  The general of the
future will telegraph to headquarters that he is pleased to be able
to inform His Majesty that the enemy, having broken down all
opposition, has succeeded in crossing the frontier and is now well on
his way to His Majesty's capital.

"I am luring him on," he will add, "as fast as I can.  At our present
rate of progress, I am in hopes of bringing him home by the tenth."

Lest foolish civilian sort of people should wonder whereabouts lies
the cause for rejoicing, the military man will condescend to explain.
The enemy is being enticed farther and farther from his base.  The
defeated general--who is not really defeated, who is only artful, and
who appears to be running away, is not really running away at all.
On the contrary, he is running home--bringing, as he explains, the
enemy with him.

If I remember rightly--it is long since I played it--there is a
parlour game entitled "Puss in the Corner."  You beckon another
player to you with your finger.  "Puss, puss!" you cry.  Thereupon he
has to leave his chair--his "base," as the military man would term
it--and try to get to you without anything happening to him.

War in the future is going to be Puss in the Corner on a bigger
scale.  You lure your enemy away from his base.  If all goes well--if
he does not see the trap that is being laid for him--why, then,
almost before he knows it, he finds himself in your capital.  That
finishes the game.  You find out what it is he really wants.
Provided it is something within reason, and you happen to have it
handy, you give it to him.  He goes home crowing, and you, on your
side, laugh when you think how cleverly you succeeded in luring him
away from his base.

There is a bright side to all things.  The gentleman charged with the
defence of a fortress will meet the other gentleman who has captured
it and shake hands with him mid the ruins.

"So here you are at last!" he will explain.  "Why didn't you come
before?  We have been waiting for you."

And he will send off dispatches felicitating his chief on having got
that fortress off their hands, together with all the worry and
expense it has been to them.  When prisoners are taken you will
console yourself with the reflection that the cost of feeding them
for the future will have to be borne by the enemy.  Captured cannon
you will watch being trailed away with a sigh of relief.

"Confounded heavy things!" you will say to yourself.  "Thank goodness
I've got rid of them.  Let him have the fun of dragging them about
these ghastly roads.  See how he likes the job!"

War is a ridiculous method of settling disputes.  Anything that can
tend to make its ridiculous aspect more apparent is to be welcomed.
The new school of military dispatch-writers may succeed in turning
even the laughter of the mob against it.

The present trouble in the East would never have occurred but for the
white man's enthusiasm for bearing other people's burdens.  What we
call the yellow danger is the fear that the yellow man may before
long request us, so far as he is concerned, to put his particular
burden down.  It may occur to him that, seeing it is his property, he
would just as soon carry it himself.  A London policeman told me a
story the other day that struck him as an example of Cockney humour
under trying circumstances.  But it may also serve as a fable.  From
a lonely street in the neighbourhood of Covent Garden, early one
morning, the constable heard cries of "Stop thief!" shouted in a
childish treble.  He arrived on the scene just in time to collar a
young hooligan, who, having snatched a basket of fruit from a small
lad--a greengrocer's errand boy, as it turned out--was, with it,
making tracks.  The greengrocer's boy, between panting and tears,
delivered his accusation.  The hooligan regarded him with an
expression of amazed indignation.

"What d'yer mean, stealing it?" exclaimed Mr. Hooligan.  "Why, I was
carrying it for yer!"

The white man has got into the way of "carrying" other people's
burdens, and now it looks as if the yellow man were going to object
to our carrying his any further.  Maybe he is going to get nasty, and
insist on carrying it himself.  We call this "the yellow danger."

A friend of mine--he is a man who in the street walks into lamp-
posts, and apologises--sees rising from the East the dawn of a new
day in the world's history.  The yellow danger is to him a golden
hope.  He sees a race long stagnant, stretching its giant limbs with
the first vague movements of returning life.  He is a poor sort of
patriot; he calls himself, I suppose, a white man, yet he shamelessly
confesses he would rather see Asia's millions rise from the ruins of
their ancient civilization to take their part in the future of
humanity, than that half the population of the globe should remain
bound in savagery for the pleasure and the profit of his own
particular species.

He even goes so far as to think that the white man may have something
to learn.  The world has belonged to him now for some thousands of
years.  Has he done all with it that could have been done?  Are his
ideals the last word?

Not what the yellow man has absorbed from Europe, but what he is
going to give Europe it is that interests my friend.  He is watching
the birth of a new force--an influence as yet unknown.  He clings to
the fond belief that new ideas, new formulae, to replace the old worn
shibboleths, may, during these thousands of years, have been
developing in those keen brains that behind the impressive yellow
mask have been working so long in silence and in mystery.



WHY DIDN'T HE MARRY THE GIRL?



What is wrong with marriage, anyhow?  I find myself pondering this
question so often, when reading high-class literature.  I put it to
myself again the other evening, during a performance of Faust.  Why
could not Faust have married the girl?  I would not have married her
myself for any consideration whatsoever; but that is not the
argument.  Faust, apparently, could not see anything amiss with her.
Both of them were mad about each other.  Yet the idea of a quiet,
unostentatious marriage with a week's honeymoon, say, in Vienna,
followed by a neat little cottage orne, not too far from Nurnberg, so
that their friends could have come out to them, never seems to have
occurred to either of them.

There could have been a garden.  Marguerite might have kept chickens
and a cow.  That sort of girl, brought up to hard work and by no
means too well educated, is all the better for having something to
do.  Later, with the gradual arrival of the family, a good, all-round
woman might have been hired in to assist.  Faust, of course, would
have had his study and got to work again; that would have kept him
out of further mischief.  The idea that a brainy man, his age, was
going to be happy with nothing to do all day but fool round a
petticoat was ridiculous from the beginning.  Valentine--a good
fellow, Valentine, with nice ideas--would have spent his Saturdays to
Monday with them.  Over a pipe and a glass of wine, he and Faust
would have discussed the local politics.

He would have danced the children on his knee, have told them tales
about the war--taught the eldest boy to shoot.  Faust, with a
practical man like Valentine to help him, would probably have
invented a new gun.  Valentine would have got it taken up.

Things might have come of it.  Sybil, in course of time, would have
married and settled down--perhaps have taken a little house near to
them.  He and Marguerite would have joked--when Mrs. Sybil was not
around--about his early infatuation.  The old mother would have
toddled over from Nurnberg--not too often, just for the day.

The picture grows upon one the more one thinks of it.  Why did it
never occur to them?  There would have been a bit of a bother with
the Old Man.  I can imagine Mephistopheles being upset about it,
thinking himself swindled.  Of course, if that was the reason--if
Faust said to himself:

"I should like to marry the girl, but I won't do it; it would not be
fair to the Old Man; he has been to a lot of trouble working this
thing up; in common gratitude I cannot turn round now and behave like
a decent, sensible man; it would not be playing the game"--if this
was the way Faust looked at the matter there is nothing more to be
said.  Indeed, it shows him in rather a fine light--noble, if
quixotic.

If, on the other hand, he looked at the question from the point of
view of himself and the girl, I think the thing might have been
managed.  All one had to do in those days when one wanted to get rid
of the Devil was to show him a sword hilt.  Faust and Marguerite
could have slipped into a church one morning, and have kept him out
of the way with a sword hilt till the ceremony was through.  They
might have hired a small boy:

"You see the gentleman in red?  Well, he wants us and we don't want
him.  That is the only difference between us.  Now, you take this
sword, and when you see him coming show him the hilt.  Don't hurt
him; just show him the sword and shake your head.  He will
understand."

The old gentleman's expression, when subsequently Faust presented him
to Marguerite, would have been interesting:

"Allow me, my wife.  My dear, a--a friend of mine.  You may remember
meeting him that night at your aunt's."

As I have said, there would have been ructions; but I do not myself
see what could have been done.  There was nothing in the bond to the
effect that Faust should not marry, so far as we are told.  The Old
Man had a sense of humour.  My own opinion is that, after getting
over the first annoyance, he himself would have seen the joke.  I can
even picture him looking in now and again on Mr. and Mrs. Faust.  The
children would be hurried off to bed.  There would be, for a while,
an atmosphere of constraint.

But the Old Man had a way with him.  He would have told one or two
stories at which Marguerite would have blushed, at which Faust would
have grinned.  I can see the old fellow occasionally joining the
homely social board.  The children, awed at first, would have sat
silent, with staring eyes.  But, as I have said, the Old Man had a
way with him.  Why should he not have reformed?  The good woman's
unconsciously exerted influence--the sweet childish prattle!  One
hears of such things.  Might he not have come to be known as
"Nunkie"?

Myself--I believe I have already mentioned it--I would not have
married Marguerite.  She is not my ideal of a good girl.  I never
liked the way she deceived her mother.  And that aunt of hers!  Well,
a nice girl would not have been friends with such a woman.  She did
not behave at all too well to Sybil, either.  It is clear to me that
she led the boy on.  And what was she doing with that box of jewels,
anyhow?  She was not a fool.  She could not have gone every day to
that fountain, chatted with those girl friends of hers, and learnt
nothing.  She must have known that people don't go leaving twenty
thousand pounds' worth of jewels about on doorsteps as part of a
round game.  Her own instinct, if she had been a good girl, would
have told her to leave the thing alone.

I don't believe in these innocent people who do not know what they
are doing half their time.  Ask any London magistrate what he thinks
of the lady who explains that she picked up the diamond brooch:-

"Not meaning, of course, your Worship, to take it.  I would not do
such a thing.  It just happened this way, your Worship.  I was
standing as you might say here, and not seeing anyone about in the
shop I opened the case and took it out, thinking as perhaps it might
belong to someone; and then this gentleman here, as I had not noticed
before, comes up quite suddenly and says; 'You come along with me,'
he says.  'What for,' I says, 'when I don't even know you?' I says.
'For stealing,' he says.  'Well, that's a hard word to use to a
lady,' I says; 'I don't know what you mean, I'm sure.'"

And if she had put them all on, not thinking, what would a really
nice girl have done when the gentleman came up and assured her they
were hers?  She would have been thirty seconds taking them off and
flinging them back into the box.

"Thank you," she would have said, "I'll trouble you to leave this
garden as quickly as you entered it and take them with you.  I'm not
that sort of girl."

Marguerite clings to the jewels, and accepts the young man's arm for
a moonlight promenade.  And when it does enter into her innocent head
that he and she have walked that shady garden long enough, what does
she do when she has said good-bye and shut the door?  She opens the
ground-floor window and begins to sing!

Maybe I am not poetical, but I do like justice.  When other girls do
these sort of things they get called names.  I cannot see why this
particular girl should be held up as an ideal.  She kills her mother.
According to her own account this was an accident.  It is not an
original line of defence, and we are not allowed to hear the evidence
for the prosecution.  She also kills her baby.  You are not to blame
her for that, because at the time she was feeling poorly.  I don't
see why this girl should have a special line of angels to take her up
to heaven.  There must have been decent, hard-working women in
Nurnburg more entitled to the ticket.

Why is it that all these years we have been content to accept
Marguerite as a type of innocence and virtue?  The explanation is, I
suppose, that Goethe wrote at a time when it was the convention to
regard all women as good.  Anything in petticoats was virtuous.  If
she did wrong it was always somebody else's fault.  Cherchez la femme
was a later notion.  In the days of Goethe it was always Cherchez
l'homme.  It was the man's fault.  It was the devil's fault.  It was
anybody's fault you liked, but not her's.

The convention has not yet died out.  I was reading the other day a
most interesting book by a brilliant American authoress.  Seeing I
live far away from the lady's haunts, I venture to mention names.  I
am speaking of "Patience Sparhawk," by Gertrude Atherton.  I take
this book because it is typical of a large body of fiction.  Miss
Sparhawk lives a troubled life:  it puzzles her.  She asks herself
what is wrong.  Her own idea is that it is civilisation.

If it is not civilisation, then it is the American man or Nature--or
Democracy.  Miss Sparhawk marries the wrong man.  Later on she gets
engaged to another wrong man.  In the end we are left to believe she
is about to be married to the right man.  I should be better
satisfied if I could hear Miss Sparhawk talking six months after that
last marriage.  But if a mistake has again been made I am confident
that, in Miss Sparhawk's opinion, the fault will not be Miss
Sparhawk's.  The argument is always the same:  Miss Sparhawk, being a
lady, can do no wrong.

If Miss Sparhawk cared to listen to me for five minutes, I feel I
could put her right on this point.

"It is quite true, my dear girl," I should say to her, "something is
wrong--very wrong.  But it is not the American man.  Never you mind
the American man:  you leave him to worry out his own salvation.  You
are not the girl to put him right, even where he is wrong.  And it is
not civilisation.  Civilisation has a deal to answer for, I admit:
don't you load it up with this additional trouble.  The thing that is
wrong in this case of yours--if you will forgive my saying so--is
you.  You make a fool of yourself; you marry a man who is a mere
animal because he appeals to your animal instincts.  Then, like the
lady who cried out 'Alack, I've married a black,' you appeal to
heaven against the injustice of being mated with a clown.  You are
not a nice girl, either in your ideas or in your behaviour.  I don't
blame you for it; you did not make yourself.  But when you set to
work to attract all that is lowest in man, why be so astonished at
your own success?  There are plenty of shocking American men, I
agree.  One meets the class even outside America.  But nice American
girls will tell you that there are also nice American men.  There is
an old proverb about birds of a feather.  Next time you find yourself
in the company of a shocking American man, you just ask yourself how
he got there, and how it is he seems to be feeling at home.  You
learn self-control.  Get it out of your head that you are the centre
of the universe, and grasp the idea that a petticoat is not a halo,
and you will find civilisation not half as wrong as you thought it."

I know what Miss Sparhawk's reply would be.

"You say all this to me--to me, a lady?  Great Heavens!  What has
become of chivalry?"

A Frenchman was once put on trial for murdering his father and
mother.  He confessed his guilt, but begged for mercy on the plea
that he was an orphan.  Chivalry was founded on the assumption that
woman was worthy to be worshipped.  The modern woman's notion is that
when she does wrong she ought to be excused by chivalrous man because
she is a lady.

I like the naughty heroine; we all of us do.  The early Victorian
heroine--the angel in a white frock, was a bore.  We knew exactly
what she was going to do--the right thing.  We did not even have to
ask ourselves, "What will she think is the right thing to do under
the circumstances?"  It was always the conventional right thing.  You
could have put it to a Sunday school and have got the answer every
time.  The heroine with passions, instincts, emotions, is to be
welcomed.  But I want her to grasp the fact that after all she is
only one of us.  I should like her better if, instead of demanding:

"What is wrong in civilisation?  What is the world coming to?" and so
forth, she would occasionally say to herself:

"Guess I've made a fool of myself this time.  I do feel that 'shamed
of myself."

She would not lose by it.  We should respect her all the more.



WHAT MRS. WILKINS THOUGHT ABOUT IT.



Last year, travelling on the Underground Railway, I met a man; he was
one of the saddest-looking men I had seen for years.  I used to know
him well in the old days when we were journalists together.  I asked
him, in a sympathetic tone, how things were going with him.  I
expected his response would be a flood of tears, and that in the end
I should have to fork out a fiver.  To my astonishment, his answer
was that things were going exceedingly well with him.  I did not want
to say to him bluntly:

"Then what has happened to you to make you look like a mute at a
temperance funeral?" I said:

"And how are all at home?"

I thought that if the trouble lay there he would take the
opportunity.  It brightened him somewhat, the necessity of replying
to the question.  It appeared that his wife was in the best of
health.

"You remember her," he continued with a smile; "wonderful spirits,
always cheerful, nothing seems to put her out, not even--"

He ended the sentence abruptly with a sigh.

His mother-in-law, I learned from further talk with him, had died
since I had last met him, and had left them a comfortable addition to
their income.  His eldest daughter was engaged to be married.

"It is entirely a love match," he explained, "and he is such a dear,
good fellow, that I should not have made any objection even had he
been poor.  But, of course, as it is, I am naturally all the more
content."

His eldest boy, having won the Mottle Scholarship, was going up to
Cambridge in the Autumn.  His own health, he told me, had greatly
improved; and a novel he had written in his leisure time promised to
be one of the successes of the season.  Then it was that I spoke
plainly.

"If I am opening a wound too painful to be touched," I said, "tell
me.  If, on the contrary, it is an ordinary sort of trouble upon
which the sympathy of a fellow worker may fall as balm, let me hear
it."

"So far as I am concerned," he replied, "I should be glad to tell
you.  Speaking about it does me good, and may lead--so I am always in
hopes--to an idea.  But, for your own sake, if you take my advice,
you will not press me."

"How can it affect me?" I asked, "it is nothing to do with me, is
it?"

"It need have nothing to do with you," he answered, "if you are
sensible enough to keep out of it.  If I tell you:  from this time
onward it will be your trouble also.  Anyhow, that is what has
happened in four other separate cases.  If you like to be the fifth
and complete the half dozen of us, you are welcome.  But remember I
have warned you."

"What has it done to the other five?" I demanded.

"It has changed them from cheerful, companionable persons into gloomy
one-idead bores," he told me.  "They think of but one thing, they
talk of but one thing, they dream of but one thing.  Instead of
getting over it, as time goes on, it takes possession of them more
and more.  There are men, of course, who would be unaffected by it--
who could shake it off.  I warn you in particular against it,
because, in spite of all that is said, I am convinced you have a
sense of humour; and that being so, it will lay hold of you.  It will
plague you night and day.  You see what it has made of me!  Three
months ago a lady interviewer described me as of a sunny temperament.
If you know your own business you will get out at the next station."

I wish now I had followed his advice.  As it was, I allowed my
curiosity to take possession of me, and begged him to explain.  And
he did so.

"It was just about Christmas time," he said.  "We were discussing the
Drury Lane Pantomime--some three or four of us--in the smoking room
of the Devonshire Club, and young Gold said he thought it would prove
a mistake, the introduction of a subject like the Fiscal question
into the story of Humpty Dumpty.  The two things, so far as he could
see, had nothing to do with one another.  He added that he
entertained a real regard for Mr. Dan Leno, whom he had once met on a
steamboat, but that there were other topics upon which he would
prefer to seek that gentleman's guidance.  Nettleship, on the other
hand, declared that he had no sympathy with the argument that artists
should never intrude upon public affairs.  The actor was a fellow
citizen with the rest of us.  He said that, whether one agreed with
their conclusions or not, one must admit that the nation owed a debt
of gratitude to Mrs. Brown Potter and to Miss Olga Nethersole for
giving to it the benefit of their convictions.  He had talked to both
ladies in private on the subject and was convinced they knew as much
about it as did most people.

"Burnside, who was one of the party, contended that if sides were to
be taken, a pantomime should surely advocate the Free-Food Cause,
seeing it was a form of entertainment supposed to appeal primarily to
the tastes of the Little Englander.  Then I came into the discussion.

"'The Fiscal question,' I said, 'is on everybody's tongue.  Such
being the case, it is fit and proper it should be referred to in our
annual pantomime, which has come to be regarded as a review of the
year's doings.  But it should not have been dealt with from the
political standpoint.  The proper attitude to have assumed towards it
was that of innocent raillery, free from all trace of partisanship.'

"Old Johnson had strolled up and was standing behind us.

"'The very thing I have been trying to get hold of for weeks,' he
said--'a bright, amusing resume of the whole problem that should give
offence to neither side.  You know our paper,' he continued; 'we
steer clear of politics, but, at the same time, try to be up-to-date;
it is not always easy.  The treatment of the subject, on the lines
you suggest, is just what we require.  I do wish you would write me
something.'

"He is a good old sort, Johnson; it seemed an easy thing.  I said I
would.  Since that time I have been thinking how to do it.  As a
matter of fact, I have not thought of much else.  Maybe you can
suggest something."

I was feeling in a good working mood the next morning.

"Pilson," said I to myself, "shall have the benefit of this.  He does
not need anything boisterously funny.  A few playfully witty remarks
on the subject will be the ideal."

I lit a pipe and sat down to think.  At half-past twelve, having to
write some letters before going out to lunch, I dismissed the Fiscal
question from my mind.

But not for long.  It worried me all the afternoon.  I thought,
maybe, something would come to me in the evening.  I wasted all that
evening, and I wasted all the following morning.  Everything has its
amusing side, I told myself.  One turns out comic stories about
funerals, about weddings.  Hardly a misfortune that can happen to
mankind but has produced its comic literature.  An American friend of
mine once took a contract from the Editor of an Insurance Journal to
write four humorous stories; one was to deal with an earthquake, the
second with a cyclone, the third with a flood, and the fourth with a
thunderstorm.  And more amusing stories I have never read.  What is
the matter with the Fiscal question?

I myself have written lightly on Bime-metallism.  Home Rule we used
to be merry over in the eighties.  I remember one delightful evening
at the Codgers' Hall.  It would have been more delightful still, but
for a raw-boned Irishman, who rose towards eleven o'clock and
requested to be informed if any other speaker was wishful to make any
more jokes on the subject of Ould Ireland; because, if so, the raw-
boned gentleman was prepared to save time by waiting and dealing with
them altogether.  But if not, then--so the raw-boned gentleman
announced--his intention was to go for the last speaker and the last
speaker but two at once and without further warning.

No other humourist rising, the raw-boned gentleman proceeded to make
good his threat, with the result that the fun degenerated somewhat.
Even on the Boer War we used to whisper jokes to one another in quiet
places.  In this Fiscal question there must be fun.  Where is it?

For days I thought of little else.  My laundress--as we call them in
the Temple--noticed my trouble.

"Mrs. Wilkins," I confessed, "I am trying to think of something
innocently amusing to say on the Fiscal question."

"I've 'eard about it," she said, "but I don't 'ave much time to read
the papers.  They want to make us pay more for our food, don't they?"

"For some of it," I explained.  "But, then, we shall pay less for
other things, so that really we shan't be paying more at all."

"There don't seem much in it, either way," was Mrs. Wilkins' opinion.

"Just so," I agreed, "that is the advantage of the system.  It will
cost nobody anything, and will result in everybody being better off."

"The pity is," said Mrs. Wilkins "that pity nobody ever thought of it
before."

"The whole trouble hitherto," I explained, "has been the foreigner."

"Ah," said Mrs. Wilkins, "I never 'eard much good of 'em, though they
do say the Almighty 'as a use for almost everything."

"These foreigners," I continued, "these Germans and Americans, they
dump things on us, you know."

"What's that?" demanded Mrs. Wilkins.

"What's dump?  Well, it's dumping, you know.  You take things, and
you dump them down."

"But what things?  'Ow do they do it?" asked Mrs. Wilkins.

"Why, all sorts of things:  pig iron, bacon, door-mats--everything.
They bring them over here--in ships, you understand--and then, if you
please, just dump them down upon our shores."

"You don't mean surely to tell me that they just throw them out and
leave them there?" queried Mrs. Wilkins.

"Of course not," I replied; "when I say they dump these things upon
our shores, that is a figure of speech.  What I mean is they sell
them to us."

"But why do we buy them if we don't want them?" asked Mrs. Wilkins;
"we're not bound to buy them, are we?"

"It is their artfulness," I explained, "these Germans and Americans,
and the others; they are all just as bad as one another--they insist
on selling us these things at less price than they cost to make."

"It seems a bit silly of them, don't it?" thought Mrs. Wilkins.  "I
suppose being foreigners, poor things, they ain't naturally got much
sense."

"It does seem silly of them, if you look at it that way," I admitted,
"but what we have got to consider is, the injury it is doing us."

"Don't see 'ow it can do us much 'arm," argued Mrs. Wilkins; "seems a
bit of luck so far as we are concerned.  There's a few more things
they'd be welcome to dump round my way."

"I don't seem to be putting this thing quite in the right light to
you, Mrs. Wilkins," I confessed.  "It is a long argument, and you
might not be able to follow it; but you must take it as a fact now
generally admitted that the cheaper you buy things the sooner your
money goes.  By allowing the foreigner to sell us all these things at
about half the cost price, he is getting richer every day, and we are
getting poorer.  Unless we, as a country, insist on paying at least
twenty per cent. more for everything we want, it is calculated that
in a very few years England won't have a penny left."

"Sounds a bit topsy turvy," suggested Mrs. Wilkins.

"It may sound so," I answered, "but I fear there can be no doubt of
it.  The Board of Trade Returns would seem to prove it conclusively."

"Well, God be praised, we've found it out in time," ejaculated Mrs.
Wilkins piously.

"It is a matter of congratulation," I agreed; "the difficulty is that
a good many other people say that far from being ruined, we are doing
very well indeed, and are growing richer every year."

"But 'ow can they say that," argued Mrs. Wilkins, "when, as you tell
me, those Trade Returns prove just the opposite?"

"Well, they say the same, Mrs. Wilkins, that the Board of Trade
Returns prove just the opposite."

"Well, they can't both be right," said Mrs. Wilkins.

"You would be surprised, Mrs. Wilkins," I said, "how many things can
be proved from Board of Trade Returns!"

But I have not yet thought of that article for Pilson.



SHALL WE BE RUINED BY CHINESE CHEAP LABOUR?



"What is all this talk I 'ear about the Chinese?" said Mrs. Wilkins
to me the other morning.  We generally indulge in a little chat while
Mrs. Wilkins is laying the breakfast-table.  Letters and newspapers
do not arrive in my part of the Temple much before nine.  From half-
past eight to nine I am rather glad of Mrs. Wilkins.  "They 'ave been
up to some of their tricks again, 'aven't they?"

"The foreigner, Mrs. Wilkins," I replied, "whether he be Chinee or
any other he, is always up to tricks.  Was not England specially
prepared by an all-wise Providence to frustrate these knavish tricks?
Which of such particular tricks may you be referring to at the
moment, Mrs. Wilkins?"

"Well, 'e's comin' over 'ere--isn't he, sir? to take the work out of
our mouths, as it were."

"Well, not exactly over here, to England, Mrs. Wilkins," I explained.
"He has been introduced into Africa to work in the mines there."

"It's a funny thing," said Mrs. Wilkins, "but to 'ear the way some of
them talk in our block, you might run away with the notion--that is,
if you didn't know 'em--that work was their only joy.  I said to one
of 'em, the other evening--a man as calls 'isself a brass finisher,
though, Lord knows, the only brass 'e ever finishes is what 'is poor
wife earns and isn't quick enough to 'ide away from 'im--well,
whatever 'appens, I says, it will be clever of 'em if they take away
much work from you.  It made them all laugh, that did," added Mrs.
Wilkins, with a touch of pardonable pride.

"Ah," continued the good lady, "it's surprising 'ow contented they
can be with a little, some of 'em.  Give 'em a 'ard-working woman to
look after them, and a day out once a week with a procession of the
unemployed, they don't ask for nothing more.  There's that beauty my
poor sister Jane was fool enough to marry.  Serves 'er right, as I
used to tell 'er at first, till there didn't seem any more need to
rub it into 'er.  She'd 'ad one good 'usband.  It wouldn't 'ave been
fair for 'er to 'ave 'ad another, even if there'd been a chance of
it, seeing the few of 'em there is to go round among so many.  But
it's always the same with us widows:  if we 'appen to 'ave been lucky
the first time, we put it down to our own judgment--think we can't
ever make a mistake; and if we draw a wrong 'un, as the saying is, we
argue as if it was the duty of Providence to make it up to us the
second time.  Why, I'd a been making a fool of myself three years ago
if 'e 'adn't been good-natured enough to call one afternoon when I
was out, and 'ook it off with two pounds eight in the best teapot
that I 'ad been soft enough to talk to 'im about:  and never let me
set eyes on 'im again.  God bless 'im!  'E's one of the born-tireds,
'e is, as poor Jane might 'ave seen for 'erself, if she 'ad only
looked at 'im, instead of listening to 'im.

"But that's courtship all the world over--old and young alike, so far
as I've been able to see it," was the opinion of Mrs. Wilkins.  "The
man's all eyes and the woman all ears.  They don't seem to 'ave any
other senses left 'em.  I ran against 'im the other night, on my way
'ome, at the corner of Gray's Inn Road.  There was the usual crowd
watching a pack of them Italians laying down the asphalt in 'Olborn,
and 'e was among 'em.  'E 'ad secured the only lamp-post, and was
leaning agen it.

"'Ullo,' I says, 'glad to see you 'aven't lost your job.  Nothin'
like stickin' to it, when you've dropped into somethin' that really
suits you.'

"'What do you mean, Martha?' 'e says.  'E's not one of what I call
your smart sort.  It takes a bit of sarcasm to get through 'is 'ead.

"'Well,' I says, 'you're still on the old track, I see, looking for
work.  Take care you don't 'ave an accident one of these days and run
up agen it before you've got time to get out of its way.'

"'It's these miserable foreigners,' 'e says.  'Look at 'em,' 'e says.

"'There's enough of you doing that,' I says.  'I've got my room to
put straight and three hours needlework to do before I can get to
bed.  But don't let me 'inder you.  You might forget what work was
like, if you didn't take an opportunity of watching it now and then.'

"'They come over 'ere,' 'e says, 'and take the work away from us
chaps.'

"'Ah,' I says, 'poor things, perhaps they ain't married.'

"'Lazy devils! 'e says.  'Look at 'em, smoking cigarettes.  I could
do that sort of work.  There's nothing in it.  It don't take 'eathen
foreigners to dab a bit of tar about a road.'

"'Yes,' I says, 'you always could do anybody else's work but your
own.'

"'I can't find it, Martha,' 'e says.

"'No,' I says, 'and you never will in the sort of places you go
looking for it.  They don't 'ang it out on lamp-posts, and they don't
leave it about at the street corners.  Go 'ome,' I says, 'and turn
the mangle for your poor wife.  That's big enough for you to find,
even in the dark.'

"Looking for work!" snorted Mrs. Wilkins with contempt; "we women
never 'ave much difficulty in finding it, I've noticed.  There are
times when I feel I could do with losing it for a day."

"But what did he reply, Mrs. Wilkins," I asked; "your brass-finishing
friend, who was holding forth on the subject of Chinese cheap
labour."  Mrs. Wilkins as a conversationalist is not easily kept to
the point.  I was curious to know what the working classes were
thinking on the subject.

"Oh, that," replied Mrs. Wilkins, "'e did not say nothing.  'E ain't
the sort that's got much to say in an argument.  'E belongs to the
crowd that 'angs about at the back, and does the shouting.  But there
was another of 'em, a young fellow as I feels sorry for, with a wife
and three small children, who 'asn't 'ad much luck for the last six
months; and that through no fault of 'is own, I should say, from the
look of 'im.  'I was a fool,' says 'e, 'when I chucked a good
situation and went out to the war.  They told me I was going to fight
for equal rights for all white men.  I thought they meant that all of
us were going to 'ave a better chance, and it seemed worth making a
bit of sacrifice for, that did.  I should be glad if they would give
me a job in their mines that would enable me to feed my wife and
children.  That's all I ask them for!'"

"It is a difficult problem, Mrs. Wilkins," I said.  "According to the
mine owners--"

"Ah," said Mrs. Wilkins.  "They don't seem to be exactly what you'd
call popular, them mine owners, do they?  Daresay they're not as bad
as they're painted."

"Some people, Mrs. Wilkins," I said, "paint them very black.  There
are those who hold that the South African mine-owner is not a man at
all, but a kind of pantomime demon.  You take Goliath, the whale that
swallowed Jonah, a selection from the least respectable citizens of
Sodom and Gomorrah at their worst, Bluebeard, Bloody Queen Mary, Guy
Fawkes, and the sea-serpent--or, rather, you take the most
objectionable attributes of all these various personages, and mix
them up together.  The result is the South African mine-owner, a
monster who would willingly promote a company for the putting on the
market of a new meat extract, prepared exclusively from new-born
infants, provided the scheme promised a fair and reasonable
opportunity of fleecing the widow and orphan."

"I've 'eard they're a bad lot," said Mrs. Wilkins.  "But we're most
of us that, if we listen to what other people say about us."

"Quite so, Mrs. Wilkins," I agreed.  "One never arrives at the truth
by listening to one side only.  On the other hand, for example, there
are those who stoutly maintain that the South African mine-owner is a
kind of spiritual creature, all heart and sentiment, who, against his
own will, has been, so to speak, dumped down upon this earth as the
result of over-production up above of the higher class of archangel.
The stock of archangels of superior finish exceeds the heavenly
demand; the surplus has been dropped down into South Africa and has
taken to mine owning.  It is not that these celestial visitors of
German sounding nomenclature care themselves about the gold.  Their
only desire is, during this earthly pilgrimage of theirs, to benefit
the human race.  Nothing can be obtained in this world without money-
-"

"That's true," said Mrs. Wilkins, with a sigh.

"For gold, everything can be obtained.  The aim of the mine-owning
archangel is to provide the world with gold.  Why should the world
trouble to grow things and make things?  'Let us,' say these
archangels, temporarily dwelling in South Africa, 'dig up and
distribute to the world plenty of gold, then the world can buy
whatever it wants, and be happy.'

"There may be a flaw in the argument, Mrs. Wilkins," I allowed.  "I
am not presenting it to you as the last word upon the subject.  I am
merely quoting the view of the South African mine-owner, feeling
himself a much misunderstood benefactor of mankind."

"I expect," said Mrs. Wilkins, "they are just the ordinary sort of
Christian, like the rest of us, anxious to do the best they can for
themselves, and not too particular as to doing other people in the
process."

"I am inclined to think, Mrs. Wilkins," I said, "that you are not
very far from the truth.  A friend of mine, a year ago, was very
bitter on this subject of Chinese cheap labour.  A little later there
died a distant relative of his who left him twenty thousand South
African mining shares.  He thinks now that to object to the Chinese
is narrow-minded, illiberal, and against all religious teaching.  He
has bought an abridged edition of Confucius, and tells me that there
is much that is ennobling in Chinese morality.  Indeed, I gather from
him that the introduction of the Chinese into South Africa will be
the saving of that country.  The noble Chinese will afford an object
lesson to the poor white man, displaying to him the virtues of
sobriety, thrift, and humility.  I also gather that it will be of
inestimable benefit to the noble Chinee himself.  The Christian
missionary will get hold of him in bulk, so to speak, and imbue him
with the higher theology.  It appears to be one of those rare cases
where everybody is benefited at the expense of nobody.  It is always
a pity to let these rare opportunities slip by."

"Well," said Mrs. Wilkins, "I've nothin' to say agen the Chinaman, as
a Chinaman.  As to 'is being a 'eathen, well, throwin' stones at a
church, as the sayin' is, don't make a Christian of you.  There's
Christians I've met as couldn't do themselves much 'arm by changing
their religion; and as to cleanliness, well, I've never met but one,
and 'e was a washerwoman, and I'd rather 'ave sat next to 'im in a
third-class carriage on a Bank 'Oliday than next to some of 'em.

"Seems to me," continued Mrs. Wilkins, "we've got into the 'abit of
talkin' a bit too much about other people's dirt.  The London
atmosphere ain't nat'rally a dry-cleanin' process in itself, but
there's a goodish few as seem to think it is.  One comes across
Freeborn Britons 'ere and there as I'd be sorry to scrub clean for a
shillin' and find my own soap."

"It is a universal failing, Mrs. Wilkins," I explained.  "If you talk
to a travelled Frenchman, he contrasts to his own satisfaction the
Paris ouvrier in his blue blouse with the appearance of the London
labourer."

"I daresay they're all right according to their lights," said Mrs.
Wilkins, "but it does seem a bit wrong that if our own chaps are
willin' and anxious to work, after all they've done, too, in the way
of getting the mines for us, they shouldn't be allowed the job."

"Again, Mrs. Wilkins, it is difficult to arrive at a just
conclusion," I said.  "The mine-owner, according to his enemies,
hates the British workman with the natural instinct that evil
creatures feel towards the noble and virtuous.  He will go to trouble
and expense merely to spite the British workman, to keep him out of
South Africa.  According to his friends, the mine-owner sets his face
against the idea of white labour for two reasons.  First and
foremost, it is not nice work; the mine-owner hates the thought of
his beloved white brother toiling in the mines.  It is not right that
the noble white man should demean himself by such work.  Secondly,
white labour is too expensive.  If for digging gold men had to be
paid anything like the same prices they are paid for digging coal,
the mines could not be worked.  The world would lose the gold that
the mine-owner is anxious to bestow upon it.

"The mine-owner, following his own inclinations, would take a little
farm, grow potatoes, and live a beautiful life--perhaps write a
little poetry.  A slave to sense of duty, he is chained to the
philanthropic work of gold-mining.  If we hamper him and worry him
the danger is that he will get angry with us--possibly he will order
his fiery chariot and return to where he came from."

"Well, 'e can't take the gold with him, wherever 'e goes to?" argued
Mrs. Wilkins.

"You talk, Mrs. Wilkins," I said, "as if the gold were of more value
to the world than is the mine-owner."

"Well, isn't it?" demanded Mrs. Wilkins.

"It's a new idea, Mrs. Wilkins," I answered; "it wants thinking out."



HOW TO SOLVE THE SERVANT PROBLEM.



"I am glad to see, Mrs. Wilkins," I said, "that the Women's Domestic
Guild of America has succeeded in solving the servant girl problem--
none too soon, one might almost say."

"Ah," said Mrs. Wilkins, as she took the cover off the bacon and gave
an extra polish to the mustard-pot with her apron, "they are clever
people over there; leastways, so I've always 'eard."

"This, their latest, Mrs. Wilkins," I said, "I am inclined to regard
as their greatest triumph.  My hope is that the Women's Domestic
Guild of America, when it has finished with the United States and
Canada, will, perhaps, see its way to establishing a branch in
England.  There are ladies of my acquaintance who would welcome, I
feel sure, any really satisfactory solution of the problem."

"Well, good luck to it, is all I say," responded Mrs. Wilkins, "and
if it makes all the gals contented with their places, and all the
mistresses satisfied with what they've got and 'appy in their minds,
why, God bless it, say I."

"The mistake hitherto," I said, "from what I read, appears to have
been that the right servant was not sent to the right place.  What
the Women's Domestic Guild of America proposes to do is to find the
right servant for the right place.  You see the  difference, don't
you, Mrs. Wilkins?"

"That's the secret," agreed Mrs. Wilkins.  They don't anticipate any
difficulty in getting the right sort of gal, I take it?"

"I gather not, Mrs. Wilkins," I replied.

Mrs. Wilkins is of a pessimistic turn of mind.

"I am not so sure about it," she said; "the Almighty don't seem to
'ave made too many of that sort.  Unless these American ladies that
you speak of are going to start a factory of their own.  I am afraid
there is disappointment in store for them."

"Don't throw cold water on the idea before it is fairly started, Mrs.
Wilkins," I pleaded.

"Well, sir," said Mrs. Wilkins, "I 'ave been a gal myself in service;
and in my time I've 'ad a few mistresses of my own, and I've 'eard a
good deal about others.  There are ladies and ladies, as you may
know, sir, and some of them, if they aren't exactly angels, are about
as near to it as can be looked for in this climate, and they are not
the ones that do most of the complaining.  But, as for the average
mistress--well it ain't a gal she wants, it's a plaster image,
without any natural innards--a sort of thing as ain't 'uman, and
ain't to be found in 'uman nature.  And then she'd grumble at it, if
it didn't 'appen to be able to be in two places at once."

"You fear that the standard for that 'right girl' is likely to be set
a trifle too high Mrs. Wilkins," I suggested.

"That 'right gal,' according to the notions of some of 'em," retorted
Mrs. Wilkins, "'er place ain't down 'ere among us mere mortals; 'er
place is up in 'eaven with a 'arp and a golden crown.  There's my
niece, Emma, I don't say she is a saint, but a better 'earted, 'arder
working gal, at twenty pounds a year, you don't expect to find,
unless maybe you're a natural born fool that can't 'elp yourself.
She wanted a place.  She 'ad been 'ome for nearly six months, nursing
'er old father, as 'ad been down all the winter with rheumatic fever;
and 'ard-put to it she was for a few clothes.  You 'ear 'em talk
about gals as insists on an hour a day for practising the piano, and
the right to invite their young man to spend the evening with them in
the drawing-room.  Perhaps it is meant to be funny; I ain't come
across that type of gal myself, outside the pictures in the comic
papers; and I'll never believe, till I see 'er myself, that anybody
else 'as.  They sent 'er from the registry office to a lady at
Clapton.

"'I 'ope you are good at getting up early in the morning?' says the
lady, 'I like a gal as rises cheerfully to 'er work.'

"'Well, ma'am,' says Emma, 'I can't say as I've got a passion for it.
But it's one of those things that 'as to be done, and I guess I've
learnt the trick.'

"'I'm a great believer in early rising,' says my lady; 'in the
morning, one is always fresher for one's work; my 'usband and the
younger children breakfast at 'arf past seven; myself and my eldest
daughter 'ave our breakfest in bed at eight.'

'That'll be all right, ma'am,' says Emma.

"'And I 'ope,' says the lady, 'you are of an amiable disposition.
Some gals when you ring the bell come up looking so disagreeable, one
almost wishes one didn't want them.'

"'Well, it ain't a thing,' explains Emma, 'as makes you want to burst
out laughing, 'earing the bell go off for the twentieth time, and
'aving suddenly to put down your work at, perhaps, a critical moment.
Some ladies don't seem able to reach down their 'at for themselves.'

"'I 'ope you are not impertinent,' says the lady; 'if there's one
thing that I object to in a servant it is impertinence.'

"'We none of us like being answered back,' says Emma, 'more
particularly when we are in the wrong.  But I know my place ma'am,
and I shan't give you no lip.  It always leads to less trouble, I
find, keeping your mouth shut, rather than opening it.'

"'Are you fond of children,' asks my lady.

"'It depends upon the children,' says Emma; 'there are some I 'ave
'ad to do with as made the day seem pleasanter, and I've come across
others as I could 'ave parted from at any moment without tears.'

"'I like a gal,' says the lady, 'who is naturally fond of children,
it shows a good character.'

"'How many of them are there?' says Emma.

"'Four of them,' answers my lady, 'but you won't 'ave much to do
except with the two youngest.  The great thing with young children is
to surround them with good examples.  Are you a Christian?' asks my
lady.

"'That's what I'm generally called,' says Emma.

"'Every other Sunday evening out is my rule,' says the lady, 'but of
course I shall expect you to go to church.'

"'Do you mean in my time, ma'am,' says Emma, 'or in yours.'

"'I mean on your evening of course,' says my lady.  ''Ow else could
you go?'

"'Well, ma'am,' says Emma, 'I like to see my people now and then.'

"'There are better things,' says my lady, 'than seeing what you call
your people, and I should not care to take a girl into my 'ouse as
put 'er pleasure before 'er religion.  You are not engaged, I 'ope?'

"'Walking out, ma'am, do you mean?' says Emma.  'No, ma'am, there is
nobody I've got in my mind--not just at present.'

"'I never will take a gal,' explains my lady, 'who is engaged.  I
find it distracts 'er attention from 'er work.  And I must insist if
you come to me,' continues my lady, 'that you get yourself another
'at and jacket.  If there is one thing I object to in a servant it is
a disposition to cheap finery.'

"'Er own daughter was sitting there beside 'er with 'alf a dozen
silver bangles on 'er wrist, and a sort of thing 'anging around 'er
neck, as, 'ad it been real, would 'ave been worth perhaps a thousand
pounds.  But Emma wanted a job, so she kept 'er thoughts to 'erself.

"'I can put these things by and get myself something else,' she says,
'if you don't mind, ma'am, advancing me something out of my first
three months' wages.  I'm afraid my account at the bank is a bit
overdrawn.'

"The lady whispered something to 'er daughter.  'I am afraid, on
thinking it over,' she says, 'that you won't suit, after all.  You
don't look serious enough.  I feel sure, from the way you do your
'air,' says my lady, 'there's a frivolous side to your nature.'

"So Emma came away, and was not, on the whole, too sorry."

"But do they get servants to come to them, this type of mistress, do
you think, Mrs. Wilkins?" I asked.

"They get them all right," said Mrs. Wilkins, "and if it's a decent
gal, it makes a bad gal of 'er, that ever afterwards looks upon every
mistress as 'er enemy, and acts accordingly.  And if she ain't a
naturally good gal, it makes 'er worse, and then you 'ear what awful
things gals are.  I don't say it's an easy problem," continued Mrs.
Wilkins, "it's just like marriages.  The good mistress gets 'old of
the bad servant, and the bad mistress, as often as not is lucky."

"But how is it," I argued, "that in hotels, for instance, the service
is excellent, and the girls, generally speaking, seem contented?  The
work is hard, and the wages not much better, if as good."

"Ah," said Mrs. Wilkins, "you 'ave 'it the right nail on the 'ead,
there, sir.  They go into the 'otels and work like niggers, knowing
that if a single thing goes wrong they will be bully-ragged and sworn
at till they don't know whether they are standing on their 'ead or
their 'eels.  But they 'ave their hours; the gal knows when 'er work
is done, and when the clock strikes she is a 'uman being once again.
She 'as got that moment to look forward to all day, and it keeps 'er
going.  In private service there's no moment in the day to 'ope for.
If the lady is reasonable she ain't overworked; but no 'ow can she
ever feel she is her own mistress, free to come and go, to wear 'er
bit of finery, to 'ave 'er bit of fun.  She works from six in the
morning till eleven or twelve at night, and then she only goes to bed
provided she ain't wanted.  She don't belong to 'erself at all; it's
that that irritates them."

"I see your point, Mrs. Wilkins," I said, "and, of course, in a house
where two or three servants were kept some such plan might easily be
arranged.  The girl who commenced work at six o'clock in the morning
might consider herself free at six o'clock in the evening.  What she
did with herself, how she dressed herself in her own time, would be
her affair.  What church the clerk or the workman belongs to, what
company he keeps, is no concern of the firm.  In such matters,
mistresses, I am inclined to think, saddle themselves with a
responsibility for which there is no need.  If the girl behaves
herself while in the house, and does her work, there the contract
ends.  The mistress who thinks it her duty to combine the roles of
employer and of maiden aunt is naturally resented.  The next month
the girl might change her hours from twelve to twelve, and her
fellow-servant could enjoy the six a.m. to six p.m. shift.  But how
do you propose to deal, Mrs. Wilkins, with the smaller menage, that
employs only one servant?"

"Well, sir," said Mrs. Wilkins, "it seems to me simple enough.
Ladies talk pretty about the dignity of labour, and are never tired
of pointing out why gals should prefer domestic service to all other
kinds of work.  Suppose they practise what they preach.  In the
'ouse, where there's only the master and the mistress, and, say a
couple of small children, let the lady take her turn.  After all,
it's only her duty, same as the office or the shop is the man's.
Where, on the other 'and, there are biggish boys and gals about the
place, well it wouldn't do them any 'arm to be taught to play a
little less, and to look after themselves a little more.  It's just
arranging things--that's all that's wanted."

"You remind me of a family I once knew, Mrs. Wilkins," I said; "it
consisted of the usual father and mother, and of five sad, healthy
girls.  They kept two servants--or, rather, they never kept any
servants; they lived always looking for servants, breaking their
hearts over servants, packing servants off at a moment's notice,
standing disconsolately looking after servants who had packed
themselves off at a moment's notice, wondering generally what the
world was coming too.  It occurred to me at the time, that without
much trouble, they could have lived a peaceful life without servants.
The eldest girl was learning painting--and seemed unable to learn
anything else.  It was poor sort of painting; she noticed it herself.
But she seemed to think that, if she talked a lot about it, and
thought of nothing else, that somehow it would all come right.  The
second girl played the violin.  She played it from early morning till
late evening, and friends fell away from them.  There wasn't a spark
of talent in the family, but they all had a notion that a vague
longing to be admired was just the same as genius.

"Another daughter fancied she would like to be an actress, and
screamed all day in the attic.  The fourth wrote poetry on a
typewriter, and wondered why nobody seemed to want it; while the
fifth one suffered from a weird belief that smearing wood with a red-
hot sort of poker was a thing worth doing for its own sake.  All of
them seemed willing enough to work, provided only that it was work of
no use to any living soul.  With a little sense, and the occasional
assistance of a charwoman, they could have led a merrier life."

"If I was giving away secrets," said Mrs. Wilkins, "I'd say to the
mistresses:  'Show yourselves able to be independent.'  It's because
the gals know that the mistresses can't do without them that they
sometimes gives themselves airs."



WHY WE HATE THE FOREIGNER.



The advantage that the foreigner possesses over the Englishman is
that he is born good.  He does not have to try to be good, as we do.
He does not have to start the New Year with the resolution to be
good, and succeed, bar accidents, in being so till the middle of
January.  He is just good all the year round.  When a foreigner is
told to mount or descend from a tram on the near side, it does not
occur to him that it would be humanly possible to secure egress from
or ingress to that tram from the off side.

In Brussels once I witnessed a daring attempt by a lawless foreigner
to enter a tram from the wrong side.  The gate was open:  he was
standing close beside it.  A line of traffic was in his way:  to have
got round to the right side of that tram would have meant missing it.
He entered when the conductor was not looking, and took his seat.
The astonishment of the conductor on finding him there was immense.
How did he get there?  The conductor had been watching the proper
entrance, and the man had not passed him.  Later, the true
explanation suggested itself to the conductor, but for a while he
hesitated to accuse a fellow human being of such crime.

He appealed to the passenger himself.  Was his presence to be
accounted for by miracle or by sin?  The passenger confessed.  It was
more in sorrow than in anger that the conductor requested him at once
to leave.  This tram was going to be kept respectable.  The passenger
proved refractory, a halt was called, and the gendarmerie appealed
to.  After the manner of policemen, they sprang, as it were, from the
ground, and formed up behind an imposing officer, whom I took to be
the sergeant.  At first the sergeant could hardly believe the
conductor's statement.  Even then, had the passenger asserted that he
had entered by the proper entrance, his word would have been taken.
Much easier to the foreign official mind would it have been to
believe that the conductor had been stricken with temporary
blindness, than that man born of woman would have deliberately done
anything expressly forbidden by a printed notice.

Myself, in his case, I should have lied and got the trouble over.
But he was a proud man, or had not much sense--one of the two, and so
held fast to the truth.  It was pointed out to him that he must
descend immediately and wait for the next tram.  Other gendarmes were
arriving from every quarter:  resistance in the circumstances seemed
hopeless.  He said he would get down.  He made to descend this time
by the proper gate, but that was not justice.  He had mounted the
wrong side, he must alight on the wrong side.  Accordingly, he was
put out amongst the traffic, after which the conductor preached a
sermon from the centre of the tram on the danger of ascents and
descents conducted from the wrong quarter.

There is a law throughout Germany--an excellent law it is:  I would
we had it in England--that nobody may scatter paper about the street.
An English military friend told me that, one day in Dresden,
unacquainted with this rule, he tore a long letter he had been
reading into some fifty fragments and threw them behind him.  A
policeman stopped him and explained to him quite politely the law
upon the subject.  My military friend agreed that it was a very good
law, thanked the man for his information, and said that for the
future he would bear it in mind.  That, as the policeman pointed out,
would make things right enough for the future, but meanwhile it was
necessary to deal with the past--with the fifty or so pieces of paper
lying scattered about the road and pavement.

My military friend, with a pleasant laugh, confessed he did not see
what was to be done.  The policeman, more imaginative, saw a way out.
It was that my military friend should set to work and pick up those
fifty scraps of paper.  He is an English General on the Retired List,
and of imposing appearance:  his manner on occasion is haughty.  He
did not see himself on his hands and knees in the chief street of
Dresden, in the middle of the afternoon, picking up paper.

The German policeman himself admitted that the situation was awkward.
If the English General could not accept it there happened to be an
alternative.  It was that the English General should accompany the
policeman through the streets, followed by the usual crowd, to the
nearest prison, some three miles off.  It being now four o'clock in
the afternoon, they would probably find the judge departed.  But the
most comfortable thing possible in prison cells should be allotted to
him, and the policeman had little doubt that the General, having paid
his fine of forty marks, would find himself a free man again in time
for lunch the following day.  The general suggested hiring a boy to
pick up the paper.  The policeman referred to the wording of the law,
and found that this would not be permitted.

"I thought the matter out," my friend told me, "imagining all the
possible alternatives, including that of knocking the fellow down and
making a bolt, and came to the conclusion that his first suggestion
would, on the whole, result in the least discomfort.  But I had no
idea that picking up small scraps of thin paper off greasy stones was
the business that I found it!  It took me nearly ten minutes, and
afforded amusement, I calculate, to over a thousand people.  But it
is a good law, mind you:  all I wish is that I had known it
beforehand."

On one occasion I accompanied an American lady to a German Opera
House.  The taking-off of hats in the German Schausspielhaus is
obligatory, and again I would it were so in England.  But the
American lady is accustomed to disregard rules made by mere man.  She
explained to the doorkeeper that she was going to wear her hat.  He,
on his side, explained to her that she was not:  they were both a bit
short with one another.  I took the opportunity to turn aside and buy
a programme:  the fewer people there are mixed up in an argument, I
always think, the better.

My companion explained quite frankly to the doorkeeper that it did
not matter what he said, she was not going to take any notice of him.
He did not look a talkative man at any time, and, maybe, this
announcement further discouraged him.  In any case, he made no
attempt to answer.  All he did was to stand in the centre of the
doorway with a far-away look in his eyes.  The doorway was some four
feet wide:  he was about three feet six across, and weighed about
twenty stone.  As I explained, I was busy buying a programme, and
when I returned my friend had her hat in her hand, and was digging
pins into it:  I think she was trying to make believe it was the
heart of the doorkeeper.  She did not want to listen to the opera,
she wanted to talk all the time about that doorkeeper, but the people
round us would not even let her do that.

She has spent three winters in Germany since then.  Now when she
feels like passing through a door that is standing wide open just in
front of her, and which leads to just the place she wants to get to,
and an official shakes his head at her, and explains that she must
not, but must go up two flights of stairs and along a corridor and
down another flight of stairs, and so get to her place that way, she
apologises for her error and trots off looking ashamed of herself.

Continental Governments have trained their citizens to perfection.
Obedience is the Continent's first law.  The story that is told of a
Spanish king who was nearly drowned because the particular official
whose duty it was to dive in after Spanish kings when they tumbled
out of boats happened to be dead, and his successor had not yet been
appointed, I can quite believe.  On the Continental railways if you
ride second class with a first-class ticket you render yourself
liable to imprisonment.  What the penalty is for riding first with a
second-class ticket I cannot say--probably death, though a friend of
mine came very near on one occasion to finding out.

All would have gone well with him if he had not been so darned
honest.  He is one of those men who pride themselves on being honest.
I believe he takes a positive pleasure in being honest.  He had
purchased a second-class ticket for a station up a mountain, but
meeting, by chance on the platform, a lady acquaintance, had gone
with her into a first-class apartment.  On arriving at the journey's
end he explained to the collector what he had done, and, with his
purse in his hand, demanded to know the difference.  They took him
into a room and locked the door.  They wrote out his confession and
read it over to him, and made him sign it, and then they sent for a
policeman.

The policeman cross-examined him for about a quarter of an hour.
They did not believe the story about the lady.  Where was the lady?
He did not know.  They searched the neighbourhood for her, but could
not find her.  He suggested--what turned out to be the truth--that,
tired of loitering about the station, she had gone up the mountain.
An Anarchist outrage had occurred in the neighbouring town some
months before.  The policeman suggested searching for bombs.
Fortunately, a Cook's agent, returning with a party of tourists,
arrived upon the scene, and took it upon himself to explain in
delicate language that my friend was a bit of an ass and could not
tell first class from second.  It was the red cushions that had
deceived my friend:  he thought it was first class, as a matter of
fact it was second class.

Everybody breathed again.  The confession was torn up amid universal
joy:  and then the fool of a ticket collector wanted to know about
the lady--who must have travelled in a second-class compartment with
a first-class ticket.  It looked as if a bad time were in store for
her on her return to the station.

But the admirable representative of Cook was again equal to the
occasion.  He explained that my friend was also a bit of a liar.
When he said he had travelled with this lady he was merely boasting.
He would like to have travelled with her, that was all he meant, only
his German was shaky.  Joy once more entered upon the scene.  My
friend's character appeared to be re-established.  He was not the
abandoned wretch for whom they had taken him--only, apparently, a
wandering idiot.  Such an one the German official could respect.  At
the expense of such an one the German official even consented to
drink beer.

Not only the foreign man, woman and child, but the foreign dog is
born good.  In England, if you happen to be the possessor of a dog,
much of your time is taken up dragging him out of fights, quarrelling
with the possessor of the other dog as to which began it, explaining
to irate elderly ladies that he did not kill the cat, that the cat
must have died of heart disease while running across the road,
assuring disbelieving game-keepers that he is not your dog, that you
have not the faintest notion whose dog he is.  With the foreign dog,
life is a peaceful proceeding.  When the foreign dog sees a row,
tears spring to his eyes:  he hastens on and tries to find a
policeman.  When the foreign dog sees a cat in a hurry, he stands
aside to allow her to pass.  They dress the foreign dog--some of
them--in a little coat, with a pocket for his handkerchief, and put
shoes on his feet.  They have not given him a hat--not yet.  When
they do, he will contrive by some means or another to raise it
politely when he meets a cat he thinks he knows.

One morning, in a Continental city, I came across a disturbance--it
might be more correct to say the disturbance came across me:  it
swept down upon me, enveloped me before I knew that I was in it.  A
fox-terrier it was, belonging to a very young lady--it was when the
disturbance was to a certain extent over that we discovered he
belonged to this young lady.  She arrived towards the end of the
disturbance, very much out of breath:  she had been running for a
mile, poor girl, and shouting most of the way.  When she looked round
and saw all the things that had happened, and had had other things
that she had missed explained to her, she burst into tears.  An
English owner of that fox-terrier would have given one look round and
then have jumped upon the nearest tram going anywhere.  But, as I
have said, the foreigner is born good.  I left her giving her name
and address to seven different people.

But it was about the dog I wished to speak more particularly.  He had
commenced innocently enough, trying to catch a sparrow.  Nothing
delights a sparrow more than being chased by a dog.  A dozen times he
thought he had the sparrow.  Then another dog had got in his way.  I
don't know what they call this breed of dog, but abroad it is
popular:  it has no tail and looks like a pig--when things are going
well with it.  This particular specimen, when I saw him, looked more
like part of a doormat.  The fox-terrier had seized it by the scruff
of the neck and had rolled it over into the gutter just in front of a
motor cycle.  Its owner, a large lady, had darted out to save it, and
had collided with the motor cyclist.  The large lady had been thrown
some half a dozen yards against an Italian boy carrying a tray load
of plaster images.

I have seen a good deal of trouble in my life, but never one yet that
did not have an Italian image-vendor somehow or other mixed up in it.
Where these boys hide in times of peace is a mystery.  The chance of
being upset brings them out as sunshine brings out flies.  The motor
cycle had dashed into a little milk-cart and had spread it out neatly
in the middle of the tram lines.  The tram traffic looked like being
stopped for a quarter of an hour; but the idea of every approaching
tram driver appeared to be that if he rang his bell with sufficient
vigor this seeming obstruction would fade away and disappear.

In an English town all this would not have attracted much attention.
Somebody would have explained that a dog was the original cause, and
the whole series of events would have appeared ordinary and natural.
Upon these foreigners the fear descended that the Almighty, for some
reason, was angry with them.  A policeman ran to catch the dog.

The delighted dog rushed backwards, barking furiously, and tried to
throw up paving stones with its hind legs.  That frightened a
nursemaid who was wheeling a perambulator, and then it was that I
entered into the proceedings.  Seated on the edge of the pavement,
with a perambulator on one side of me and a howling baby on the
other, I told that dog what I thought of him.

Forgetful that I was in a foreign land--that he might not understand
me--I told it him in English, I told it him at length, I told it very
loud and clear.  He stood a yard in front of me, listening to me with
an expression of ecstatic joy I have never before or since seen
equalled on any face, human or canine.  He drank it in as though it
had been music from Paradise.

"Where have I heard that song before?" he seemed to be saying to
himself, "the old familiar language they used to talk to me when I
was young?"

He approached nearer to me; there were almost tears in his eyes when
I had finished.

"Say it again!" he seemed to be asking of me.  "Oh! say it all over
again, the dear old English oaths and curses that in this God-
forsaken land I never hoped to hear again."

I learnt from the young lady that he was an English-born fox-terrier.
That explained everything.  The foreign dog does not do this sort of
thing.  The foreigner is born good:  that is why we hate him.






THE IDLE THOUGHTS OF AN IDLE FELLOW.




ON BEING IDLE.

Now, this is a subject on which I flatter myself I really am _au fait_.
The gentleman who, when I was young, bathed me at wisdom's font for nine
guineas a term--no extras--used to say he never knew a boy who could
do less work in more time; and I remember my poor grandmother once
incidentally observing, in the course of an instruction upon the use
of the Prayer-book, that it was highly improbable that I should ever do
much that I ought not to do, but that she felt convinced beyond a doubt
that I should leave undone pretty well everything that I ought to do.

I am afraid I have somewhat belied half the dear old lady's prophecy.
Heaven help me! I have done a good many things that I ought not to have
done, in spite of my laziness. But I have fully confirmed the accuracy
of her judgment so far as neglecting much that I ought not to have
neglected is concerned. Idling always has been my strong point. I take
no credit to myself in the matter--it is a gift. Few possess it. There
are plenty of lazy people and plenty of slow-coaches, but a genuine
idler is a rarity. He is not a man who slouches about with his hands in
his pockets. On the contrary, his most startling characteristic is that
he is always intensely busy.

It is impossible to enjoy idling thoroughly unless one has plenty of
work to do. There is no fun in doing nothing when you have nothing to
do. Wasting time is merely an occupation then, and a most exhausting
one. Idleness, like kisses, to be sweet must be stolen.

Many years ago, when I was a young man, I was taken very ill--I never
could see myself that much was the matter with me, except that I had
a beastly cold. But I suppose it was something very serious, for the
doctor said that I ought to have come to him a month before, and that
if it (whatever it was) had gone on for another week he would not have
answered for the consequences. It is an extraordinary thing, but I
never knew a doctor called into any case yet but what it transpired
that another day's delay would have rendered cure hopeless. Our medical
guide, philosopher, and friend is like the hero in a melodrama--he
always comes upon the scene just, and only just, in the nick of time. It
is Providence, that is what it is.

Well, as I was saying, I was very ill and was ordered to Buxton for a
month, with strict injunctions to do nothing whatever all the while
that I was there. "Rest is what you require," said the doctor, "perfect
rest."

It seemed a delightful prospect. "This man evidently understands my
complaint," said I, and I pictured to myself a glorious time--a four
weeks' _dolce far niente_ with a dash of illness in it. Not too much
illness, but just illness enough--just sufficient to give it the flavor
of suffering and make it poetical. I should get up late, sip chocolate,
and have my breakfast in slippers and a dressing-gown. I should lie out
in the garden in a hammock and read sentimental novels with a melancholy
ending, until the books should fall from my listless hand, and I should
recline there, dreamily gazing into the deep blue of the firmament,
watching the fleecy clouds floating like white-sailed ships across
its depths, and listening to the joyous song of the birds and the low
rustling of the trees. Or, on becoming too weak to go out of doors,
I should sit propped up with pillows at the open window of the
ground-floor front, and look wasted and interesting, so that all the
pretty girls would sigh as they passed by.

And twice a day I should go down in a Bath chair to the Colonnade to
drink the waters. Oh, those waters! I knew nothing about them then,
and was rather taken with the idea. "Drinking the waters" sounded
fashionable and Queen Anne-fied, and I thought I should like them. But,
ugh! after the first three or four mornings! Sam Weller's description of
them as "having a taste of warm flat-irons" conveys only a faint idea of
their hideous nauseousness. If anything could make a sick man get well
quickly, it would be the knowledge that he must drink a glassful of them
every day until he was recovered. I drank them neat for six consecutive
days, and they nearly killed me; but after then I adopted the plan of
taking a stiff glass of brandy-and-water immediately on the top of them,
and found much relief thereby. I have been informed since, by various
eminent medical gentlemen, that the alcohol must have entirely
counteracted the effects of the chalybeate properties contained in the
water. I am glad I was lucky enough to hit upon the right thing.

But "drinking the waters" was only a small portion of the torture I
experienced during that memorable month--a month which was, without
exception, the most miserable I have ever spent. During the best part of
it I religiously followed the doctor's mandate and did nothing whatever,
except moon about the house and garden and go out for two hours a day in
a Bath chair. That did break the monotony to a certain extent. There is
more excitement about Bath-chairing--especially if you are not used to
the exhilarating exercise--than might appear to the casual observer. A
sense of danger, such as a mere outsider might not understand, is ever
present to the mind of the occupant. He feels convinced every minute
that the whole concern is going over, a conviction which becomes
especially lively whenever a ditch or a stretch of newly macadamized
road comes in sight. Every vehicle that passes he expects is going to
run into him; and he never finds himself ascending or descending a
hill without immediately beginning to speculate upon his chances,
supposing--as seems extremely probable--that the weak-kneed controller
of his destiny should let go.

But even this diversion failed to enliven after awhile, and the _ennui_
became perfectly unbearable. I felt my mind giving way under it. It is
not a strong mind, and I thought it would be unwise to tax it too far.
So somewhere about the twentieth morning I got up early, had a good
breakfast, and walked straight off to Hayfield, at the foot of the
Kinder Scout--a pleasant, busy little town, reached through a lovely
valley, and with two sweetly pretty women in it. At least they were
sweetly pretty then; one passed me on the bridge and, I think, smiled;
and the other was standing at an open door, making an unremunerative
investment of kisses upon a red-faced baby. But it is years ago, and I
dare say they have both grown stout and snappish since that time.
Coming back, I saw an old man breaking stones, and it roused such strong
longing in me to use my arms that I offered him a drink to let me take
his place. He was a kindly old man and he humored me. I went for those
stones with the accumulated energy of three weeks, and did more work in
half an hour than he had done all day. But it did not make him jealous.

Having taken the plunge, I went further and further into dissipation,
going out for a long walk every morning and listening to the band in
the pavilion every evening. But the days still passed slowly
notwithstanding, and I was heartily glad when the last one came and I
was being whirled away from gouty, consumptive Buxton to London with its
stern work and life. I looked out of the carriage as we rushed through
Hendon in the evening. The lurid glare overhanging the mighty city
seemed to warm my heart, and when, later on, my cab rattled out of St.
Pancras' station, the old familiar roar that came swelling up around me
sounded the sweetest music I had heard for many a long day.

I certainly did not enjoy that month's idling. I like idling when I
ought not to be idling; not when it is the only thing I have to do. That
is my pig-headed nature. The time when I like best to stand with my
back to the fire, calculating how much I owe, is when my desk is heaped
highest with letters that must be answered by the next post. When I like
to dawdle longest over my dinner is when I have a heavy evening's work
before me. And if, for some urgent reason, I ought to be up particularly
early in the morning, it is then, more than at any other time, that I
love to lie an extra half-hour in bed.

Ah! how delicious it is to turn over and go to sleep again: "just for
five minutes." Is there any human being, I wonder, besides the hero of
a Sunday-school "tale for boys," who ever gets up willingly? There
are some men to whom getting up at the proper time is an utter
impossibility. If eight o'clock happens to be the time that they should
turn out, then they lie till half-past. If circumstances change and
half-past eight becomes early enough for them, then it is nine before
they can rise. They are like the statesman of whom it was said that he
was always punctually half an hour late. They try all manner of schemes.
They buy alarm-clocks (artful contrivances that go off at the wrong time
and alarm the wrong people). They tell Sarah Jane to knock at the door
and call them, and Sarah Jane does knock at the door and does call them,
and they grunt back "awri" and then go comfortably to sleep again. I
knew one man who would actually get out and have a cold bath; and even
that was of no use, for afterward he would jump into bed again to warm
himself.

I think myself that I could keep out of bed all right if I once got
out. It is the wrenching away of the head from the pillow that I find so
hard, and no amount of over-night determination makes it easier. I say
to myself, after having wasted the whole evening, "Well, I won't do
any more work to-night; I'll get up early to-morrow morning;" and I am
thoroughly resolved to do so--then. In the morning, however, I feel less
enthusiastic about the idea, and reflect that it would have been much
better if I had stopped up last night. And then there is the trouble of
dressing, and the more one thinks about that the more one wants to put
it off.

It is a strange thing this bed, this mimic grave, where we stretch our
tired limbs and sink away so quietly into the silence and rest. "O bed,
O bed, delicious bed, that heaven on earth to the weary head," as sang
poor Hood, you are a kind old nurse to us fretful boys and girls. Clever
and foolish, naughty and good, you take us all in your motherly lap and
hush our wayward crying. The strong man full of care--the sick man
full of pain--the little maiden sobbing for her faithless lover--like
children we lay our aching heads on your white bosom, and you gently
soothe us off to by-by.

Our trouble is sore indeed when you turn away and will not comfort us.
How long the dawn seems coming when we cannot sleep! Oh! those hideous
nights when we toss and turn in fever and pain, when we lie, like living
men among the dead, staring out into the dark hours that drift so slowly
between us and the light. And oh! those still more hideous nights when
we sit by another in pain, when the low fire startles us every now and
then with a falling cinder, and the tick of the clock seems a hammer
beating out the life that we are watching.

But enough of beds and bedrooms. I have kept to them too long, even for
an idle fellow. Let us come out and have a smoke. That wastes time just
as well and does not look so bad. Tobacco has been a blessing to us
idlers. What the civil-service clerk before Sir Walter's time found
to occupy their minds with it is hard to imagine. I attribute the
quarrelsome nature of the Middle Ages young men entirely to the want of
the soothing weed. They had no work to do and could not smoke, and
the consequence was they were forever fighting and rowing. If, by any
extraordinary chance, there was no war going, then they got up a deadly
family feud with the next-door neighbor, and if, in spite of this, they
still had a few spare moments on their hands, they occupied them with
discussions as to whose sweetheart was the best looking, the arguments
employed on both sides being battle-axes, clubs, etc. Questions of taste
were soon decided in those days. When a twelfth-century youth fell in
love he did not take three paces backward, gaze into her eyes, and tell
her she was too beautiful to live. He said he would step outside and see
about it. And if, when he got out, he met a man and broke his head--the
other man's head, I mean--then that proved that his--the first
fellow's--girl was a pretty girl. But if the other fellow broke _his_
head--not his own, you know, but the other fellow's--the other fellow
to the second fellow, that is, because of course the other fellow would
only be the other fellow to him, not the first fellow who--well, if he
broke his head, then _his_ girl--not the other fellow's, but the fellow
who _was_ the--Look here, if A broke B's head, then A's girl was a
pretty girl; but if B broke A's head, then A's girl wasn't a pretty
girl, but B's girl was. That was their method of conducting art
criticism.

Nowadays we light a pipe and let the girls fight it out among
themselves.

They do it very well. They are getting to do all our work. They are
doctors, and barristers, and artists. They manage theaters, and promote
swindles, and edit newspapers. I am looking forward to the time when we
men shall have nothing to do but lie in bed till twelve, read two novels
a day, have nice little five-o'clock teas all to ourselves, and tax
our brains with nothing more trying than discussions upon the latest
patterns in trousers and arguments as to what Mr. Jones' coat was
made of and whether it fitted him. It is a glorious prospect--for idle
fellows.




ON BEING IN LOVE.

You've been in love, of course! If not you've got it to come. Love is
like the measles; we all have to go through it. Also like the measles,
we take it only once. One never need be afraid of catching it a second
time. The man who has had it can go into the most dangerous places and
play the most foolhardy tricks with perfect safety. He can picnic in
shady woods, ramble through leafy aisles, and linger on mossy seats to
watch the sunset. He fears a quiet country-house no more than he would
his own club. He can join a family party to go down the Rhine. He can,
to see the last of a friend, venture into the very jaws of the marriage
ceremony itself. He can keep his head through the whirl of a ravishing
waltz, and rest afterward in a dark conservatory, catching nothing more
lasting than a cold. He can brave a moonlight walk adown sweet-scented
lanes or a twilight pull among the somber rushes. He can get over a
stile without danger, scramble through a tangled hedge without being
caught, come down a slippery path without falling. He can look into
sunny eyes and not be dazzled. He listens to the siren voices, yet sails
on with unveered helm. He clasps white hands in his, but no electric
"Lulu"-like force holds him bound in their dainty pressure.

No, we never sicken with love twice. Cupid spends no second arrow on
the same heart. Love's handmaids are our life-long friends. Respect, and
admiration, and affection, our doors may always be left open for, but
their great celestial master, in his royal progress, pays but one visit
and departs. We like, we cherish, we are very, very fond of--but we
never love again. A man's heart is a firework that once in its time
flashes heavenward. Meteor-like, it blazes for a moment and lights
with its glory the whole world beneath. Then the night of our sordid
commonplace life closes in around it, and the burned-out case, falling
back to earth, lies useless and uncared for, slowly smoldering into
ashes. Once, breaking loose from our prison bonds, we dare, as mighty
old Prometheus dared, to scale the Olympian mount and snatch from
Phoebus' chariot the fire of the gods. Happy those who, hastening down
again ere it dies out, can kindle their earthly altars at its flame.
Love is too pure a light to burn long among the noisome gases that we
breathe, but before it is choked out we may use it as a torch to ignite
the cozy fire of affection.

And, after all, that warming glow is more suited to our cold little back
parlor of a world than is the burning spirit love. Love should be the
vestal fire of some mighty temple--some vast dim fane whose organ music
is the rolling of the spheres. Affection will burn cheerily when the
white flame of love is flickered out. Affection is a fire that can be
fed from day to day and be piled up ever higher as the wintry years draw
nigh. Old men and women can sit by it with their thin hands clasped, the
little children can nestle down in front, the friend and neighbor has
his welcome corner by its side, and even shaggy Fido and sleek Titty can
toast their noses at the bars.

Let us heap the coals of kindness upon that fire. Throw on your pleasant
words, your gentle pressures of the hand, your thoughtful and unselfish
deeds. Fan it with good-humor, patience, and forbearance. You can let
the wind blow and the rain fall unheeded then, for your hearth will be
warm and bright, and the faces round it will make sunshine in spite of
the clouds without.

I am afraid, dear Edwin and Angelina, you expect too much from love.
You think there is enough of your little hearts to feed this fierce,
devouring passion for all your long lives. Ah, young folk! don't rely
too much upon that unsteady flicker. It will dwindle and dwindle as the
months roll on, and there is no replenishing the fuel. You will watch it
die out in anger and disappointment. To each it will seem that it is the
other who is growing colder. Edwin sees with bitterness that Angelina no
longer runs to the gate to meet him, all smiles and blushes; and when he
has a cough now she doesn't begin to cry and, putting her arms round his
neck, say that she cannot live without him. The most she will probably
do is to suggest a lozenge, and even that in a tone implying that it is
the noise more than anything else she is anxious to get rid of.

Poor little Angelina, too, sheds silent tears, for Edwin has given up
carrying her old handkerchief in the inside pocket of his waistcoat.

Both are astonished at the falling off in the other one, but neither
sees their own change. If they did they would not suffer as they do.
They would look for the cause in the right quarter--in the littleness
of poor human nature--join hands over their common failing, and start
building their house anew on a more earthly and enduring foundation.
But we are so blind to our own shortcomings, so wide awake to those
of others. Everything that happens to us is always the other person's
fault. Angelina would have gone on loving Edwin forever and ever and
ever if only Edwin had not grown so strange and different. Edwin would
have adored Angelina through eternity if Angelina had only remained the
same as when he first adored her.

It is a cheerless hour for you both when the lamp of love has gone out
and the fire of affection is not yet lit, and you have to grope about
in the cold, raw dawn of life to kindle it. God grant it catches light
before the day is too far spent. Many sit shivering by the dead coals
till night come.

But, there, of what use is it to preach? Who that feels the rush of
young love through his veins can think it will ever flow feeble and
slow! To the boy of twenty it seems impossible that he will not love as
wildly at sixty as he does then. He cannot call to mind any middle-aged
or elderly gentleman of his acquaintance who is known to exhibit
symptoms of frantic attachment, but that does not interfere in his
belief in himself. His love will never fall, whoever else's may. Nobody
ever loved as he loves, and so, of course, the rest of the world's
experience can be no guide in his case. Alas! alas! ere thirty he has
joined the ranks of the sneerers. It is not his fault. Our passions,
both the good and bad, cease with our blushes. We do not hate, nor
grieve, nor joy, nor despair in our thirties like we did in our teens.
Disappointment does not suggest suicide, and we quaff success without
intoxication.

We take all things in a minor key as we grow older. There are few
majestic passages in the later acts of life's opera. Ambition takes
a less ambitious aim. Honor becomes more reasonable and conveniently
adapts itself to circumstances. And love--love dies. "Irreverence for
the dreams of youth" soon creeps like a killing frost upon our hearts.
The tender shoots and the expanding flowers are nipped and withered, and
of a vine that yearned to stretch its tendrils round the world there is
left but a sapless stump.

My fair friends will deem all this rank heresy, I know. So far from a
man's not loving after he has passed boyhood, it is not till there is a
good deal of gray in his hair that they think his protestations at all
worthy of attention. Young ladies take their notions of our sex from the
novels written by their own, and compared with the monstrosities
that masquerade for men in the pages of that nightmare literature,
Pythagoras' plucked bird and Frankenstein's demon were fair average
specimens of humanity.

In these so-called books, the chief lover, or Greek god, as he is
admiringly referred to--by the way, they do not say which "Greek god"
it is that the gentleman bears such a striking likeness to; it might be
hump-backed Vulcan, or double-faced Janus, or even driveling Silenus,
the god of abstruse mysteries. He resembles the whole family of them,
however, in being a blackguard, and perhaps this is what is meant. To
even the little manliness his classical prototypes possessed, though,
he can lay no claim whatever, being a listless effeminate noodle, on
the shady side of forty. But oh! the depth and strength of this elderly
party's emotion for some bread-and-butter school-girl! Hide your heads,
ye young Romeos and Leanders! this _blase_ old beau loves with an
hysterical fervor that requires four adjectives to every noun to
properly describe.

It is well, dear ladies, for us old sinners that you study only books.
Did you read mankind, you would know that the lad's shy stammering tells
a truer tale than our bold eloquence. A boy's love comes from a full
heart; a man's is more often the result of a full stomach. Indeed, a
man's sluggish current may not be called love, compared with the rushing
fountain that wells up when a boy's heart is struck with the heavenly
rod. If you would taste love, drink of the pure stream that youth pours
out at your feet. Do not wait till it has become a muddy river before
you stoop to catch its waves.

Or is it that you like its bitter flavor--that the clear, limpid water
is insipid to your palate and that the pollution of its after-course
gives it a relish to your lips? Must we believe those who tell us that a
hand foul with the filth of a shameful life is the only one a young girl
cares to be caressed by?

That is the teaching that is bawled out day by day from between those
yellow covers. Do they ever pause to think, I wonder, those devil's
ladyhelps, what mischief they are doing crawling about God's garden, and
telling childish Eves and silly Adams that sin is sweet and that decency
is ridiculous and vulgar? How many an innocent girl do they not degrade
into an evil-minded woman? To how many a weak lad do they not point out
the dirty by-path as the shortest cut to a maiden's heart? It is not as
if they wrote of life as it really is. Speak truth, and right will take
care of itself. But their pictures are coarse daubs painted from the
sickly fancies of their own diseased imagination.

We want to think of women not--as their own sex would show them--as
Lorleis luring us to destruction, but as good angels beckoning us
upward. They have more power for good or evil than they dream of. It is
just at the very age when a man's character is forming that he tumbles
into love, and then the lass he loves has the making or marring of him.
Unconsciously he molds himself to what she would have him, good or bad.
I am sorry to have to be ungallant enough to say that I do not think
they always use their influence for the best. Too often the female world
is bounded hard and fast within the limits of the commonplace. Their
ideal hero is a prince of littleness, and to become that many a powerful
mind, enchanted by love, is "lost to life and use and name and fame."

And yet, women, you could make us so much better if you only would. It
rests with you, more than with all the preachers, to roll this world a
little nearer heaven. Chivalry is not dead: it only sleeps for want
of work to do. It is you who must wake it to noble deeds. You must be
worthy of knightly worship.

You must be higher than ourselves. It was for Una that the Red Cross
Knight did war. For no painted, mincing court dame could the dragon have
been slain. Oh, ladies fair, be fair in mind and soul as well as face,
so that brave knights may win glory in your service! Oh, woman, throw
off your disguising cloaks of selfishness, effrontery, and affectation!
Stand forth once more a queen in your royal robe of simple purity. A
thousand swords, now rusting in ignoble sloth, shall leap from their
scabbards to do battle for your honor against wrong. A thousand Sir
Rolands shall lay lance in rest, and Fear, Avarice, Pleasure, and
Ambition shall go down in the dust before your colors.

What noble deeds were we not ripe for in the days when we loved?
What noble lives could we not have lived for her sake? Our love was
a religion we could have died for. It was no mere human creature like
ourselves that we adored. It was a queen that we paid homage to, a
goddess that we worshiped.

And how madly we did worship! And how sweet it was to worship! Ah, lad,
cherish love's young dream while it lasts! You will know too soon how
truly little Tom Moore sang when he said that there was nothing half so
sweet in life. Even when it brings misery it is a wild, romantic misery,
all unlike the dull, worldly pain of after-sorrows. When you have lost
her--when the light is gone out from your life and the world stretches
before you a long, dark horror, even then a half-enchantment mingles
with your despair.

And who would not risk its terrors to gain its raptures? Ah, what
raptures they were! The mere recollection thrills you. How delicious
it was to tell her that you loved her, that you lived for her, that
you would die for her! How you did rave, to be sure, what floods of
extravagant nonsense you poured forth, and oh, how cruel it was of
her to pretend not to believe you! In what awe you stood of her! How
miserable you were when you had offended her! And yet, how pleasant to
be bullied by her and to sue for pardon without having the slightest
notion of what your fault was! How dark the world was when she snubbed
you, as she often did, the little rogue, just to see you look wretched;
how sunny when she smiled! How jealous you were of every one about
her! How you hated every man she shook hands with, every woman she
kissed--the maid that did her hair, the boy that cleaned her shoes, the
dog she nursed--though you had to be respectful to the last-named! How
you looked forward to seeing her, how stupid you were when you did see
her, staring at her without saying a word! How impossible it was for
you to go out at any time of the day or night without finding yourself
eventually opposite her windows! You hadn't pluck enough to go in, but
you hung about the corner and gazed at the outside. Oh, if the house had
only caught fire--it was insured, so it wouldn't have mattered--and you
could have rushed in and saved her at the risk of your life, and have
been terribly burned and injured! Anything to serve her. Even in little
things that was so sweet. How you would watch her, spaniel-like, to
anticipate her slightest wish! How proud you were to do her bidding! How
delightful it was to be ordered about by her! To devote your whole life
to her and to never think of yourself seemed such a simple thing. You
would go without a holiday to lay a humble offering at her shrine, and
felt more than repaid if she only deigned to accept it. How precious to
you was everything that she had hallowed by her touch--her little glove,
the ribbon she had worn, the rose that had nestled in her hair and whose
withered leaves still mark the poems you never care to look at now.

And oh, how beautiful she was, how wondrous beautiful! It was as some
angel entering the room, and all else became plain and earthly. She was
too sacred to be touched. It seemed almost presumption to gaze at her.
You would as soon have thought of kissing her as of singing comic songs
in a cathedral. It was desecration enough to kneel and timidly raise the
gracious little hand to your lips.

Ah, those foolish days, those foolish days when we were unselfish and
pure-minded; those foolish days when our simple hearts were full
of truth, and faith, and reverence! Ah, those foolish days of noble
longings and of noble strivings! And oh, these wise, clever days when we
know that money is the only prize worth striving for, when we believe in
nothing else but meanness and lies, when we care for no living creature
but ourselves!




ON BEING IN THE BLUES.

I can enjoy feeling melancholy, and there is a good deal of satisfaction
about being thoroughly miserable; but nobody likes a fit of the blues.
Nevertheless, everybody has them; notwithstanding which, nobody can tell
why. There is no accounting for them. You are just as likely to have one
on the day after you have come into a large fortune as on the day after
you have left your new silk umbrella in the train. Its effect upon you
is somewhat similar to what would probably be produced by a combined
attack of toothache, indigestion, and cold in the head. You become
stupid, restless, and irritable; rude to strangers and dangerous toward
your friends; clumsy, maudlin, and quarrelsome; a nuisance to yourself
and everybody about you.

While it is on you can do nothing and think of nothing, though feeling
at the time bound to do something. You can't sit still so put on your
hat and go for a walk; but before you get to the corner of the street
you wish you hadn't come out and you turn back. You open a book and try
to read, but you find Shakespeare trite and commonplace, Dickens is dull
and prosy, Thackeray a bore, and Carlyle too sentimental. You throw the
book aside and call the author names. Then you "shoo" the cat out of
the room and kick the door to after her. You think you will write your
letters, but after sticking at "Dearest Auntie: I find I have five
minutes to spare, and so hasten to write to you," for a quarter of an
hour, without being able to think of another sentence, you tumble the
paper into the desk, fling the wet pen down upon the table-cloth,
and start up with the resolution of going to see the Thompsons. While
pulling on your gloves, however, it occurs to you that the Thompsons are
idiots; that they never have supper; and that you will be expected to
jump the baby. You curse the Thompsons and decide not to go.

By this time you feel completely crushed. You bury your face in your
hands and think you would like to die and go to heaven. You picture to
yourself your own sick-bed, with all your friends and relations standing
round you weeping. You bless them all, especially the young and pretty
ones. They will value you when you are gone, so you say to yourself,
and learn too late what they have lost; and you bitterly contrast their
presumed regard for you then with their decided want of veneration now.

These reflections make you feel a little more cheerful, but only for a
brief period; for the next moment you think what a fool you must be
to imagine for an instant that anybody would be sorry at anything that
might happen to you. Who would care two straws (whatever precise amount
of care two straws may represent) whether you are blown up, or hung
up, or married, or drowned? Nobody cares for you. You never have
been properly appreciated, never met with your due deserts in any one
particular. You review the whole of your past life, and it is painfully
apparent that you have been ill-used from your cradle.

Half an hour's indulgence in these considerations works you up into
a state of savage fury against everybody and everything, especially
yourself, whom anatomical reasons alone prevent your kicking. Bed-time
at last comes, to save you from doing something rash, and you spring
upstairs, throw off your clothes, leaving them strewn all over the room,
blow out the candle, and jump into bed as if you had backed yourself
for a heavy wager to do the whole thing against time. There you toss
and tumble about for a couple of hours or so, varying the monotony by
occasionally jerking the clothes off and getting out and putting them
on again. At length you drop into an uneasy and fitful slumber, have bad
dreams, and wake up late the next morning.

At least, this is all we poor single men can do under the circumstances.
Married men bully their wives, grumble at the dinner, and insist on the
children's going to bed. All of which, creating, as it does, a good deal
of disturbance in the house, must be a great relief to the feelings of a
man in the blues, rows being the only form of amusement in which he can
take any interest.

The symptoms of the infirmity are much the same in every case, but the
affliction itself is variously termed. The poet says that "a feeling
of sadness comes o'er him." 'Arry refers to the heavings of his wayward
heart by confiding to Jimee that he has "got the blooming hump." Your
sister doesn't know what is the matter with her to-night. She feels out
of sorts altogether and hopes nothing is going to happen. The every-day
young man is "so awful glad to meet you, old fellow," for he does "feel
so jolly miserable this evening." As for myself, I generally say that "I
have a strange, unsettled feeling to-night" and "think I'll go out."

By the way, it never does come except in the evening. In the sun-time,
when the world is bounding forward full of life, we cannot stay to sigh
and sulk. The roar of the working day drowns the voices of the elfin
sprites that are ever singing their low-toned _miserere_ in our ears.
In the day we are angry, disappointed, or indignant, but never "in the
blues" and never melancholy. When things go wrong at ten o'clock in the
morning we--or rather you--swear and knock the furniture about; but if
the misfortune comes at ten P.M., we read poetry or sit in the dark and
think what a hollow world this is.

But, as a rule, it is not trouble that makes us melancholy. The
actuality is too stern a thing for sentiment. We linger to weep over
a picture, but from the original we should quickly turn our eyes away.
There is no pathos in real misery: no luxury in real grief. We do not
toy with sharp swords nor hug a gnawing fox to our breast for choice.
When a man or woman loves to brood over a sorrow and takes care to keep
it green in their memory, you may be sure it is no longer a pain to
them. However they may have suffered from it at first, the recollection
has become by then a pleasure. Many dear old ladies who daily look at
tiny shoes lying in lavender-scented drawers, and weep as they think of
the tiny feet whose toddling march is done, and sweet-faced young ones
who place each night beneath their pillow some lock that once curled on
a boyish head that the salt waves have kissed to death, will call me
a nasty cynical brute and say I'm talking nonsense; but I believe,
nevertheless, that if they will ask themselves truthfully whether they
find it unpleasant to dwell thus on their sorrow, they will be compelled
to answer "No." Tears are as sweet as laughter to some natures. The
proverbial Englishman, we know from old chronicler Froissart, takes his
pleasures sadly, and the Englishwoman goes a step further and takes her
pleasures in sadness itself.

I am not sneering. I would not for a moment sneer at anything that
helps to keep hearts tender in this hard old world. We men are cold and
common-sensed enough for all; we would not have women the same. No, no,
ladies dear, be always sentimental and soft-hearted, as you are--be the
soothing butter to our coarse dry bread. Besides, sentiment is to women
what fun is to us. They do not care for our humor, surely it would be
unfair to deny them their grief. And who shall say that their mode of
enjoyment is not as sensible as ours? Why assume that a doubled-up
body, a contorted, purple face, and a gaping mouth emitting a series
of ear-splitting shrieks point to a state of more intelligent happiness
than a pensive face reposing upon a little white hand, and a pair of
gentle tear-dimmed eyes looking back through Time's dark avenue upon a
fading past?

I am glad when I see Regret walked with as a friend--glad because I know
the saltness has been washed from out the tears, and that the sting must
have been plucked from the beautiful face of Sorrow ere we dare press
her pale lips to ours. Time has laid his healing hand upon the wound
when we can look back upon the pain we once fainted under and no
bitterness or despair rises in our hearts. The burden is no longer
heavy when we have for our past troubles only the same sweet mingling of
pleasure and pity that we feel when old knight-hearted Colonel Newcome
answers "_adsum_" to the great roll-call, or when Tom and Maggie
Tulliver, clasping hands through the mists that have divided them, go
down, locked in each other's arms, beneath the swollen waters of the
Floss.

Talking of poor Tom and Maggie Tulliver brings to my mind a saying of
George Eliot's in connection with this subject of melancholy. She
speaks somewhere of the "sadness of a summer's evening." How wonderfully
true--like everything that came from that wonderful pen--the observation
is! Who has not felt the sorrowful enchantment of those lingering
sunsets? The world belongs to Melancholy then, a thoughtful deep-eyed
maiden who loves not the glare of day. It is not till "light thickens
and the crow wings to the rocky wood" that she steals forth from her
groves. Her palace is in twilight land. It is there she meets us. At her
shadowy gate she takes our hand in hers and walks beside us through
her mystic realm. We see no form, but seem to hear the rustling of her
wings.

Even in the toiling hum-drum city her spirit comes to us. There is a
somber presence in each long, dull street; and the dark river creeps
ghostlike under the black arches, as if bearing some hidden secret
beneath its muddy waves.

In the silent country, when the trees and hedges loom dim and blurred
against the rising night, and the bat's wing flutters in our face, and
the land-rail's cry sounds drearily across the fields, the spell sinks
deeper still into our hearts. We seem in that hour to be standing by
some unseen death-bed, and in the swaying of the elms we hear the sigh
of the dying day.

A solemn sadness reigns. A great peace is around us. In its light
our cares of the working day grow small and trivial, and bread and
cheese--ay, and even kisses--do not seem the only things worth striving
for. Thoughts we cannot speak but only listen to flood in upon us, and
standing in the stillness under earth's darkening dome, we feel that we
are greater than our petty lives. Hung round with those dusky curtains,
the world is no longer a mere dingy workshop, but a stately temple
wherein man may worship, and where at times in the dimness his groping
hands touch God's.




ON BEING HARD UP.

It is a most remarkable thing. I sat down with the full intention of
writing something clever and original; but for the life of me I can't
think of anything clever and original--at least, not at this moment. The
only thing I can think about now is being hard up. I suppose having my
hands in my pockets has made me think about this. I always do sit with
my hands in my pockets except when I am in the company of my sisters,
my cousins, or my aunts; and they kick up such a shindy--I should say
expostulate so eloquently upon the subject--that I have to give in and
take them out--my hands I mean. The chorus to their objections is that
it is not gentlemanly. I am hanged if I can see why. I could understand
its not being considered gentlemanly to put your hands in other people's
pockets (especially by the other people), but how, O ye sticklers for
what looks this and what looks that, can putting his hands in his own
pockets make a man less gentle? Perhaps you are right, though. Now I
come to think of it, I have heard some people grumble most savagely when
doing it. But they were mostly old gentlemen. We young fellows, as a
rule, are never quite at ease unless we have our hands in our pockets.
We are awkward and shifty. We are like what a music-hall Lion Comique
would be without his opera-hat, if such a thing can be imagined. But let
us put our hands in our trousers pockets, and let there be some small
change in the right-hand one and a bunch of keys in the left, and we
will face a female post-office clerk.

It is a little difficult to know what to do with your hands, even in
your pockets, when there is nothing else there. Years ago, when my whole
capital would occasionally come down to "what in town the people call
a bob," I would recklessly spend a penny of it, merely for the sake of
having the change, all in coppers, to jingle. You don't feel nearly so
hard up with eleven pence in your pocket as you do with a shilling. Had
I been "La-di-da," that impecunious youth about whom we superior folk
are so sarcastic, I would have changed my penny for two ha'pennies.

I can speak with authority on the subject of being hard up. I have been
a provincial actor. If further evidence be required, which I do not
think likely, I can add that I have been a "gentleman connected with the
press." I have lived on 15 shilling a week. I have lived a week on 10,
owing the other 5; and I have lived for a fortnight on a great-coat.

It is wonderful what an insight into domestic economy being really hard
up gives one. If you want to find out the value of money, live on
15 shillings a week and see how much you can put by for clothes and
recreation. You will find out that it is worth while to wait for the
farthing change, that it is worth while to walk a mile to save a
penny, that a glass of beer is a luxury to be indulged in only at rare
intervals, and that a collar can be worn for four days.

Try it just before you get married. It will be excellent practice. Let
your son and heir try it before sending him to college. He won't grumble
at a hundred a year pocket-money then. There are some people to whom it
would do a world of good. There is that delicate blossom who can't drink
any claret under ninety-four, and who would as soon think of dining
off cat's meat as off plain roast mutton. You do come across these
poor wretches now and then, though, to the credit of humanity, they are
principally confined to that fearful and wonderful society known only
to lady novelists. I never hear of one of these creatures discussing a
_menu_ card but I feel a mad desire to drag him off to the bar of
some common east-end public-house and cram a sixpenny dinner down his
throat--beefsteak pudding, fourpence; potatoes, a penny; half a pint of
porter, a penny. The recollection of it (and the mingled fragrance of
beer, tobacco, and roast pork generally leaves a vivid impression) might
induce him to turn up his nose a little less frequently in the future
at everything that is put before him. Then there is that generous party,
the cadger's delight, who is so free with his small change, but who
never thinks of paying his debts. It might teach even him a little
common sense. "I always give the waiter a shilling. One can't give the
fellow less, you know," explained a young government clerk with whom I
was lunching the other day in Regent Street. I agreed with him as to the
utter impossibility of making it elevenpence ha'penny; but at the same
time I resolved to one day decoy him to an eating-house I remembered
near Covent Garden, where the waiter, for the better discharge of his
duties, goes about in his shirt-sleeves--and very dirty sleeves they
are, too, when it gets near the end of the month. I know that waiter.
If my friend gives him anything beyond a penny, the man will insist on
shaking hands with him then and there as a mark of his esteem; of that I
feel sure.

There have been a good many funny things said and written about
hardupishness, but the reality is not funny, for all that. It is not
funny to have to haggle over pennies. It isn't funny to be thought
mean and stingy. It isn't funny to be shabby and to be ashamed of your
address. No, there is nothing at all funny in poverty--to the poor. It
is hell upon earth to a sensitive man; and many a brave gentleman who
would have faced the labors of Hercules has had his heart broken by its
petty miseries.

It is not the actual discomforts themselves that are hard to bear.
Who would mind roughing it a bit if that were all it meant? What cared
Robinson Crusoe for a patch on his trousers? Did he wear trousers? I
forget; or did he go about as he does in the pantomimes? What did it
matter to him if his toes did stick out of his boots? and what if
his umbrella was a cotton one, so long as it kept the rain off? His
shabbiness did not trouble him; there was none of his friends round
about to sneer him.

Being poor is a mere trifle. It is being known to be poor that is the
sting. It is not cold that makes a man without a great-coat hurry along
so quickly. It is not all shame at telling lies--which he knows will
not be believed--that makes him turn so red when he informs you that
he considers great-coats unhealthy and never carries an umbrella on
principle. It is easy enough to say that poverty is no crime. No; if
it were men wouldn't be ashamed of it. It's a blunder, though, and is
punished as such. A poor man is despised the whole world over; despised
as much by a Christian as by a lord, as much by a demagogue as by a
footman, and not all the copy-book maxims ever set for ink stained youth
will make him respected. Appearances are everything, so far as human
opinion goes, and the man who will walk down Piccadilly arm in arm with
the most notorious scamp in London, provided he is a well-dressed one,
will slink up a back street to say a couple of words to a seedy-looking
gentleman. And the seedy-looking gentleman knows this--no one
better--and will go a mile round to avoid meeting an acquaintance. Those
that knew him in his prosperity need never trouble themselves to look
the other way. He is a thousand times more anxious that they should not
see him than they can be; and as to their assistance, there is nothing
he dreads more than the offer of it. All he wants is to be forgotten;
and in this respect he is generally fortunate enough to get what he
wants.

One becomes used to being hard up, as one becomes used to everything
else, by the help of that wonderful old homeopathic doctor, Time. You
can tell at a glance the difference between the old hand and the novice;
between the case-hardened man who has been used to shift and struggle
for years and the poor devil of a beginner striving to hide his misery,
and in a constant agony of fear lest he should be found out. Nothing
shows this difference more clearly than the way in which each will pawn
his watch. As the poet says somewhere: "True ease in pawning comes from
art, not chance." The one goes into his "uncle's" with as much composure
as he would into his tailor's--very likely with more. The assistant is
even civil and attends to him at once, to the great indignation of the
lady in the next box, who, however, sarcastically observes that she
don't mind being kept waiting "if it is a regular customer." Why, from
the pleasant and businesslike manner in which the transaction is carried
out, it might be a large purchase in the three per cents. Yet what a
piece of work a man makes of his first "pop." A boy popping his first
question is confidence itself compared with him. He hangs about outside
the shop until he has succeeded in attracting the attention of all the
loafers in the neighborhood and has aroused strong suspicions in the
mind of the policeman on the beat. At last, after a careful examination
of the contents of the windows, made for the purpose of impressing the
bystanders with the notion that he is going in to purchase a diamond
bracelet or some such trifle, he enters, trying to do so with a careless
swagger, and giving himself really the air of a member of the swell mob.
When inside he speaks in so low a voice as to be perfectly inaudible,
and has to say it all over again. When, in the course of his rambling
conversation about a "friend" of his, the word "lend" is reached, he is
promptly told to go up the court on the right and take the first door
round the corner. He comes out of the shop with a face that you could
easily light a cigarette at, and firmly under the impression that the
whole population of the district is watching him. When he does get
to the right place he has forgotten his name and address and is in a
general condition of hopeless imbecility. Asked in a severe tone how he
came by "this," he stammers and contradicts himself, and it is only a
miracle if he does not confess to having stolen it that very day. He is
thereupon informed that they don't want anything to do with his sort,
and that he had better get out of this as quickly as possible, which he
does, recollecting nothing more until he finds himself three miles off,
without the slightest knowledge how he got there.

By the way, how awkward it is, though, having to depend on public-houses
and churches for the time. The former are generally too fast and the
latter too slow. Besides which, your efforts to get a glimpse of
the public house clock from the outside are attended with great
difficulties. If you gently push the swing-door ajar and peer in you
draw upon yourself the contemptuous looks of the barmaid, who at once
puts you down in the same category with area sneaks and cadgers. You
also create a certain amount of agitation among the married portion of
the customers. You don't see the clock because it is behind the door;
and in trying to withdraw quietly you jam your head. The only other
method is to jump up and down outside the window. After this latter
proceeding, however, if you do not bring out a banjo and commence to
sing, the youthful inhabitants of the neighborhood, who have gathered
round in expectation, become disappointed.

I should like to know, too, by what mysterious law of nature it is that
before you have left your watch "to be repaired" half an hour, some one
is sure to stop you in the street and conspicuously ask you the time.
Nobody even feels the slightest curiosity on the subject when you've got
it on.

Dear old ladies and gentlemen who know nothing about being hard up--and
may they never, bless their gray old heads--look upon the pawn-shop
as the last stage of degradation; but those who know it better (and my
readers have no doubt, noticed this themselves) are often surprised,
like the little boy who dreamed he went to heaven, at meeting so many
people there that they never expected to see. For my part, I think it a
much more independent course than borrowing from friends, and I always
try to impress this upon those of my acquaintance who incline toward
"wanting a couple of pounds till the day after to-morrow." But they
won't all see it. One of them once remarked that he objected to the
principle of the thing. I fancy if he had said it was the interest that
he objected to he would have been nearer the truth: twenty-five per
cent. certainly does come heavy.

There are degrees in being hard up. We are all hard up, more or
less--most of us more. Some are hard up for a thousand pounds; some for
a shilling. Just at this moment I am hard up myself for a fiver. I only
want it for a day or two. I should be certain of paying it back within a
week at the outside, and if any lady or gentleman among my readers would
kindly lend it me, I should be very much obliged indeed. They could send
it to me under cover to Messrs. Field & Tuer, only, in such case, please
let the envelope be carefully sealed. I would give you my I.O.U. as
security.




ON VANITY AND VANITIES.

All is vanity and everybody's vain. Women are terribly vain. So are
men--more so, if possible. So are children, particularly children. One
of them at this very moment is hammering upon my legs. She wants to know
what I think of her new shoes. Candidly I don't think much of them.
They lack symmetry and curve and possess an indescribable appearance of
lumpiness (I believe, too, they've put them on the wrong feet). But I
don't say this. It is not criticism, but flattery that she wants; and I
gush over them with what I feel to myself to be degrading effusiveness.
Nothing else would satisfy this self-opinionated cherub. I tried the
conscientious-friend dodge with her on one occasion, but it was not
a success. She had requested my judgment upon her general conduct and
behavior, the exact case submitted being, "Wot oo tink of me? Oo peased
wi' me?" and I had thought it a good opportunity to make a few salutary
remarks upon her late moral career, and said: "No, I am not pleased with
you." I recalled to her mind the events of that very morning, and I put
it to her how she, as a Christian child, could expect a wise and good
uncle to be satisfied with the carryings on of an infant who that very
day had roused the whole house at five AM.; had upset a water-jug and
tumbled downstairs after it at seven; had endeavored to put the cat in
the bath at eight; and sat on her own father's hat at nine thirty-five.

What did she do? Was she grateful to me for my plain speaking? Did she
ponder upon my words and determine to profit by them and to lead from
that hour a better and nobler life?

No! she howled.

That done, she became abusive. She said:

"Oo naughty--oo naughty, bad unkie--oo bad man--me tell MAR."

And she did, too.

Since then, when my views have been called for I have kept my real
sentiments more to myself like, preferring to express unbounded
admiration of this young person's actions, irrespective of their actual
merits. And she nods her head approvingly and trots off to advertise my
opinion to the rest of the household. She appears to employ it as a sort
of testimonial for mercenary purposes, for I subsequently hear
distant sounds of "Unkie says me dood dirl--me dot to have two bikkies
[biscuits]."

There she goes, now, gazing rapturously at her own toes and murmuring
"pittie"--two-foot-ten of conceit and vanity, to say nothing of other
wickednesses.

They are all alike. I remember sitting in a garden one sunny afternoon
in the suburbs of London. Suddenly I heard a shrill treble voice calling
from a top-story window to some unseen being, presumably in one of the
other gardens, "Gamma, me dood boy, me wery good boy, gamma; me dot on
Bob's knickiebockies."

Why, even animals are vain. I saw a great Newfoundland dog the other
day sitting in front of a mirror at the entrance to a shop in Regent's
Circus, and examining himself with an amount of smug satisfaction that I
have never seen equaled elsewhere outside a vestry meeting.

I was at a farm-house once when some high holiday was being celebrated.
I don't remember what the occasion was, but it was something festive,
a May Day or Quarter Day, or something of that sort, and they put a
garland of flowers round the head of one of the cows. Well, that absurd
quadruped went about all day as perky as a schoolgirl in a new frock;
and when they took the wreath off she became quite sulky, and they had
to put it on again before she would stand still to be milked. This is
not a Percy anecdote. It is plain, sober truth.

As for cats, they nearly equal human beings for vanity. I have known
a cat get up and walk out of the room on a remark derogatory to her
species being made by a visitor, while a neatly turned compliment will
set them purring for an hour.

I do like cats. They are so unconsciously amusing. There is such a comic
dignity about them, such a "How dare you!" "Go away, don't touch me"
sort of air. Now, there is nothing haughty about a dog. They are "Hail,
fellow, well met" with every Tom, Dick, or Harry that they come
across. When I meet a dog of my acquaintance I slap his head, call him
opprobrious epithets, and roll him over on his back; and there he lies,
gaping at me, and doesn't mind it a bit.

Fancy carrying on like that with a cat! Why, she would never speak to
you again as long as you lived. No, when you want to win the approbation
of a cat you must mind what you are about and work your way carefully.
If you don't know the cat, you had best begin by saying, "Poor pussy."
After which add "did 'ums" in a tone of soothing sympathy. You don't
know what you mean any more than the cat does, but the sentiment
seems to imply a proper spirit on your part, and generally touches her
feelings to such an extent that if you are of good manners and passable
appearance she will stick her back up and rub her nose against you.
Matters having reached this stage, you may venture to chuck her under
the chin and tickle the side of her head, and the intelligent creature
will then stick her claws into your legs; and all is friendship and
affection, as so sweetly expressed in the beautiful lines--

     "I love little pussy, her coat is so warm,
     And if I don't tease her she'll do me no harm;
     So I'll stroke her, and pat her, and feed her with food,
     And pussy will love me because I am good."

The last two lines of the stanza give us a pretty true insight into
pussy's notions of human goodness. It is evident that in her opinion
goodness consists of stroking her, and patting her, and feeding her with
food. I fear this narrow-minded view of virtue, though, is not confined
to pussies. We are all inclined to adopt a similar standard of merit in
our estimate of other people. A good man is a man who is good to us, and
a bad man is a man who doesn't do what we want him to. The truth is,
we each of us have an inborn conviction that the whole world, with
everybody and everything in it, was created as a sort of necessary
appendage to ourselves. Our fellow men and women were made to admire us
and to minister to our various requirements. You and I, dear reader, are
each the center of the universe in our respective opinions. You, as I
understand it, were brought into being by a considerate Providence in
order that you might read and pay me for what I write; while I, in your
opinion, am an article sent into the world to write something for you
to read. The stars--as we term the myriad other worlds that are rushing
down beside us through the eternal silence--were put into the heavens
to make the sky look interesting for us at night; and the moon with its
dark mysteries and ever-hidden face is an arrangement for us to flirt
under.

I fear we are most of us like Mrs. Poyser's bantam cock, who fancied the
sun got up every morning to hear him crow. "'Tis vanity that makes the
world go round." I don't believe any man ever existed without vanity,
and if he did he would be an extremely uncomfortable person to have
anything to do with. He would, of course, be a very good man, and we
should respect him very much. He would be a very admirable man--a man
to be put under a glass case and shown round as a specimen--a man to be
stuck upon a pedestal and copied, like a school exercise--a man to be
reverenced, but not a man to be loved, not a human brother whose hand we
should care to grip. Angels may be very excellent sort of folk in their
way, but we, poor mortals, in our present state, would probably find
them precious slow company. Even mere good people are rather depressing.
It is in our faults and failings, not in our virtues, that we touch
one another and find sympathy. We differ widely enough in our nobler
qualities. It is in our follies that we are at one. Some of us are
pious, some of us are generous. Some few of us are honest, comparatively
speaking; and some, fewer still, may possibly be truthful. But in vanity
and kindred weaknesses we can all join hands. Vanity is one of those
touches of nature that make the whole world kin. From the Indian hunter,
proud of his belt of scalps, to the European general, swelling beneath
his row of stars and medals; from the Chinese, gleeful at the length of
his pigtail, to the "professional beauty," suffering tortures in order
that her waist may resemble a peg-top; from draggle-tailed little Polly
Stiggins, strutting through Seven Dials with a tattered parasol over her
head, to the princess sweeping through a drawing-room with a train of
four yards long; from 'Arry, winning by vulgar chaff the loud laughter
of his pals, to the statesman whose ears are tickled by the cheers
that greet his high-sounding periods; from the dark-skinned African,
bartering his rare oils and ivory for a few glass beads to hang about
his neck, to the Christian maiden selling her white body for a score of
tiny stones and an empty title to tack before her name--all march, and
fight, and bleed, and die beneath its tawdry flag.

Ay, ay, vanity is truly the motive-power that moves humanity, and it
is flattery that greases the wheels. If you want to win affection and
respect in this world, you must flatter people. Flatter high and low,
and rich and poor, and silly and wise. You will get on famously. Praise
this man's virtues and that man's vices. Compliment everybody upon
everything, and especially upon what they haven't got. Admire guys for
their beauty, fools for their wit, and boors for their breeding. Your
discernment and intelligence will be extolled to the skies.

Every one can be got over by flattery. The belted earl--"belted earl" is
the correct phrase, I believe. I don't know what it means, unless it be
an earl that wears a belt instead of braces. Some men do. I don't like
it myself. You have to keep the thing so tight for it to be of any use,
and that is uncomfortable. Anyhow, whatever particular kind of an earl
a belted earl may be, he is, I assert, get-overable by flattery; just as
every other human being is, from a duchess to a cat's-meat man, from a
plow boy to a poet--and the poet far easier than the plowboy, for butter
sinks better into wheaten bread than into oaten cakes.

As for love, flattery is its very life-blood. Fill a person with love
for themselves, and what runs over will be your share, says a certain
witty and truthful Frenchman whose name I can't for the life of me
remember. (Confound it! I never can remember names when I want to.) Tell
a girl she is an angel, only more angelic than an angel; that she is
a goddess, only more graceful, queenly, and heavenly than the average
goddess; that she is more fairy-like than Titania, more beautiful than
Venus, more enchanting than Parthenope; more adorable, lovely, and
radiant, in short, than any other woman that ever did live, does live,
or could live, and you will make a very favorable impression upon her
trusting little heart. Sweet innocent! she will believe every word you
say. It is so easy to deceive a woman--in this way.

Dear little souls, they hate flattery, so they tell you; and when you
say, "Ah, darling, it isn't flattery in your case, it's plain, sober
truth; you really are, without exaggeration, the most beautiful, the
most good, the most charming, the most divine, the most perfect human
creature that ever trod this earth," they will smile a quiet, approving
smile, and, leaning against your manly shoulder, murmur that you are a
dear good fellow after all.

By Jove! fancy a man trying to make love on strictly truthful
principles, determining never to utter a word of mere compliment or
hyperbole, but to scrupulously confine himself to exact fact! Fancy his
gazing rapturously into his mistress' eyes and whispering softly to her
that she wasn't, on the whole, bad-looking, as girls went! Fancy his
holding up her little hand and assuring her that it was of a light drab
color shot with red; and telling her as he pressed her to his heart that
her nose, for a turned-up one, seemed rather pretty; and that her eyes
appeared to him, as far as he could judge, to be quite up to the average
standard of such things!

A nice chance he would stand against the man who would tell her that her
face was like a fresh blush rose, that her hair was a wandering sunbeam
imprisoned by her smiles, and her eyes like two evening stars.

There are various ways of flattering, and, of course, you must adapt
your style to your subject. Some people like it laid on with a trowel,
and this requires very little art. With sensible persons, however, it
needs to be done very delicately, and more by suggestion than actual
words. A good many like it wrapped up in the form of an insult, as--"Oh,
you are a perfect fool, you are. You would give your last sixpence to
the first hungry-looking beggar you met;" while others will swallow it
only when administered through the medium of a third person, so that if
C wishes to get at an A of this sort, he must confide to A's particular
friend B that he thinks A a splendid fellow, and beg him, B, not to
mention it, especially to A. Be careful that B is a reliable man,
though, otherwise he won't.

Those fine, sturdy John Bulls who "hate flattery, sir," "Never let
anybody get over me by flattery," etc., etc., are very simply managed.
Flatter them enough upon their absence of vanity, and you can do what
you like with them.

After all, vanity is as much a virtue as a vice. It is easy to recite
copy-book maxims against its sinfulness, but it is a passion that can
move us to good as well as to evil. Ambition is only vanity ennobled. We
want to win praise and admiration--or fame as we prefer to name it--and
so we write great books, and paint grand pictures, and sing sweet songs;
and toil with willing hands in study, loom, and laboratory.

We wish to become rich men, not in order to enjoy ease and comfort--all
that any one man can taste of those may be purchased anywhere for 200
pounds per annum--but that our houses may be bigger and more gaudily
furnished than our neighbors'; that our horses and servants may be
more numerous; that we may dress our wives and daughters in absurd
but expensive clothes; and that we may give costly dinners of which we
ourselves individually do not eat a shilling's worth. And to do this we
aid the world's work with clear and busy brain, spreading commerce among
its peoples, carrying civilization to its remotest corners.

Do not let us abuse vanity, therefore. Rather let us use it. Honor
itself is but the highest form of vanity. The instinct is not confined
solely to Beau Brummels and Dolly Vardens. There is the vanity of the
peacock and the vanity of the eagle. Snobs are vain. But so, too, are
heroes. Come, oh! my young brother bucks, let us be vain together. Let
us join hands and help each other to increase our vanity. Let us be
vain, not of our trousers and hair, but of brave hearts and working
hands, of truth, of purity, of nobility. Let us be too vain to stoop
to aught that is mean or base, too vain for petty selfishness and
little-minded envy, too vain to say an unkind word or do an unkind act.
Let us be vain of being single-hearted, upright gentlemen in the
midst of a world of knaves. Let us pride ourselves upon thinking high
thoughts, achieving great deeds, living good lives.




ON GETTING ON IN THE WORLD.

Not exactly the sort of thing for an idle fellow to think about, is it?
But outsiders, you know, often see most of the game; and sitting in my
arbor by the wayside, smoking my hookah of contentment and eating
the sweet lotus-leaves of indolence, I can look out musingly upon the
whirling throng that rolls and tumbles past me on the great high-road of
life.

Never-ending is the wild procession. Day and night you can hear the
quick tramp of the myriad feet--some running, some walking, some
halting and lame; but all hastening, all eager in the feverish race, all
straining life and limb and heart and soul to reach the ever-receding
horizon of success.

Mark them as they surge along--men and women, old and young, gentle
and simple, fair and foul, rich and poor, merry and sad--all hurrying,
bustling, scrambling. The strong pushing aside the weak, the cunning
creeping past the foolish; those behind elbowing those before; those
in front kicking, as they run, at those behind. Look close and see the
flitting show. Here is an old man panting for breath, and there a timid
maiden driven by a hard and sharp-faced matron; here is a studious
youth, reading "How to Get On in the World" and letting everybody
pass him as he stumbles along with his eyes on his book; here is a
bored-looking man, with a fashionably dressed woman jogging his elbow;
here a boy gazing wistfully back at the sunny village that he
never again will see; here, with a firm and easy step, strides a
broad-shouldered man; and here, with stealthy tread, a thin-faced,
stooping fellow dodges and shuffles upon his way; here, with gaze fixed
always on the ground, an artful rogue carefully works his way from side
to side of the road and thinks he is going forward; and here a youth
with a noble face stands, hesitating as he looks from the distant goal
to the mud beneath his feet.

And now into sight comes a fair girl, with her dainty face growing more
wrinkled at every step, and now a care-worn man, and now a hopeful lad.

A motley throng--a motley throng! Prince and beggar, sinner and saint,
butcher and baker and candlestick maker, tinkers and tailors, and
plowboys and sailors--all jostling along together. Here the counsel
in his wig and gown, and here the old Jew clothes-man under his dingy
tiara; here the soldier in his scarlet, and here the undertaker's mute
in streaming hat-band and worn cotton gloves; here the musty scholar
fumbling his faded leaves, and here the scented actor dangling his showy
seals. Here the glib politician crying his legislative panaceas, and
here the peripatetic Cheap-Jack holding aloft his quack cures for human
ills. Here the sleek capitalist and there the sinewy laborer; here
the man of science and here the shoe-back; here the poet and here
the water-rate collector; here the cabinet minister and there the
ballet-dancer. Here a red-nosed publican shouting the praises of his
vats and there a temperance lecturer at 50 pounds a night; here a judge
and there a swindler; here a priest and there a gambler. Here a jeweled
duchess, smiling and gracious; here a thin lodging-house keeper,
irritable with cooking; and here a wabbling, strutting thing, tawdry in
paint and finery.

Cheek by cheek they struggle onward. Screaming, cursing, and praying,
laughing, singing, and moaning, they rush past side by side. Their speed
never slackens, the race never ends. There is no wayside rest for them,
no halt by cooling fountains, no pause beneath green shades. On, on,
on--on through the heat and the crowd and the dust--on, or they will
be trampled down and lost--on, with throbbing brain and tottering
limbs--on, till the heart grows sick, and the eyes grow blurred, and a
gurgling groan tells those behind they may close up another space.

And yet, in spite of the killing pace and the stony track, who but
the sluggard or the dolt can hold aloof from the course? Who--like the
belated traveler that stands watching fairy revels till he snatches and
drains the goblin cup and springs into the whirling circle--can view the
mad tumult and not be drawn into its midst? Not I, for one. I confess to
the wayside arbor, the pipe of contentment, and the lotus-leaves
being altogether unsuitable metaphors. They sounded very nice and
philosophical, but I'm afraid I am not the sort of person to sit in
arbors smoking pipes when there is any fun going on outside. I think
I more resemble the Irishman who, seeing a crowd collecting, sent his
little girl out to ask if there was going to be a row--"'Cos, if so,
father would like to be in it."

I love the fierce strife. I like to watch it. I like to hear of people
getting on in it--battling their way bravely and fairly--that is, not
slipping through by luck or trickery. It stirs one's old Saxon fighting
blood like the tales of "knights who fought 'gainst fearful odds" that
thrilled us in our school-boy days.

And fighting the battle of life is fighting against fearful odds, too.
There are giants and dragons in this nineteenth century, and the golden
casket that they guard is not so easy to win as it appears in the
story-books. There, Algernon takes one long, last look at the ancestral
hall, dashes the tear-drop from his eye, and goes off--to return in
three years' time, rolling in riches. The authors do not tell us "how
it's done," which is a pity, for it would surely prove exciting.

But then not one novelist in a thousand ever does tell us the real story
of their hero. They linger for a dozen pages over a tea-party, but sum
up a life's history with "he had become one of our merchant princes," or
"he was now a great artist, with the world at his feet." Why, there
is more real life in one of Gilbert's patter-songs than in half the
biographical novels ever written. He relates to us all the various steps
by which his office-boy rose to be the "ruler of the queen's navee," and
explains to us how the briefless barrister managed to become a great and
good judge, "ready to try this breach of promise of marriage." It is
in the petty details, not in the great results, that the interest of
existence lies.

What we really want is a novel showing us all the hidden under-current
of an ambitious man's career--his struggles, and failures, and hopes,
his disappointments and victories. It would be an immense success. I am
sure the wooing of Fortune would prove quite as interesting a tale as
the wooing of any flesh-and-blood maiden, though, by the way, it would
read extremely similar; for Fortune is, indeed, as the ancients painted
her, very like a woman--not quite so unreasonable and inconsistent, but
nearly so--and the pursuit is much the same in one case as in the other.
Ben Jonson's couplet--

     "Court a mistress, she denies you;
     Let her alone, she will court you"--

puts them both in a nutshell. A woman never thoroughly cares for her
lover until he has ceased to care for her; and it is not until you have
snapped your fingers in Fortune's face and turned on your heel that she
begins to smile upon you.

But by that time you do not much care whether she smiles or frowns. Why
could she not have smiled when her smiles would have filled you with
ecstasy? Everything comes too late in this world.

Good people say that it is quite right and proper that it should be so,
and that it proves ambition is wicked.

Bosh! Good people are altogether wrong. (They always are, in my opinion.
We never agree on any single point.) What would the world do without
ambitious people, I should like to know? Why, it would be as flabby as
a Norfolk dumpling. Ambitious people are the leaven which raises it into
wholesome bread. Without ambitious people the world would never get
up. They are busybodies who are about early in the morning, hammering,
shouting, and rattling the fire-irons, and rendering it generally
impossible for the rest of the house to remain in bed.

Wrong to be ambitious, forsooth! The men wrong who, with bent back and
sweating brow, cut the smooth road over which humanity marches forward
from generation to generation! Men wrong for using the talents that
their Master has intrusted to them--for toiling while others play!

Of course they are seeking their reward. Man is not given that godlike
unselfishness that thinks only of others' good. But in working for
themselves they are working for us all. We are so bound together that no
man can labor for himself alone. Each blow he strikes in his own behalf
helps to mold the universe. The stream in struggling onward turns the
mill-wheel; the coral insect, fashioning its tiny cell, joins continents
to one another; and the ambitious man, building a pedestal for himself,
leaves a monument to posterity. Alexander and Caesar fought for their
own ends, but in doing so they put a belt of civilization half round
the earth. Stephenson, to win a fortune, invented the steam-engine; and
Shakespeare wrote his plays in order to keep a comfortable home for Mrs.
Shakespeare and the little Shakespeares.

Contented, unambitious people are all very well in their way. They form
a neat, useful background for great portraits to be painted against, and
they make a respectable, if not particularly intelligent, audience for
the active spirits of the age to play before. I have not a word to say
against contented people so long as they keep quiet. But do not, for
goodness' sake, let them go strutting about, as they are so fond of
doing, crying out that they are the true models for the whole species.
Why, they are the deadheads, the drones in the great hive, the street
crowds that lounge about, gaping at those who are working.

And let them not imagine, either--as they are also fond of doing--that
they are very wise and philosophical and that it is a very artful
thing to be contented. It may be true that "a contented mind is happy
anywhere," but so is a Jerusalem pony, and the consequence is that both
are put anywhere and are treated anyhow. "Oh, you need not bother about
him," is what is said; "he is very contented as he is, and it would be a
pity to disturb him." And so your contented party is passed over and the
discontented man gets his place.

If you are foolish enough to be contented, don't show it, but grumble
with the rest; and if you can do with a little, ask for a great deal.
Because if you don't you won't get any. In this world it is necessary to
adopt the principle pursued by the plaintiff in an action for damages,
and to demand ten times more than you are ready to accept. If you can
feel satisfied with a hundred, begin by insisting on a thousand; if you
start by suggesting a hundred you will only get ten.

It was by not following this simple plan that poor Jean Jacques Rousseau
came to such grief. He fixed the summit of his earthly bliss at living
in an orchard with an amiable woman and a cow, and he never attained
even that. He did get as far as the orchard, but the woman was not
amiable, and she brought her mother with her, and there was no cow. Now,
if he had made up his mind for a large country estate, a houseful of
angels, and a cattle-show, he might have lived to possess his kitchen
garden and one head of live-stock, and even possibly have come across
that _rara-avis_--a really amiable woman.

What a terribly dull affair, too, life must be for contented people!
How heavy the time must hang upon their hands, and what on earth do they
occupy their thoughts with, supposing that they have any? Reading the
paper and smoking seems to be the intellectual food of the majority
of them, to which the more energetic add playing the flute and talking
about the affairs of the next-door neighbor.

They never knew the excitement of expectation nor the stern delight of
accomplished effort, such as stir the pulse of the man who has objects,
and hopes, and plans. To the ambitious man life is a brilliant game--a
game that calls forth all his tact and energy and nerve--a game to be
won, in the long run, by the quick eye and the steady hand, and yet
having sufficient chance about its working out to give it all the
glorious zest of uncertainty. He exults in it as the strong swimmer in
the heaving billows, as the athlete in the wrestle, the soldier in the
battle.

And if he be defeated he wins the grim joy of fighting; if he lose the
race, he, at least, has had a run. Better to work and fail than to sleep
one's life away.

So, walk up, walk up, walk up. Walk up, ladies and gentlemen! walk up,
boys and girls! Show your skill and try your strength; brave your luck
and prove your pluck. Walk up! The show is never closed and the game is
always going. The only genuine sport in all the fair, gentlemen--highly
respectable and strictly moral--patronized by the nobility, clergy, and
gentry. Established in the year one, gentlemen, and been flourishing
ever since--walk up! Walk up, ladies and gentlemen, and take a hand.
There are prizes for all and all can play. There is gold for the man and
fame for the boy; rank for the maiden and pleasure for the fool. So walk
up, ladies and gentlemen, walk up!--all prizes and no blanks; for some
few win, and as to the rest, why--

     "The rapture of pursuing
     Is the prize the vanquished gain."




ON THE WEATHER.

Things do go so contrary-like with me. I wanted to hit upon an
especially novel, out-of-the-way subject for one of these articles. "I
will write one paper about something altogether new," I said to myself;
"something that nobody else has ever written or talked about before; and
then I can have it all my own way." And I went about for days, trying to
think of something of this kind; and I couldn't. And Mrs. Cutting, our
charwoman, came yesterday--I don't mind mentioning her name, because I
know she will not see this book. She would not look at such a frivolous
publication. She never reads anything but the Bible and _Lloyd's Weekly
News_. All other literature she considers unnecessary and sinful.

She said: "Lor', sir, you do look worried."

I said: "Mrs. Cutting, I am trying to think of a subject the discussion
of which will come upon the world in the nature of a startler--some
subject upon which no previous human being has ever said a word--some
subject that will attract by its novelty, invigorate by its surprising
freshness."

She laughed and said I was a funny gentleman.

That's my luck again. When I make serious observations people chuckle;
when I attempt a joke nobody sees it. I had a beautiful one last week.
I thought it so good, and I worked it up and brought it in artfully at
a dinner-party. I forget how exactly, but we had been talking about the
attitude of Shakespeare toward the Reformation, and I said something and
immediately added, "Ah, that reminds me; such a funny thing happened the
other day in Whitechapel." "Oh," said they, "what was that?" "Oh, 'twas
awfully funny," I replied, beginning to giggle myself; "it will make you
roar;" and I told it them.

There was dead silence when I finished--it was one of those long jokes,
too--and then, at last, somebody said: "And that was the joke?"

I assured them that it was, and they were very polite and took my word
for it. All but one old gentleman at the other end of the table, who
wanted to know which was the joke--what he said to her or what she said
to him; and we argued it out.

Some people are too much the other way. I knew a fellow once whose
natural tendency to laugh at everything was so strong that if you wanted
to talk seriously to him, you had to explain beforehand that what you
were going to say would not be amusing. Unless you got him to clearly
understand this, he would go off into fits of merriment over every word
you uttered. I have known him on being asked the time stop short in the
middle of the road, slap his leg, and burst into a roar of laughter.
One never dared say anything really funny to that man. A good joke would
have killed him on the spot.

In the present instance I vehemently repudiated the accusation of
frivolity, and pressed Mrs. Cutting for practical ideas. She then became
thoughtful and hazarded "samplers;" saying that she never heard them
spoken much of now, but that they used to be all the rage when she was a
girl.

I declined samplers and begged her to think again. She pondered a long
while, with a tea-tray in her hands, and at last suggested the weather,
which she was sure had been most trying of late.

And ever since that idiotic suggestion I have been unable to get the
weather out of my thoughts or anything else in.

It certainly is most wretched weather. At all events it is so now at the
time I am writing, and if it isn't particularly unpleasant when I come
to be read it soon will be.

It always is wretched weather according to us. The weather is like the
government--always in the wrong. In summer-time we say it is stifling;
in winter that it is killing; in spring and autumn we find fault with it
for being neither one thing nor the other and wish it would make up its
mind. If it is fine we say the country is being ruined for want of rain;
if it does rain we pray for fine weather. If December passes without
snow, we indignantly demand to know what has become of our good
old-fashioned winters, and talk as if we had been cheated out of
something we had bought and paid for; and when it does snow, our
language is a disgrace to a Christian nation. We shall never be content
until each man makes his own weather and keeps it to himself.

If that cannot be arranged, we would rather do without it altogether.

Yet I think it is only to us in cities that all weather is so unwelcome.
In her own home, the country, Nature is sweet in all her moods. What
can be more beautiful than the snow, falling big with mystery in silent
softness, decking the fields and trees with white as if for a fairy
wedding! And how delightful is a walk when the frozen ground rings
beneath our swinging tread--when our blood tingles in the rare keen air,
and the sheep-dogs' distant bark and children's laughter peals faintly
clear like Alpine bells across the open hills! And then skating!
scudding with wings of steel across the swaying ice, making whirring
music as we fly. And oh, how dainty is spring--Nature at sweet eighteen!

When the little hopeful leaves peep out so fresh and green, so pure and
bright, like young lives pushing shyly out into the bustling world; when
the fruit-tree blossoms, pink and white, like village maidens in their
Sunday frocks, hide each whitewashed cottage in a cloud of fragile
splendor; and the cuckoo's note upon the breeze is wafted through the
woods! And summer, with its deep dark green and drowsy hum--when the
rain-drops whisper solemn secrets to the listening leaves and the
twilight lingers in the lanes! And autumn! ah, how sadly fair, with its
golden glow and the dying grandeur of its tinted woods--its blood-red
sunsets and its ghostly evening mists, with its busy murmur of reapers,
and its laden orchards, and the calling of the gleaners, and the
festivals of praise!

The very rain, and sleet, and hail seem only Nature's useful servants
when found doing their simple duties in the country; and the East Wind
himself is nothing worse than a boisterous friend when we meet him
between the hedge-rows.

But in the city where the painted stucco blisters under the smoky sun,
and the sooty rain brings slush and mud, and the snow lies piled in
dirty heaps, and the chill blasts whistle down dingy streets and shriek
round flaring gas lit corners, no face of Nature charms us. Weather in
towns is like a skylark in a counting-house--out of place and in the
way. Towns ought to be covered in, warmed by hot-water pipes, and
lighted by electricity. The weather is a country lass and does not
appear to advantage in town. We liked well enough to flirt with her in
the hay-field, but she does not seem so fascinating when we meet her
in Pall Mall. There is too much of her there. The frank, free laugh
and hearty voice that sounded so pleasant in the dairy jars against the
artificiality of town-bred life, and her ways become exceedingly trying.

Just lately she has been favoring us with almost incessant rain for
about three weeks; and I am a demned damp, moist, unpleasant body, as
Mr. Mantalini puts it.

Our next-door neighbor comes out in the back garden every now and then
and says it's doing the country a world of good--not his coming out into
the back garden, but the weather. He doesn't understand anything about
it, but ever since he started a cucumber-frame last summer he has
regarded himself in the light of an agriculturist, and talks in this
absurd way with the idea of impressing the rest of the terrace with the
notion that he is a retired farmer. I can only hope that for this once
he is correct, and that the weather really is doing good to something,
because it is doing me a considerable amount of damage. It is spoiling
both my clothes and my temper. The latter I can afford, as I have a good
supply of it, but it wounds me to the quick to see my dear old hats and
trousers sinking, prematurely worn and aged, beneath the cold world's
blasts and snows.

There is my new spring suit, too. A beautiful suit it was, and now it is
hanging up so bespattered with mud I can't bear to look at it.

That was Jim's fault, that was. I should never have gone out in it that
night if it had not been for him. I was just trying it on when he came
in. He threw up his arms with a wild yell the moment he caught sight of
it, and exclaimed that he had "got 'em again!"

I said: "Does it fit all right behind?"

"Spiffin, old man," he replied. And then he wanted to know if I was
coming out.

I said "no" at first, but he overruled me. He said that a man with a
suit like that had no right to stop indoors. "Every citizen," said he,
"owes a duty to the public. Each one should contribute to the general
happiness as far as lies in his power. Come out and give the girls a
treat."

Jim is slangy. I don't know where he picks it up. It certainly is not
from me.

I said: "Do you think it will really please 'em?" He said it would be
like a day in the country to them.

That decided me. It was a lovely evening and I went.

When I got home I undressed and rubbed myself down with whisky, put
my feet in hot water and a mustard-plaster on my chest, had a basin of
gruel and a glass of hot brandy-and-water, tallowed my nose, and went to
bed.

These prompt and vigorous measures, aided by a naturally strong
constitution, were the means of preserving my life; but as for the suit!
Well, there, it isn't a suit; it's a splash-board.

And I did fancy that suit, too. But that's just the way. I never do get
particularly fond of anything in this world but what something dreadful
happens to it. I had a tame rat when I was a boy, and I loved that
animal as only a boy would love an old water-rat; and one day it fell
into a large dish of gooseberry-fool that was standing to cool in the
kitchen, and nobody knew what had become of the poor creature until the
second helping.

I do hate wet weather in town. At least, it is not so much the wet
as the mud that I object to. Somehow or other I seem to possess an
irresistible alluring power over mud. I have only to show myself in the
street on a muddy day to be half-smothered by it. It all comes of being
so attractive, as the old lady said when she was struck by lightning.
Other people can go out on dirty days and walk about for hours without
getting a speck upon themselves; while if I go across the road I come
back a perfect disgrace to be seen (as in my boyish days my poor dear
mother tried often to tell me). If there were only one dab of mud to be
found in the whole of London, I am convinced I should carry it off from
all competitors.

I wish I could return the affection, but I fear I never shall be able
to. I have a horror of what they call the "London particular." I feel
miserable and muggy all through a dirty day, and it is quite a relief
to pull one's clothes off and get into bed, out of the way of it all.
Everything goes wrong in wet weather. I don't know how it is, but there
always seem to me to be more people, and dogs, and perambulators, and
cabs, and carts about in wet weather than at any other time, and they
all get in your way more, and everybody is so disagreeable--except
myself--and it does make me so wild. And then, too, somehow I always
find myself carrying more things in wet weather than in dry; and when
you have a bag, and three parcels, and a newspaper, and it suddenly
comes on to rain, you can't open your umbrella.

Which reminds me of another phase of the weather that I can't bear, and
that is April weather (so called because it always comes in May).
Poets think it very nice. As it does not know its own mind five minutes
together, they liken it to a woman; and it is supposed to be very
charming on that account. I don't appreciate it, myself. Such
lightning-change business may be all very agreeable in a girl. It is no
doubt highly delightful to have to do with a person who grins one moment
about nothing at all, and snivels the next for precisely the same cause,
and who then giggles, and then sulks, and who is rude, and affectionate,
and bad-tempered, and jolly, and boisterous, and silent, and passionate,
and cold, and stand-offish, and flopping, all in one minute (mind,
I don't say this. It is those poets. And they are supposed to
be connoisseurs of this sort of thing); but in the weather the
disadvantages of the system are more apparent. A woman's tears do not
make one wet, but the rain does; and her coldness does not lay the
foundations of asthma and rheumatism, as the east wind is apt to. I
can prepare for and put up with a regularly bad day, but these
ha'porth-of-all-sorts kind of days do not suit me. It aggravates me to
see a bright blue sky above me when I am walking along wet through,
and there is something so exasperating about the way the sun comes out
smiling after a drenching shower, and seems to say: "Lord love you, you
don't mean to say you're wet? Well, I am surprised. Why, it was only my
fun."

They don't give you time to open or shut your umbrella in an English
April, especially if it is an "automaton" one--the umbrella, I mean, not
the April.

I bought an "automaton" once in April, and I did have a time with it! I
wanted an umbrella, and I went into a shop in the Strand and told them
so, and they said:

"Yes, sir. What sort of an umbrella would you like?"

I said I should like one that would keep the rain off, and that would
not allow itself to be left behind in a railway carriage.

"Try an 'automaton,'" said the shopman.

"What's an 'automaton'?" said I.

"Oh, it's a beautiful arrangement," replied the man, with a touch of
enthusiasm. "It opens and shuts itself."

I bought one and found that he was quite correct. It did open and shut
itself. I had no control over it whatever. When it began to rain, which
it did that season every alternate five minutes, I used to try and get
the machine to open, but it would not budge; and then I used to stand
and struggle with the wretched thing, and shake it, and swear at it,
while the rain poured down in torrents. Then the moment the rain ceased
the absurd thing would go up suddenly with a jerk and would not come
down again; and I had to walk about under a bright blue sky, with an
umbrella over my head, wishing that it would come on to rain again, so
that it might not seem that I was insane.

When it did shut it did so unexpectedly and knocked one's hat off.

I don't know why it should be so, but it is an undeniable fact that
there is nothing makes a man look so supremely ridiculous as losing
his hat. The feeling of helpless misery that shoots down one's back on
suddenly becoming aware that one's head is bare is among the most bitter
ills that flesh is heir to. And then there is the wild chase after it,
accompanied by an excitable small dog, who thinks it is a game, and
in the course of which you are certain to upset three or four innocent
children--to say nothing of their mothers--butt a fat old gentleman on
to the top of a perambulator, and carom off a ladies' seminary into the
arms of a wet sweep.

After this, the idiotic hilarity of the spectators and the disreputable
appearance of the hat when recovered appear but of minor importance.

Altogether, what between March winds, April showers, and the entire
absence of May flowers, spring is not a success in cities. It is all
very well in the country, as I have said, but in towns whose population
is anything over ten thousand it most certainly ought to be abolished.
In the world's grim workshops it is like the children--out of place.
Neither shows to advantage amid the dust and din. It seems so sad to see
the little dirt-grimed brats try to play in the noisy courts and muddy
streets. Poor little uncared-for, unwanted human atoms, they are not
children. Children are bright-eyed, chubby, and shy. These are dingy,
screeching elves, their tiny faces seared and withered, their baby
laughter cracked and hoarse.

The spring of life and the spring of the year were alike meant to be
cradled in the green lap of nature. To us in the town spring brings but
its cold winds and drizzling rains. We must seek it among the leafless
woods and the brambly lanes, on the heathy moors and the great still
hills, if we want to feel its joyous breath and hear its silent voices.
There is a glorious freshness in the spring there. The scurrying clouds,
the open bleakness, the rushing wind, and the clear bright air thrill
one with vague energies and hopes. Life, like the landscape around us,
seems bigger, and wider, and freer--a rainbow road leading to unknown
ends. Through the silvery rents that bar the sky we seem to catch a
glimpse of the great hope and grandeur that lies around this little
throbbing world, and a breath of its scent is wafted us on the wings of
the wild March wind.

Strange thoughts we do not understand are stirring in our hearts. Voices
are calling us to some great effort, to some mighty work. But we do not
comprehend their meaning yet, and the hidden echoes within us that would
reply are struggling, inarticulate and dumb.

We stretch our hands like children to the light, seeking to grasp we
know not what. Our thoughts, like the boys' thoughts in the Danish song,
are very long, long thoughts, and very vague; we cannot see their end.

It must be so. All thoughts that peer outside this narrow world cannot
be else than dim and shapeless. The thoughts that we can clearly grasp
are very little thoughts--that two and two make four-that when we are
hungry it is pleasant to eat--that honesty is the best policy; all
greater thoughts are undefined and vast to our poor childish brains. We
see but dimly through the mists that roll around our time-girt isle of
life, and only hear the distant surging of the great sea beyond.




ON CATS AND DOGS.

What I've suffered from them this morning no tongue can tell. It
began with Gustavus Adolphus. Gustavus Adolphus (they call him "Gusty"
down-stairs for short) is a very good sort of dog when he is in the
middle of a large field or on a fairly extensive common, but I won't
have him indoors. He means well, but this house is not his size. He
stretches himself, and over go two chairs and a what-not. He wags his
tail, and the room looks as if a devastating army had marched through
it. He breathes, and it puts the fire out.

At dinner-time he creeps in under the table, lies there for awhile, and
then gets up suddenly; the first intimation we have of his movements
being given by the table, which appears animated by a desire to turn
somersaults. We all clutch at it frantically and endeavor to maintain
it in a horizontal position; whereupon his struggles, he being under
the impression that some wicked conspiracy is being hatched against him,
become fearful, and the final picture presented is generally that of
an overturned table and a smashed-up dinner sandwiched between two
sprawling layers of infuriated men and women.

He came in this morning in his usual style, which he appears to have
founded on that of an American cyclone, and the first thing he did was
to sweep my coffee-cup off the table with his tail, sending the contents
full into the middle of my waistcoat.

I rose from my chair hurriedly and remarking "----," approached him at a
rapid rate. He preceded me in the direction of the door. At the door he
met Eliza coming in with eggs. Eliza observed "Ugh!" and sat down on the
floor, the eggs took up different positions about the carpet, where they
spread themselves out, and Gustavus Adolphus left the room. I called
after him, strongly advising him to go straight downstairs and not let
me see him again for the next hour or so; and he seeming to agree with
me, dodged the coal-scoop and went, while I returned, dried myself and
finished breakfast. I made sure that he had gone in to the yard, but
when I looked into the passage ten minutes later he was sitting at the
top of the stairs. I ordered him down at once, but he only barked and
jumped about, so I went to see what was the matter.

It was Tittums. She was sitting on the top stair but one and wouldn't
let him pass.

Tittums is our kitten. She is about the size of a penny roll. Her back
was up and she was swearing like a medical student.

She does swear fearfully. I do a little that way myself sometimes, but
I am a mere amateur compared with her. To tell you the truth--mind, this
is strictly between ourselves, please; I shouldn't like your wife
to know I said it--the women folk don't understand these things; but
between you and me, you know, I think it does a man good to swear.
Swearing is the safety-valve through which the bad temper that might
otherwise do serious internal injury to his mental mechanism escapes in
harmless vaporing. When a man has said: "Bless you, my dear, sweet
sir. What the sun, moon, and stars made you so careless (if I may be
permitted the expression) as to allow your light and delicate foot to
descend upon my corn with so much force? Is it that you are physically
incapable of comprehending the direction in which you are proceeding?
you nice, clever young man--you!" or words to that effect, he feels
better. Swearing has the same soothing effect upon our angry passions
that smashing the furniture or slamming the doors is so well known to
exercise; added to which it is much cheaper. Swearing clears a man out
like a pen'orth of gunpowder does the wash-house chimney. An occasional
explosion is good for both. I rather distrust a man who never swears,
or savagely kicks the foot-stool, or pokes the fire with unnecessary
violence. Without some outlet, the anger caused by the ever-occurring
troubles of life is apt to rankle and fester within. The petty
annoyance, instead of being thrown from us, sits down beside us and
becomes a sorrow, and the little offense is brooded over till, in
the hot-bed of rumination, it grows into a great injury, under whose
poisonous shadow springs up hatred and revenge.

Swearing relieves the feelings--that is what swearing does. I explained
this to my aunt on one occasion, but it didn't answer with her. She said
I had no business to have such feelings.

That is what I told Tittums. I told her she ought to be ashamed of
herself, brought up in at Christian family as she was, too. I don't
so much mind hearing an old cat swear, but I can't bear to see a mere
kitten give way to it. It seems sad in one so young.

I put Tittums in my pocket and returned to my desk. I forgot her for the
moment, and when I looked I found that she had squirmed out of my pocket
on to the table and was trying to swallow the pen; then she put her leg
into the ink-pot and upset it; then she licked her leg; then she swore
again--at me this time.

I put her down on the floor, and there Tim began rowing with her. I do
wish Tim would mind his own business. It was no concern of his what
she had been doing. Besides, he is not a saint himself. He is only a
two-year-old fox-terrier, and he interferes with everything and gives
himself the airs of a gray-headed Scotch collie.

Tittums' mother has come in and Tim has got his nose scratched, for
which I am remarkably glad. I have put them all three out in the
passage, where they are fighting at the present moment. I'm in a mess
with the ink and in a thundering bad temper; and if anything more in the
cat or dog line comes fooling about me this morning, it had better bring
its own funeral contractor with it.

Yet, in general, I like cats and dogs very much indeed. What jolly chaps
they are! They are much superior to human beings as companions. They
do not quarrel or argue with you. They never talk about themselves but
listen to you while you talk about yourself, and keep up an appearance
of being interested in the conversation. They never make stupid remarks.
They never observe to Miss Brown across a dinner-table that they always
understood she was very sweet on Mr. Jones (who has just married Miss
Robinson). They never mistake your wife's cousin for her husband and
fancy that you are the father-in-law. And they never ask a young author
with fourteen tragedies, sixteen comedies, seven farces, and a couple of
burlesques in his desk why he doesn't write a play.

They never say unkind things. They never tell us of our faults, "merely
for our own good." They do not at inconvenient moments mildly remind us
of our past follies and mistakes. They do not say, "Oh, yes, a lot of
use you are if you are ever really wanted"--sarcastic like. They never
inform us, like our _inamoratas_ sometimes do, that we are not nearly so
nice as we used to be. We are always the same to them.

They are always glad to see us. They are with us in all our humors. They
are merry when we are glad, sober when we feel solemn, and sad when we
are sorrowful.

"Halloo! happy and want a lark? Right you are; I'm your man. Here I am,
frisking round you, leaping, barking, pirouetting, ready for any amount
of fun and mischief. Look at my eyes if you doubt me. What shall it be?
A romp in the drawing-room and never mind the furniture, or a scamper
in the fresh, cool air, a scud across the fields and down the hill,
and won't we let old Gaffer Goggles' geese know what time o' day it is,
neither! Whoop! come along."

Or you'd like to be quiet and think. Very well. Pussy can sit on the arm
of the chair and purr, and Montmorency will curl himself up on the rug
and blink at the fire, yet keeping one eye on you the while, in case you
are seized with any sudden desire in the direction of rats.

And when we bury our face in our hands and wish we had never been born,
they don't sit up very straight and observe that we have brought it all
upon ourselves. They don't even hope it will be a warning to us. But
they come up softly and shove their heads against us. If it is a cat she
stands on your shoulder, rumples your hair, and says, "Lor,' I am sorry
for you, old man," as plain as words can speak; and if it is a dog he
looks up at you with his big, true eyes and says with them, "Well you've
always got me, you know. We'll go through the world together and always
stand by each other, won't we?"

He is very imprudent, a dog is. He never makes it his business to
inquire whether you are in the right or in the wrong, never bothers
as to whether you are going up or down upon life's ladder, never asks
whether you are rich or poor, silly or wise, sinner or saint. You are
his pal. That is enough for him, and come luck or misfortune, good
repute or bad, honor or shame, he is going to stick to you, to
comfort you, guard you, and give his life for you if need be--foolish,
brainless, soulless dog!

Ah! old stanch friend, with your deep, clear eyes and bright, quick
glances, that take in all one has to say before one has time to speak
it, do you know you are only an animal and have no mind? Do you know
that that dull-eyed, gin-sodden lout leaning against the post out there
is immeasurably your intellectual superior? Do you know that every
little-minded, selfish scoundrel who lives by cheating and tricking,
who never did a gentle deed or said a kind word, who never had a thought
that was not mean and low or a desire that was not base, whose every
action is a fraud, whose every utterance is a lie--do you know that
these crawling skulks (and there are millions of them in the world), do
you know they are all as much superior to you as the sun is superior to
rushlight you honorable, brave-hearted, unselfish brute? They are MEN,
you know, and MEN are the greatest, and noblest, and wisest, and best
beings in the whole vast eternal universe. Any man will tell you that.

Yes, poor doggie, you are very stupid, very stupid indeed, compared with
us clever men, who understand all about politics and philosophy, and who
know everything, in short, except what we are and where we came from and
whither we are going, and what everything outside this tiny world and
most things in it are.

Never mind, though, pussy and doggie, we like you both all the better
for your being stupid. We all like stupid things. Men can't bear clever
women, and a woman's ideal man is some one she can call a "dear old
stupid." It is so pleasant to come across people more stupid than
ourselves. We love them at once for being so. The world must be rather
a rough place for clever people. Ordinary folk dislike them, and as for
themselves, they hate each other most cordially.

But there, the clever people are such a very insignificant minority
that it really doesn't much matter if they are unhappy. So long as the
foolish people can be made comfortable the world, as a whole, will get
on tolerably well.

Cats have the credit of being more worldly wise than dogs--of looking
more after their own interests and being less blindly devoted to those
of their friends. And we men and women are naturally shocked at such
selfishness. Cats certainly do love a family that has a carpet in the
kitchen more than a family that has not; and if there are many children
about, they prefer to spend their leisure time next door. But, taken
altogether, cats are libeled. Make a friend of one, and she will stick
to you through thick and thin. All the cats that I have had have been
most firm comrades. I had a cat once that used to follow me about
everywhere, until it even got quite embarrassing, and I had to beg
her, as a personal favor, not to accompany me any further down the High
Street. She used to sit up for me when I was late home and meet me in
the passage. It made me feel quite like a married man, except that she
never asked where I had been and then didn't believe me when I told her.

Another cat I had used to get drunk regularly every day. She would hang
about for hours outside the cellar door for the purpose of sneaking
in on the first opportunity and lapping up the drippings from the
beer-cask. I do not mention this habit of hers in praise of the
species, but merely to show how almost human some of them are. If the
transmigration of souls is a fact, this animal was certainly qualifying
most rapidly for a Christian, for her vanity was only second to her love
of drink. Whenever she caught a particularly big rat, she would bring it
up into the room where we were all sitting, lay the corpse down in the
midst of us, and wait to be praised. Lord! how the girls used to scream.

Poor rats! They seem only to exist so that cats and dogs may gain credit
for killing them and chemists make a fortune by inventing specialties
in poison for their destruction. And yet there is something fascinating
about them. There is a weirdness and uncanniness attaching to them. They
are so cunning and strong, so terrible in their numbers, so cruel, so
secret. They swarm in deserted houses, where the broken casements hang
rotting to the crumbling walls and the doors swing creaking on their
rusty hinges. They know the sinking ship and leave her, no one knows how
or whither. They whisper to each other in their hiding-places how a
doom will fall upon the hall and the great name die forgotten. They do
fearful deeds in ghastly charnel-houses.

No tale of horror is complete without the rats. In stories of ghosts
and murderers they scamper through the echoing rooms, and the gnawing of
their teeth is heard behind the wainscot, and their gleaming eyes peer
through the holes in the worm-eaten tapestry, and they scream in shrill,
unearthly notes in the dead of night, while the moaning wind sweeps,
sobbing, round the ruined turret towers, and passes wailing like a woman
through the chambers bare and tenantless.

And dying prisoners, in their loathsome dungeons, see through the
horrid gloom their small red eyes, like glittering coals, hear in
the death-like silence the rush of their claw-like feet, and start up
shrieking in the darkness and watch through the awful night.

I love to read tales about rats. They make my flesh creep so. I like
that tale of Bishop Hatto and the rats. The wicked bishop, you know, had
ever so much corn stored in his granaries and would not let the starving
people touch it, but when they prayed to him for food gathered them
together in his barn, and then shutting the doors on them, set fire
to the place and burned them all to death. But next day there came
thousands upon thousands of rats, sent to do judgment on him. Then
Bishop Hatto fled to his strong tower that stood in the middle of the
Rhine, and barred himself in and fancied he was safe. But the rats! they
swam the river, they gnawed their way through the thick stone walls, and
ate him alive where he sat.

     "They have whetted their teeth against the stones,
     And now they pick the bishop's bones;
     They gnawed the flesh from every limb,
     For they were sent to do judgment on him."

Oh, it's a lovely tale.

Then there is the story of the Pied Piper of Hamelin, how first he piped
the rats away, and afterward, when the mayor broke faith with him,
drew all the children along with him and went into the mountain. What
a curious old legend that is! I wonder what it means, or has it any
meaning at all? There seems something strange and deep lying hid beneath
the rippling rhyme. It haunts me, that picture of the quaint, mysterious
old piper piping through Hamelin's narrow streets, and the children
following with dancing feet and thoughtful, eager faces. The old folks
try to stay them, but the children pay no heed. They hear the weird,
witched music and must follow. The games are left unfinished and the
playthings drop from their careless hands. They know not whither they
are hastening. The mystic music calls to them, and they follow, heedless
and unasking where. It stirs and vibrates in their hearts and other
sounds grow faint. So they wander through Pied Piper Street away from
Hamelin town.

I get thinking sometimes if the Pied Piper is really dead, or if he may
not still be roaming up and down our streets and lanes, but playing now
so softly that only the children hear him. Why do the little faces look
so grave and solemn when they pause awhile from romping, and stand, deep
wrapt, with straining eyes? They only shake their curly heads and dart
back laughing to their playmates when we question them. But I fancy
myself they have been listening to the magic music of the old Pied
Piper, and perhaps with those bright eyes of theirs have even seen his
odd, fantastic figure gliding unnoticed through the whirl and throng.

Even we grown-up children hear his piping now and then. But the yearning
notes are very far away, and the noisy, blustering world is always
bellowing so loud it drowns the dreamlike melody. One day the sweet, sad
strains will sound out full and clear, and then we too shall, like the
little children, throw our playthings all aside and follow. The loving
hands will be stretched out to stay us, and the voices we have learned
to listen for will cry to us to stop. But we shall push the fond arms
gently back and pass out through the sorrowing house and through the
open door. For the wild, strange music will be ringing in our hearts,
and we shall know the meaning of its song by then.

I wish people could love animals without getting maudlin over them, as
so many do. Women are the most hardened offenders in such respects, but
even our intellectual sex often degrade pets into nuisances by absurd
idolatry. There are the gushing young ladies who, having read "David
Copperfield," have thereupon sought out a small, longhaired dog of
nondescript breed, possessed of an irritating habit of criticising
a man's trousers, and of finally commenting upon the same by a sniff
indicative of contempt and disgust. They talk sweet girlish prattle to
this animal (when there is any one near enough to overhear them), and
they kiss its nose, and put its unwashed head up against their cheek in
a most touching manner; though I have noticed that these caresses are
principally performed when there are young men hanging about.

Then there are the old ladies who worship a fat poodle, scant of breath
and full of fleas. I knew a couple of elderly spinsters once who had
a sort of German sausage on legs which they called a dog between them.
They used to wash its face with warm water every morning. It had a
mutton cutlet regularly for breakfast; and on Sundays, when one of the
ladies went to church, the other always stopped at home to keep the dog
company.

There are many families where the whole interest of life is centered
upon the dog. Cats, by the way, rarely suffer from excess of adulation.
A cat possesses a very fair sense of the ridiculous, and will put
her paw down kindly but firmly upon any nonsense of this kind. Dogs,
however, seem to like it. They encourage their owners in the tomfoolery,
and the consequence is that in the circles I am speaking of what "dear
Fido" has done, does do, will do, won't do, can do, can't do, was doing,
is doing, is going to do, shall do, shan't do, and is about to be going
to have done is the continual theme of discussion from morning till
night.

All the conversation, consisting, as it does, of the very dregs of
imbecility, is addressed to this confounded animal. The family sit in
a row all day long, watching him, commenting upon his actions, telling
each other anecdotes about him, recalling his virtues, and remembering
with tears how one day they lost him for two whole hours, on which
occasion he was brought home in a most brutal manner by the butcher-boy,
who had been met carrying him by the scruff of his neck with one hand,
while soundly cuffing his head with the other.

After recovering from these bitter recollections, they vie with each
other in bursts of admiration for the brute, until some more than
usually enthusiastic member, unable any longer to control his feelings,
swoops down upon the unhappy quadruped in a frenzy of affection,
clutches it to his heart, and slobbers over it. Whereupon the others,
mad with envy, rise up, and seizing as much of the dog as the greed of
the first one has left to them, murmur praise and devotion.

Among these people everything is done through the dog. If you want to
make love to the eldest daughter, or get the old man to lend you
the garden roller, or the mother to subscribe to the Society for the
Suppression of Solo-Cornet Players in Theatrical Orchestras (it's a pity
there isn't one, anyhow), you have to begin with the dog. You must
gain its approbation before they will even listen to you, and if, as is
highly probable, the animal, whose frank, doggy nature has been warped
by the unnatural treatment he has received, responds to your overtures
of friendship by viciously snapping at you, your cause is lost forever.

"If Fido won't take to any one," the father has thoughtfully remarked
beforehand, "I say that man is not to be trusted. You know, Maria, how
often I have said that. Ah! he knows, bless him."

Drat him!

And to think that the surly brute was once an innocent puppy, all legs
and head, full of fun and play, and burning with ambition to become a
big, good dog and bark like mother.

Ah me! life sadly changes us all. The world seems a vast horrible
grinding machine, into which what is fresh and bright and pure is pushed
at one end, to come out old and crabbed and wrinkled at the other.

Look even at Pussy Sobersides, with her dull, sleepy glance, her grave,
slow walk, and dignified, prudish airs; who could ever think that once
she was the blue-eyed, whirling, scampering, head-over-heels, mad little
firework that we call a kitten?

What marvelous vitality a kitten has. It is really something very
beautiful the way life bubbles over in the little creatures. They rush
about, and mew, and spring; dance on their hind legs, embrace everything
with their front ones, roll over and over, lie on their backs and kick.
They don't know what to do with themselves, they are so full of life.

Can you remember, reader, when you and I felt something of the same
sort of thing? Can you remember those glorious days of fresh young
manhood--how, when coming home along the moonlit road, we felt too full
of life for sober walking, and had to spring and skip, and wave our
arms, and shout till belated farmers' wives thought--and with good
reason, too--that we were mad, and kept close to the hedge, while we
stood and laughed aloud to see them scuttle off so fast and made their
blood run cold with a wild parting whoop, and the tears came, we knew
not why? Oh, that magnificent young LIFE! that crowned us kings of the
earth; that rushed through every tingling vein till we seemed to walk on
air; that thrilled through our throbbing brains and told us to go forth
and conquer the whole world; that welled up in our young hearts till we
longed to stretch out our arms and gather all the toiling men and women
and the little children to our breast and love them all--all. Ah! they
were grand days, those deep, full days, when our coming life, like an
unseen organ, pealed strange, yearnful music in our ears, and our young
blood cried out like a war-horse for the battle. Ah, our pulse beats
slow and steady now, and our old joints are rheumatic, and we love our
easy-chair and pipe and sneer at boys' enthusiasm. But oh for one brief
moment of that god-like life again!




ON BEING SHY.

All great literary men are shy. I am myself, though I am told it is
hardly noticeable.

I am glad it is not. It used to be extremely prominent at one time, and
was the cause of much misery to myself and discomfort to every one about
me--my lady friends especially complained most bitterly about it.

A shy man's lot is not a happy one. The men dislike him, the women
despise him, and he dislikes and despises himself. Use brings him no
relief, and there is no cure for him except time; though I once came
across a delicious recipe for overcoming the misfortune. It appeared
among the "answers to correspondents" in a small weekly journal and
ran as follows--I have never forgotten it: "Adopt an easy and pleasing
manner, especially toward ladies."

Poor wretch! I can imagine the grin with which he must have read that
advice. "Adopt an easy and pleasing manner, especially toward ladies,"
forsooth! Don't you adopt anything of the kind, my dear young shy
friend. Your attempt to put on any other disposition than your own will
infallibly result in your becoming ridiculously gushing and offensively
familiar. Be your own natural self, and then you will only be thought to
be surly and stupid.

The shy man does have some slight revenge upon society for the torture
it inflicts upon him. He is able, to a certain extent, to communicate
his misery. He frightens other people as much as they frighten him.
He acts like a damper upon the whole room, and the most jovial spirits
become in his presence depressed and nervous.

This is a good deal brought about by misunderstanding. Many people
mistake the shy man's timidity for overbearing arrogance and are
awed and insulted by it. His awkwardness is resented as insolent
carelessness, and when, terror-stricken at the first word addressed to
him, the blood rushes to his head and the power of speech completely
fails him, he is regarded as an awful example of the evil effects of
giving way to passion.

But, indeed, to be misunderstood is the shy man's fate on every
occasion; and whatever impression he endeavors to create, he is sure
to convey its opposite. When he makes a joke, it is looked upon as a
pretended relation of fact and his want of veracity much condemned.
His sarcasm is accepted as his literal opinion and gains for him the
reputation of being an ass, while if, on the other hand, wishing to
ingratiate himself, he ventures upon a little bit of flattery, it is
taken for satire and he is hated ever afterward.

These and the rest of a shy man's troubles are always very amusing to
other people, and have afforded material for comic writing from time
immemorial. But if we look a little deeper we shall find there is a
pathetic, one might almost say a tragic, side to the picture. A shy
man means a lonely man--a man cut off from all companionship, all
sociability. He moves about the world, but does not mix with it. Between
him and his fellow-men there runs ever an impassable barrier--a strong,
invisible wall that, trying in vain to scale, he but bruises himself
against. He sees the pleasant faces and hears the pleasant voices on the
other side, but he cannot stretch his hand across to grasp another hand.
He stands watching the merry groups, and he longs to speak and to claim
kindred with them. But they pass him by, chatting gayly to one another,
and he cannot stay them. He tries to reach them, but his prison walls
move with him and hem him in on every side. In the busy street, in the
crowded room, in the grind of work, in the whirl of pleasure, amid the
many or amid the few--wherever men congregate together, wherever the
music of human speech is heard and human thought is flashed from human
eyes, there, shunned and solitary, the shy man, like a leper, stands
apart. His soul is full of love and longing, but the world knows it not.
The iron mask of shyness is riveted before his face, and the man beneath
is never seen. Genial words and hearty greetings are ever rising to his
lips, but they die away in unheard whispers behind the steel clamps. His
heart aches for the weary brother, but his sympathy is dumb. Contempt
and indignation against wrong choke up his throat, and finding no
safety-valve whence in passionate utterance they may burst forth, they
only turn in again and harm him. All the hate and scorn and love of a
deep nature such as the shy man is ever cursed by fester and corrupt
within, instead of spending themselves abroad, and sour him into a
misanthrope and cynic.

Yes, shy men, like ugly women, have a bad time of it in this world, to
go through which with any comfort needs the hide of a rhinoceros. Thick
skin is, indeed, our moral clothes, and without it we are not fit to be
seen about in civilized society. A poor gasping, blushing creature, with
trembling knees and twitching hands, is a painful sight to every one,
and if it cannot cure itself, the sooner it goes and hangs itself the
better.

The disease can be cured. For the comfort of the shy, I can assure them
of that from personal experience. I do not like speaking about myself,
as may have been noticed, but in the cause of humanity I on this
occasion will do so, and will confess that at one time I was, as the
young man in the Bab Ballad says, "the shyest of the shy," and "whenever
I was introduced to any pretty maid, my knees they knocked together just
as if I was afraid." Now, I would--nay, have--on this very day
before yesterday I did the deed. Alone and entirely by myself (as the
school-boy said in translating the "Bellum Gallicum") did I beard a
railway refreshment-room young lady in her own lair. I rebuked her in
terms of mingled bitterness and sorrow for her callousness and want of
condescension. I insisted, courteously but firmly, on being accorded
that deference and attention that was the right of the traveling Briton,
and at the end I looked her full in the face. Need I say more?

True, immediately after doing so I left the room with what may
possibly have appeared to be precipitation and without waiting for any
refreshment. But that was because I had changed my mind, not because I
was frightened, you understand.

One consolation that shy folk can take unto themselves is that shyness
is certainly no sign of stupidity. It is easy enough for bull-headed
clowns to sneer at nerves, but the highest natures are not necessarily
those containing the greatest amount of moral brass. The horse is not an
inferior animal to the cock-sparrow, nor the deer of the forest to the
pig. Shyness simply means extreme sensibility, and has nothing whatever
to do with self-consciousness or with conceit, though its relationship
to both is continually insisted upon by the poll-parrot school of
philosophy.

Conceit, indeed, is the quickest cure for it. When it once begins to
dawn upon you that you are a good deal cleverer than any one else in
this world, bashfulness becomes shocked and leaves you. When you can
look round a roomful of people and think that each one is a mere child
in intellect compared with yourself you feel no more shy of them than
you would of a select company of magpies or orang-outangs.

Conceit is the finest armor that a man can wear. Upon its smooth,
impenetrable surface the puny dagger-thrusts of spite and envy glance
harmlessly aside. Without that breast-plate the sword of talent cannot
force its way through the battle of life, for blows have to be borne as
well as dealt. I do not, of course, speak of the conceit that displays
itself in an elevated nose and a falsetto voice. That is not real
conceit--that is only playing at being conceited; like children play
at being kings and queens and go strutting about with feathers and
long trains. Genuine conceit does not make a man objectionable. On the
contrary, it tends to make him genial, kind-hearted, and simple. He
has no need of affectation--he is far too well satisfied with his own
character; and his pride is too deep-seated to appear at all on
the outside. Careless alike of praise or blame, he can afford to be
truthful. Too far, in fancy, above the rest of mankind to trouble
about their petty distinctions, he is equally at home with duke or
costermonger. And valuing no one's standard but his own, he is never
tempted to practice that miserable pretense that less self-reliant
people offer up as an hourly sacrifice to the god of their neighbor's
opinion.

The shy man, on the other hand, is humble--modest of his own judgment
and over-anxious concerning that of others. But this in the case of
a young man is surely right enough. His character is unformed. It is
slowly evolving itself out of a chaos of doubt and disbelief. Before
the growing insight and experience the diffidence recedes. A man rarely
carries his shyness past the hobbledehoy period. Even if his own inward
strength does not throw it off, the rubbings of the world generally
smooth it down. You scarcely ever meet a really shy man--except
in novels or on the stage, where, by the bye, he is much admired,
especially by the women.

There, in that supernatural land, he appears as a fair-haired and
saintlike young man--fair hair and goodness always go together on the
stage. No respectable audience would believe in one without the other.
I knew an actor who mislaid his wig once and had to rush on to play the
hero in his own hair, which was jet-black, and the gallery howled at
all his noble sentiments under the impression that he was the villain.
He--the shy young man--loves the heroine, oh so devotedly (but only
in asides, for he dare not tell her of it), and he is so noble and
unselfish, and speaks in such a low voice, and is so good to his mother;
and the bad people in the play, they laugh at him and jeer at him, but
he takes it all so gently, and in the end it transpires that he is such
a clever man, though nobody knew it, and then the heroine tells him she
loves him, and he is so surprised, and oh, so happy! and everybody loves
him and asks him to forgive them, which he does in a few well-chosen and
sarcastic words, and blesses them; and he seems to have generally such
a good time of it that all the young fellows who are not shy long to be
shy. But the really shy man knows better. He knows that it is not quite
so pleasant in reality. He is not quite so interesting there as in the
fiction. He is a little more clumsy and stupid and a little less devoted
and gentle, and his hair is much darker, which, taken altogether,
considerably alters the aspect of the case.

The point where he does resemble his ideal is in his faithfulness. I am
fully prepared to allow the shy young man that virtue: he is constant in
his love. But the reason is not far to seek. The fact is it exhausts
all his stock of courage to look one woman in the face, and it would
be simply impossible for him to go through the ordeal with a second.
He stands in far too much dread of the whole female sex to want to go
gadding about with many of them. One is quite enough for him.

Now, it is different with the young man who is not shy. He has
temptations which his bashful brother never encounters. He looks around
and everywhere sees roguish eyes and laughing lips. What more natural
than that amid so many roguish eyes and laughing lips he should become
confused and, forgetting for the moment which particular pair of roguish
ayes and laughing lips it is that he belongs to, go off making love
to the wrong set. The shy man, who never looks at anything but his own
boots, sees not and is not tempted. Happy shy man!

Not but what the shy man himself would much rather not be happy in that
way. He longs to "go it" with the others, and curses himself every day
for not being able to. He will now and again, screwing up his courage
by a tremendous effort, plunge into roguishness. But it is always a
terrible _fiasco_, and after one or two feeble flounders he crawls out
again, limp and pitiable.

I say "pitiable," though I am afraid he never is pitied. There are
certain misfortunes which, while inflicting a vast amount of suffering
upon their victims, gain for them no sympathy. Losing an umbrella,
falling in love, toothache, black eyes, and having your hat sat upon may
be mentioned as a few examples, but the chief of them all is shyness.
The shy man is regarded as an animate joke. His tortures are the sport
of the drawing-room arena and are pointed out and discussed with much
gusto.

"Look," cry his tittering audience to each other; "he's blushing!"

"Just watch his legs," says one.

"Do you notice how he is sitting?" adds another: "right on the edge of
the chair."

"Seems to have plenty of color," sneers a military-looking gentleman.

"Pity he's got so many hands," murmurs an elderly lady, with her own
calmly folded on her lap. "They quite confuse him."

"A yard or two off his feet wouldn't be a disadvantage," chimes in the
comic man, "especially as he seems so anxious to hide them."

And then another suggests that with such a voice he ought to have been
a sea-captain. Some draw attention to the desperate way in which he is
grasping his hat. Some comment upon his limited powers of conversation.
Others remark upon the troublesome nature of his cough. And so on, until
his peculiarities and the company are both thoroughly exhausted.

His friends and relations make matters still more unpleasant for the
poor boy (friends and relations are privileged to be more disagreeable
than other people). Not content with making fun of him among themselves,
they insist on his seeing the joke. They mimic and caricature him for
his own edification. One, pretending to imitate him, goes outside
and comes in again in a ludicrously nervous manner, explaining to him
afterward that that is the way he--meaning the shy fellow--walks into
a room; or, turning to him with "This is the way you shake hands,"
proceeds to go through a comic pantomime with the rest of the room,
taking hold of every one's hand as if it were a hot plate and flabbily
dropping it again. And then they ask him why he blushes, and why he
stammers, and why he always speaks in an almost inaudible tone, as if
they thought he did it on purpose. Then one of them, sticking out his
chest and strutting about the room like a pouter-pigeon, suggests quite
seriously that that is the style he should adopt. The old man slaps him
on the back and says: "Be bold, my boy. Don't be afraid of any one." The
mother says, "Never do anything that you need be ashamed of, Algernon,
and then you never need be ashamed of anything you do," and, beaming
mildly at him, seems surprised at the clearness of her own logic. The
boys tell him that he's "worse than a girl," and the girls repudiate the
implied slur upon their sex by indignantly exclaiming that they are sure
no girl would be half as bad.

They are quite right; no girl would be. There is no such thing as a shy
woman, or, at all events, I have never come across one, and until I do I
shall not believe in them. I know that the generally accepted belief
is quite the reverse. All women are supposed to be like timid, startled
fawns, blushing and casting down their gentle eyes when looked at and
running away when spoken to; while we men are supposed to be a bold and
rollicky lot, and the poor dear little women admire us for it, but are
terribly afraid of us. It is a pretty theory, but, like most generally
accepted theories, mere nonsense. The girl of twelve is self-contained
and as cool as the proverbial cucumber, while her brother of twenty
stammers and stutters by her side. A woman will enter a concert-room
late, interrupt the performance, and disturb the whole audience
without moving a hair, while her husband follows her, a crushed heap of
apologizing misery.

The superior nerve of women in all matters connected with love, from the
casting of the first sheep's-eye down to the end of the honeymoon, is
too well acknowledged to need comment. Nor is the example a fair one to
cite in the present instance, the positions not being equally balanced.
Love is woman's business, and in "business" we all lay aside our natural
weaknesses--the shyest man I ever knew was a photographic tout.




ON BABIES.

Oh, yes, I do--I know a lot about 'em. I was one myself once, though not
long--not so long as my clothes. They were very long, I recollect, and
always in my way when I wanted to kick. Why do babies have such yards of
unnecessary clothing? It is not a riddle. I really want to know. I never
could understand it. Is it that the parents are ashamed of the size of
the child and wish to make believe that it is longer than it actually
is? I asked a nurse once why it was. She said:

"Lor', sir, they always have long clothes, bless their little hearts."

And when I explained that her answer, although doing credit to her
feelings, hardly disposed of my difficulty, she replied:

"Lor', sir, you wouldn't have 'em in short clothes, poor little dears?"
And she said it in a tone that seemed to imply I had suggested some
unmanly outrage.

Since than I have felt shy at making inquiries on the subject, and
the reason--if reason there be--is still a mystery to me. But indeed,
putting them in any clothes at all seems absurd to my mind. Goodness
knows there is enough of dressing and undressing to be gone through
in life without beginning it before we need; and one would think that
people who live in bed might at all events be spared the torture. Why
wake the poor little wretches up in the morning to take one lot of
clothes off, fix another lot on, and put them to bed again, and then
at night haul them out once more, merely to change everything back?
And when all is done, what difference is there, I should like to know,
between a baby's night-shirt and the thing it wears in the day-time?

Very likely, however, I am only making myself ridiculous--I often do,
so I am informed--and I will therefore say no more upon this matter
of clothes, except only that it would be of great convenience if some
fashion were adopted enabling you to tell a boy from a girl.

At present it is most awkward. Neither hair, dress, nor conversation
affords the slightest clew, and you are left to guess. By some
mysterious law of nature you invariably guess wrong, and are thereupon
regarded by all the relatives and friends as a mixture of fool and
knave, the enormity of alluding to a male babe as "she" being only
equaled by the atrocity of referring to a female infant as "he".
Whichever sex the particular child in question happens not to belong to
is considered as beneath contempt, and any mention of it is taken as a
personal insult to the family.

And as you value your fair name do not attempt to get out of the
difficulty by talking of "it."

There are various methods by which you may achieve ignominy and shame.
By murdering a large and respected family in cold blood and afterward
depositing their bodies in the water companies' reservoir, you will gain
much unpopularity in the neighborhood of your crime, and even robbing a
church will get you cordially disliked, especially by the vicar. But
if you desire to drain to the dregs the fullest cup of scorn and hatred
that a fellow human creature can pour out for you, let a young mother
hear you call dear baby "it."

Your best plan is to address the article as "little angel." The noun
"angel" being of common gender suits the case admirably, and the epithet
is sure of being favorably received. "Pet" or "beauty" are useful for
variety's sake, but "angel" is the term that brings you the greatest
credit for sense and good-feeling. The word should be preceded by a
short giggle and accompanied by as much smile as possible. And whatever
you do, don't forget to say that the child has got its father's nose.
This "fetches" the parents (if I may be allowed a vulgarism) more than
anything. They will pretend to laugh at the idea at first and will say,
"Oh, nonsense!" You must then get excited and insist that it is a fact.
You need have no conscientious scruples on the subject, because the
thing's nose really does resemble its father's--at all events quite as
much as it does anything else in nature--being, as it is, a mere smudge.

Do not despise these hints, my friends. There may come a time when,
with mamma on one side and grand mamma on the other, a group of admiring
young ladies (not admiring you, though) behind, and a bald-headed dab of
humanity in front, you will be extremely thankful for some idea of
what to say. A man--an unmarried man, that is--is never seen to such
disadvantage as when undergoing the ordeal of "seeing baby." A cold
shudder runs down his back at the bare proposal, and the sickly smile
with which he says how delighted he shall be ought surely to move even
a mother's heart, unless, as I am inclined to believe, the whole
proceeding is a mere device adopted by wives to discourage the visits of
bachelor friends.

It is a cruel trick, though, whatever its excuse may be. The bell is
rung and somebody sent to tell nurse to bring baby down. This is the
signal for all the females present to commence talking "baby," during
which time you are left to your own sad thoughts and the speculations
upon the practicability of suddenly recollecting an important
engagement, and the likelihood of your being believed if you do.
Just when you have concocted an absurdly implausible tale about a
man outside, the door opens, and a tall, severe-looking woman enters,
carrying what at first sight appears to be a particularly skinny
bolster, with the feathers all at one end. Instinct, however, tells
you that this is the baby, and you rise with a miserable attempt at
appearing eager. When the first gush of feminine enthusiasm with which
the object in question is received has died out, and the number of
ladies talking at once has been reduced to the ordinary four or five,
the circle of fluttering petticoats divides, and room is made for you
to step forward. This you do with much the same air that you would walk
into the dock at Bow Street, and then, feeling unutterably miserable,
you stand solemnly staring at the child. There is dead silence, and you
know that every one is waiting for you to speak. You try to think
of something to say, but find, to your horror, that your reasoning
faculties have left you. It is a moment of despair, and your evil
genius, seizing the opportunity, suggests to you some of the most
idiotic remarks that it is possible for a human being to perpetrate.
Glancing round with an imbecile smile, you sniggeringly observe that "it
hasn't got much hair has it?" Nobody answers you for a minute, but at
last the stately nurse says with much gravity:

"It is not customary for children five weeks old to have long hair."
Another silence follows this, and you feel you are being given a second
chance, which you avail yourself of by inquiring if it can walk yet, or
what they feed it on.

By this time you have got to be regarded as not quite right in your
head, and pity is the only thing felt for you. The nurse, however, is
determined that, insane or not, there shall be no shirking and that you
shall go through your task to the end. In the tones of a high priestess
directing some religious mystery she says, holding the bundle toward
you:

"Take her in your arms, sir." You are too crushed to offer any
resistance and so meekly accept the burden. "Put your arm more down her
middle, sir," says the high-priestess, and then all step back and watch
you intently as though you were going to do a trick with it.

What to do you know no more than you did what to say. It is certain
something must be done, and the only thing that occurs to you is
to heave the unhappy infant up and down to the accompaniment of
"oopsee-daisy," or some remark of equal intelligence. "I wouldn't jig
her, sir, if I were you," says the nurse; "a very little upsets her."
You promptly decide not to jig her and sincerely hope that you have not
gone too far already.

At this point the child itself, who has hitherto been regarding you with
an expression of mingled horror and disgust, puts an end to the nonsense
by beginning to yell at the top of its voice, at which the priestess
rushes forward and snatches it from you with "There! there! there!
What did ums do to ums?" "How very extraordinary!" you say pleasantly.
"Whatever made it go off like that?" "Oh, why, you must have done
something to her!" says the mother indignantly; "the child wouldn't
scream like that for nothing." It is evident they think you have been
running pins into it.

The brat is calmed at last, and would no doubt remain quiet enough, only
some mischievous busybody points you out again with "Who's this, baby?"
and the intelligent child, recognizing you, howls louder than ever.

Whereupon some fat old lady remarks that "it's strange how children take
a dislike to any one." "Oh, they know," replies another mysteriously.
"It's a wonderful thing," adds a third; and then everybody looks
sideways at you, convinced you are a scoundrel of the blackest dye; and
they glory in the beautiful idea that your true character, unguessed
by your fellow-men, has been discovered by the untaught instinct of a
little child.

Babies, though, with all their crimes and errors, are not without their
use--not without use, surely, when they fill an empty heart; not without
use when, at their call, sunbeams of love break through care-clouded
faces; not without use when their little fingers press wrinkles into
smiles.

Odd little people! They are the unconscious comedians of the world's
great stage. They supply the humor in life's all-too-heavy drama.
Each one, a small but determined opposition to the order of things in
general, is forever doing the wrong thing at the wrong time, in the
wrong place and in the wrong way. The nurse-girl who sent Jenny to
see what Tommy and Totty were doing and "tell 'em they mustn't" knew
infantile nature. Give an average baby a fair chance, and if it doesn't
do something it oughtn't to a doctor should be called in at once.

They have a genius for doing the most ridiculous things, and they do
them in a grave, stoical manner that is irresistible. The business-like
air with which two of them will join hands and proceed due east at a
break-neck toddle, while an excitable big sister is roaring for them to
follow her in a westerly direction, is most amusing--except, perhaps,
for the big sister. They walk round a soldier, staring at his legs with
the greatest curiosity, and poke him to see if he is real. They stoutly
maintain, against all argument and much to the discomfort of the victim,
that the bashful young man at the end of the 'bus is "dadda." A crowded
street-corner suggests itself to their minds as a favorable spot for the
discussion of family affairs at a shrill treble. When in the middle of
crossing the road they are seized with a sudden impulse to dance, and
the doorstep of a busy shop is the place they always select for sitting
down and taking off their shoes.

When at home they find the biggest walking-stick in the house or an
umbrella--open preferred-of much assistance in getting upstairs.
They discover that they love Mary Ann at the precise moment when that
faithful domestic is blackleading the stove, and nothing will relieve
their feelings but to embrace her then and there. With regard to food,
their favorite dishes are coke and cat's meat. They nurse pussy upside
down, and they show their affection for the dog by pulling his tail.

They are a deal of trouble, and they make a place untidy and they cost
a lot of money to keep; but still you would not have the house without
them. It would not be home without their noisy tongues and their
mischief-making hands. Would not the rooms seem silent without their
pattering feet, and might not you stray apart if no prattling voices
called you together?

It should be so, and yet I have sometimes thought the tiny hand seemed
as a wedge, dividing. It is a bearish task to quarrel with that purest
of all human affections--that perfecting touch to a woman's life--a
mother's love. It is a holy love, that we coarser-fibered men can hardly
understand, and I would not be deemed to lack reverence for it when I
say that surely it need not swallow up all other affection. The baby
need not take your whole heart, like the rich man who walled up the
desert well. Is there not another thirsty traveler standing by?

In your desire to be a good mother, do not forget to be a good wife. No
need for all the thought and care to be only for one. Do not, whenever
poor Edwin wants you to come out, answer indignantly, "What, and leave
baby!" Do not spend all your evenings upstairs, and do not confine your
conversation exclusively to whooping-cough and measles. My dear little
woman, the child is not going to die every time it sneezes, the house is
not bound to get burned down and the nurse run away with a soldier every
time you go outside the front door; nor the cat sure to come and sit on
the precious child's chest the moment you leave the bedside. You worry
yourself a good deal too much about that solitary chick, and you worry
everybody else too. Try and think of your other duties, and your pretty
face will not be always puckered into wrinkles, and there will be
cheerfulness in the parlor as well as in the nursery. Think of your big
baby a little. Dance him about a bit; call him pretty names; laugh at
him now and then. It is only the first baby that takes up the whole of
a woman's time. Five or six do not require nearly so much attention as
one. But before then the mischief has been done. A house where there
seems no room for him and a wife too busy to think of him have lost
their hold on that so unreasonable husband of yours, and he has learned
to look elsewhere for comfort and companionship.

But there, there, there! I shall get myself the character of a
baby-hater if I talk any more in this strain. And Heaven knows I am not
one. Who could be, to look into the little innocent faces clustered
in timid helplessness round those great gates that open down into the
world?

The world--the small round world! what a vast mysterious place it must
seem to baby eyes! What a trackless continent the back garden appears!
What marvelous explorations they make in the cellar under the stairs!
With what awe they gaze down the long street, wondering, like us bigger
babies when we gaze up at the stars, where it all ends!

And down that longest street of all--that long, dim street of life that
stretches out before them--what grave, old-fashioned looks they seem
to cast! What pitiful, frightened looks sometimes! I saw a little mite
sitting on a doorstep in a Soho slum one night, and I shall never forget
the look that the gas-lamp showed me on its wizen face--a look of dull
despair, as if from the squalid court the vista of its own squalid life
had risen, ghostlike, and struck its heart dead with horror.

Poor little feet, just commencing the stony journey! We old travelers,
far down the road, can only pause to wave a hand to you. You come out of
the dark mist, and we, looking back, see you, so tiny in the distance,
standing on the brow of the hill, your arms stretched out toward us.
God speed you! We would stay and take your little hands in ours, but the
murmur of the great sea is in our ears and we may not linger. We must
hasten down, for the shadowy ships are waiting to spread their sable
sails.




ON EATING AND DRINKING.

I always was fond of eating and drinking, even as a child--especially
eating, in those early days. I had an appetite then, also a digestion. I
remember a dull-eyed, livid-complexioned gentleman coming to dine at
our house once. He watched me eating for about five minutes, quite
fascinated seemingly, and then he turned to my father with--

"Does your boy ever suffer from dyspepsia?"

"I never heard him complain of anything of that kind," replied my
father. "Do you ever suffer from dyspepsia, Colly wobbles?" (They called
me Colly wobbles, but it was not my real name.)

"No, pa," I answered. After which I added:

"What is dyspepsia, pa?"

My livid-complexioned friend regarded me with a look of mingled
amazement and envy. Then in a tone of infinite pity he slowly said:

"You will know--some day."

My poor, dear mother used to say she liked to see me eat, and it has
always been a pleasant reflection to me since that I must have given
her much gratification in that direction. A growing, healthy lad, taking
plenty of exercise and careful to restrain himself from indulging in
too much study, can generally satisfy the most exacting expectations as
regards his feeding powers.

It is amusing to see boys eat when you have not got to pay for it. Their
idea of a square meal is a pound and a half of roast beef with five
or six good-sized potatoes (soapy ones preferred as being more
substantial), plenty of greens, and four thick slices of Yorkshire
pudding, followed by a couple of currant dumplings, a few green apples,
a pen'orth of nuts, half a dozen jumbles, and a bottle of ginger-beer.
After that they play at horses.

How they must despise us men, who require to sit quiet for a couple
of hours after dining off a spoonful of clear soup and the wing of a
chicken!

But the boys have not all the advantages on their side. A boy never
enjoys the luxury of being satisfied. A boy never feels full. He can
never stretch out his legs, put his hands behind his head, and, closing
his eyes, sink into the ethereal blissfulness that encompasses the
well-dined man. A dinner makes no difference whatever to a boy. To a
man it is as a good fairy's potion, and after it the world appears
a brighter and a better place. A man who has dined satisfactorily
experiences a yearning love toward all his fellow-creatures. He strokes
the cat quite gently and calls it "poor pussy," in tones full of the
tenderest emotion. He sympathizes with the members of the German band
outside and wonders if they are cold; and for the moment he does not
even hate his wife's relations.

A good dinner brings out all the softer side of a man. Under its genial
influence the gloomy and morose become jovial and chatty. Sour, starchy
individuals, who all the rest of the day go about looking as if they
lived on vinegar and Epsom salts, break out into wreathed smiles after
dinner, and exhibit a tendency to pat small children on the head and
to talk to them--vaguely--about sixpences. Serious men thaw and become
mildly cheerful, and snobbish young men of the heavy-mustache type
forget to make themselves objectionable.

I always feel sentimental myself after dinner. It is the only time when
I can properly appreciate love-stories. Then, when the hero clasps "her"
to his heart in one last wild embrace and stifles a sob, I feel as sad
as though I had dealt at whist and turned up only a deuce; and when the
heroine dies in the end I weep. If I read the same tale early in the
morning I should sneer at it. Digestion, or rather indigestion, has
a marvelous effect upon the heart. If I want to write any thing very
pathetic--I mean, if I want to try to write anything very pathetic--I
eat a large plateful of hot buttered muffins about an hour beforehand,
and then by the time I sit down to my work a feeling of unutterable
melancholy has come over me. I picture heartbroken lovers parting
forever at lonely wayside stiles, while the sad twilight deepens
around them, and only the tinkling of a distant sheep-bell breaks the
sorrow-laden silence. Old men sit and gaze at withered flowers till
their sight is dimmed by the mist of tears. Little dainty maidens wait
and watch at open casements; but "he cometh not," and the heavy years
roll by and the sunny gold tresses wear white and thin. The babies that
they dandled have become grown men and women with podgy torments of
their own, and the playmates that they laughed with are lying very
silent under the waving grass. But still they wait and watch, till the
dark shadows of the unknown night steal up and gather round them and the
world with its childish troubles fades from their aching eyes.

I see pale corpses tossed on white-foamed waves, and death-beds stained
with bitter tears, and graves in trackless deserts. I hear the wild
wailing of women, the low moaning of little children, the dry sobbing of
strong men. It's all the muffins. I could not conjure up one melancholy
fancy upon a mutton chop and a glass of champagne.

A full stomach is a great aid to poetry, and indeed no sentiment of any
kind can stand upon an empty one. We have not time or inclination
to indulge in fanciful troubles until we have got rid of our real
misfortunes. We do not sigh over dead dicky-birds with the bailiff
in the house, and when we do not know where on earth to get our next
shilling from, we do not worry as to whether our mistress' smiles are
cold, or hot, or lukewarm, or anything else about them.

Foolish people--when I say "foolish people" in this contemptuous way I
mean people who entertain different opinions to mine. If there is one
person I do despise more than another, it is the man who does not think
exactly the same on all topics as I do--foolish people, I say, then,
who have never experienced much of either, will tell you that mental
distress is far more agonizing than bodily. Romantic and touching
theory! so comforting to the love-sick young sprig who looks down
patronizingly at some poor devil with a white starved face and thinks to
himself, "Ah, how happy you are compared with me!"--so soothing to fat
old gentlemen who cackle about the superiority of poverty over riches.
But it is all nonsense--all cant. An aching head soon makes one forget
an aching heart. A broken finger will drive away all recollections of
an empty chair. And when a man feels really hungry he does not feel
anything else.

We sleek, well-fed folk can hardly realize what feeling hungry is like.
We know what it is to have no appetite and not to care for the dainty
victuals placed before us, but we do not understand what it means to
sicken for food--to die for bread while others waste it--to gaze with
famished eyes upon coarse fare steaming behind dingy windows, longing
for a pen'orth of pea pudding and not having the penny to buy it--to
feel that a crust would be delicious and that a bone would be a banquet.

Hunger is a luxury to us, a piquant, flavor-giving sauce. It is well
worth while to get hungry and thirsty merely to discover how much
gratification can be obtained from eating and drinking. If you wish
to thoroughly enjoy your dinner, take a thirty-mile country walk after
breakfast and don't touch anything till you get back. How your eyes will
glisten at sight of the white table-cloth and steaming dishes then! With
what a sigh of content you will put down the empty beer tankard and take
up your knife and fork! And how comfortable you feel afterward as you
push back your chair, light a cigar, and beam round upon everybody.

Make sure, however, when adopting this plan, that the good dinner is
really to be had at the end, or the disappointment is trying. I remember
once a friend and I--dear old Joe, it was. Ah! how we lose one another
in life's mist. It must be eight years since I last saw Joseph Taboys.
How pleasant it would be to meet his jovial face again, to clasp his
strong hand, and to hear his cheery laugh once more! He owes me 14
shillings, too. Well, we were on a holiday together, and one morning
we had breakfast early and started for a tremendous long walk. We had
ordered a duck for dinner over night. We said, "Get a big one, because
we shall come home awfully hungry;" and as we were going out our
landlady came up in great spirits. She said, "I have got you gentlemen a
duck, if you like. If you get through that you'll do well;" and she held
up a bird about the size of a door-mat. We chuckled at the sight and
said we would try. We said it with self-conscious pride, like men who
know their own power. Then we started.

We lost our way, of course. I always do in the country, and it does make
me so wild, because it is no use asking direction of any of the people
you meet. One might as well inquire of a lodging-house slavey the way
to make beds as expect a country bumpkin to know the road to the next
village. You have to shout the question about three times before the
sound of your voice penetrates his skull. At the third time he slowly
raises his head and stares blankly at you. You yell it at him then for
a fourth time, and he repeats it after you. He ponders while you count
a couple of hundred, after which, speaking at the rate of three words a
minute, he fancies you "couldn't do better than--" Here he catches
sight of another idiot coming down the road and bawls out to him the
particulars, requesting his advice. The two then argue the case for
a quarter of an hour or so, and finally agree that you had better go
straight down the lane, round to the right and cross by the third stile,
and keep to the left by old Jimmy Milcher's cow-shed, and across the
seven-acre field, and through the gate by Squire Grubbin's hay-stack,
keeping the bridle-path for awhile till you come opposite the hill where
the windmill used to be--but it's gone now--and round to the right,
leaving Stiggin's plantation behind you; and you say "Thank you" and go
away with a splitting headache, but without the faintest notion of your
way, the only clear idea you have on the subject being that somewhere
or other there is a stile which has to be got over; and at the next turn
you come upon four stiles, all leading in different directions!

We had undergone this ordeal two or three times. We had tramped over
fields. We had waded through brooks and scrambled over hedges and walls.
We had had a row as to whose fault it was that we had first lost our
way. We had got thoroughly disagreeable, footsore, and weary. But
throughout it all the hope of that duck kept us up. A fairy-like vision,
it floated before our tired eyes and drew us onward. The thought of it
was as a trumpet-call to the fainting. We talked of it and cheered each
other with our recollections of it. "Come along," we said; "the duck
will be spoiled."

We felt a strong temptation, at one point, to turn into a village inn
as we passed and have a cheese and a few loaves between us, but we
heroically restrained ourselves: we should enjoy the duck all the better
for being famished.

We fancied we smelled it when we go into the town and did the last
quarter of a mile in three minutes. We rushed upstairs, and washed
ourselves, and changed our clothes, and came down, and pulled our chairs
up to the table, and sat and rubbed our hands while the landlady removed
the covers, when I seized the knife and fork and started to carve.

It seemed to want a lot of carving. I struggled with it for about five
minutes without making the slightest impression, and then Joe, who had
been eating potatoes, wanted to know if it wouldn't be better for some
one to do the job that understood carving. I took no notice of his
foolish remark, but attacked the bird again; and so vigorously this time
that the animal left the dish and took refuge in the fender.

We soon had it out of that, though, and I was prepared to make another
effort. But Joe was getting unpleasant. He said that if he had thought
we were to have a game of blind hockey with the dinner he would have got
a bit of bread and cheese outside.

I was too exhausted to argue. I laid down the knife and fork with
dignity and took a side seat and Joe went for the wretched creature. He
worked away in silence for awhile, and then he muttered "Damn the duck"
and took his coat off.

We did break the thing up at length with the aid of a chisel, but it
was perfectly impossible to eat it, and we had to make a dinner off the
vegetables and an apple tart. We tried a mouthful of the duck, but it
was like eating India-rubber.

It was a wicked sin to kill that drake. But there! there's no respect
for old institutions in this country.

I started this paper with the idea of writing about eating and drinking,
but I seem to have confined my remarks entirely to eating as yet. Well,
you see, drinking is one of those subjects with which it is inadvisable
to appear too well acquainted. The days are gone by when it was
considered manly to go to bed intoxicated every night, and a clear head
and a firm hand no longer draw down upon their owner the reproach
of effeminacy. On the contrary, in these sadly degenerate days an
evil-smelling breath, a blotchy face, a reeling gait, and a husky voice
are regarded as the hall marks of the cad rather than or the gentleman.

Even nowadays, though, the thirstiness of mankind is something
supernatural. We are forever drinking on one excuse or another. A man
never feels comfortable unless he has a glass before him. We drink
before meals, and with meals, and after meals. We drink when we meet a
friend, also when we part from a friend. We drink when we are talking,
when we are reading, and when we are thinking. We drink one another's
healths and spoil our own. We drink the queen, and the army, and the
ladies, and everybody else that is drinkable; and I believe if the
supply ran short we should drink our mothers-in-law.

By the way, we never eat anybody's health, always drink it. Why should
we not stand up now and then and eat a tart to somebody's success?

To me, I confess the constant necessity of drinking under which the
majority of men labor is quite unaccountable. I can understand people
drinking to drown care or to drive away maddening thoughts well enough.
I can understand the ignorant masses loving to soak themselves in
drink--oh, yes, it's very shocking that they should, of course--very
shocking to us who live in cozy homes, with all the graces and pleasures
of life around us, that the dwellers in damp cellars and windy attics
should creep from their dens of misery into the warmth and glare of the
public-house bar, and seek to float for a brief space away from their
dull world upon a Lethe stream of gin.

But think, before you hold up your hands in horror at their ill-living,
what "life" for these wretched creatures really means. Picture the
squalid misery of their brutish existence, dragged on from year to year
in the narrow, noisome room where, huddled like vermin in sewers, they
welter, and sicken, and sleep; where dirt-grimed children scream and
fight and sluttish, shrill-voiced women cuff, and curse, and nag; where
the street outside teems with roaring filth and the house around is a
bedlam of riot and stench.

Think what a sapless stick this fair flower of life must be to them,
devoid of mind and soul. The horse in his stall scents the sweet hay and
munches the ripe corn contentedly. The watch-dog in his kennel blinks at
the grateful sun, dreams of a glorious chase over the dewy fields,
and wakes with a yelp of gladness to greet a caressing hand. But the
clod-like life of these human logs never knows one ray of light. From
the hour when they crawl from their comfortless bed to the hour when
they lounge back into it again they never live one moment of real life.
Recreation, amusement, companionship, they know not the meaning of. Joy,
sorrow, laughter, tears, love, friendship, longing, despair, are idle
words to them. From the day when their baby eyes first look out upon
their sordid world to the day when, with an oath, they close them
forever and their bones are shoveled out of sight, they never warm to
one touch of human sympathy, never thrill to a single thought, never
start to a single hope. In the name of the God of mercy; let them pour
the maddening liquor down their throats and feel for one brief moment
that they live!

Ah! we may talk sentiment as much as we like, but the stomach is the
real seat of happiness in this world. The kitchen is the chief temple
wherein we worship, its roaring fire is our vestal flame, and the cook
is our great high-priest. He is a mighty magician and a kindly one. He
soothes away all sorrow and care. He drives forth all enmity, gladdens
all love. Our God is great and the cook is his prophet. Let us eat,
drink, and be merry.




ON FURNISHED APARTMENTS.

"Oh, you have some rooms to let."

"Mother!"

"Well, what is it?"

"'Ere's a gentleman about the rooms."

"Ask 'im in. I'll be up in a minute."

"Will yer step inside, sir? Mother'll be up in a minute."

So you step inside and after a minute "mother" comes slowly up the
kitchen stairs, untying her apron as she comes and calling down
instructions to some one below about the potatoes.

"Good-morning, sir," says "mother," with a washed-out smile. "Will you
step this way, please?"

"Oh, it's hardly worth while my coming up," you say. "What sort of rooms
are they, and how much?"

"Well," says the landlady, "if you'll step upstairs I'll show them to
you."

So with a protesting murmur, meant to imply that any waste of time
complained of hereafter must not be laid to your charge, you follow
"mother" upstairs.

At the first landing you run up against a pail and a broom, whereupon
"mother" expatiates upon the unreliability of servant-girls, and bawls
over the balusters for Sarah to come and take them away at once. When
you get outside the rooms she pauses, with her hand upon the door, to
explain to you that they are rather untidy just at present, as the
last lodger left only yesterday; and she also adds that this is their
cleaning-day--it always is. With this understanding you enter, and both
stand solemnly feasting your eyes upon the scene before you. The rooms
cannot be said to appear inviting. Even "mother's" face betrays no
admiration. Untenanted "furnished apartments" viewed in the morning
sunlight do not inspire cheery sensations. There is a lifeless air about
them. It is a very different thing when you have settled down and are
living in them. With your old familiar household gods to greet your gaze
whenever you glance up, and all your little knick-knacks spread around
you--with the photos of all the girls that you have loved and lost
ranged upon the mantel-piece, and half a dozen disreputable-looking
pipes scattered about in painfully prominent positions--with one carpet
slipper peeping from beneath the coal-box and the other perched on the
top of the piano--with the well-known pictures to hide the dingy walls,
and these dear old friends, your books, higgledy-piggledy all over the
place--with the bits of old blue china that your mother prized, and the
screen she worked in those far by-gone days, when the sweet old face was
laughing and young, and the white soft hair tumbled in gold-brown curls
from under the coal-scuttle bonnet--

Ah, old screen, what a gorgeous personage you must have been in your
young days, when the tulips and roses and lilies (all growing from one
stem) were fresh in their glistening sheen! Many a summer and winter
have come and gone since then, my friend, and you have played with the
dancing firelight until you have grown sad and gray. Your brilliant
colors are fast fading now, and the envious moths have gnawed your
silken threads. You are withering away like the dead hands that wove
you. Do you ever think of those dead hands? You seem so grave and
thoughtful sometimes that I almost think you do. Come, you and I and
the deep-glowing embers, let us talk together. Tell me in your silent
language what you remember of those young days, when you lay on my
little mother's lap and her girlish fingers played with your rainbow
tresses. Was there never a lad near sometimes--never a lad who would
seize one of those little hands to smother it with kisses, and who would
persist in holding it, thereby sadly interfering with the progress of
your making? Was not your frail existence often put in jeopardy by this
same clumsy, headstrong lad, who would toss you disrespectfully aside
that he--not satisfied with one--might hold both hands and gaze up
into the loved eyes? I can see that lad now through the haze of the
flickering twilight. He is an eager bright-eyed boy, with pinching,
dandy shoes and tight-fitting smalls, snowy shirt frill and stock,
and--oh! such curly hair. A wild, light-hearted boy! Can he be the
great, grave gentleman upon whose stick I used to ride crosslegged, the
care-worn man into whose thoughtful face I used to gaze with childish
reverence and whom I used to call "father?" You say "yes," old screen;
but are you quite sure? It is a serious charge you are bringing. Can
it be possible? Did he have to kneel down in those wonderful smalls and
pick you up and rearrange you before he was forgiven and his curly head
smoothed by my mother's little hand? Ah! old screen, and did the lads
and the lassies go making love fifty years ago just as they do now? Are
men and women so unchanged? Did little maidens' hearts beat the same
under pearl-embroidered bodices as they do under Mother Hubbard cloaks?
Have steel casques and chimney-pot hats made no difference to the brains
that work beneath them? Oh, Time! great Chronos! and is this your power?
Have you dried up seas and leveled mountains and left the tiny human
heart-strings to defy you? Ah, yes! they were spun by a Mightier than
thou, and they stretch beyond your narrow ken, for their ends are made
fast in eternity. Ay, you may mow down the leaves and the blossoms, but
the roots of life lie too deep for your sickle to sever. You refashion
Nature's garments, but you cannot vary by a jot the throbbings of her
pulse. The world rolls round obedient to your laws, but the heart of man
is not of your kingdom, for in its birthplace "a thousand years are but
as yesterday."

I am getting away, though, I fear, from my "furnished apartments," and
I hardly know how to get back. But I have some excuse for my meanderings
this time. It is a piece of old furniture that has led me astray, and
fancies gather, somehow, round old furniture, like moss around old
stones. One's chairs and tables get to be almost part of one's life and
to seem like quiet friends. What strange tales the wooden-headed old
fellows could tell did they but choose to speak! At what unsuspected
comedies and tragedies have they not assisted! What bitter tears have
been sobbed into that old sofa cushion! What passionate whisperings the
settee must have overheard!

New furniture has no charms for me compared with old. It is the old
things that we love--the old faces, the old books, the old jokes. New
furniture can make a palace, but it takes old furniture to make a home.
Not merely old in itself--lodging-house furniture generally is that--but
it must be old to us, old in associations and recollections. The
furniture of furnished apartments, however ancient it may be in reality,
is new to our eyes, and we feel as though we could never get on with it.
As, too, in the case of all fresh acquaintances, whether wooden or human
(and there is very little difference between the two species sometimes),
everything impresses you with its worst aspect. The knobby wood-work and
shiny horse-hair covering of the easy-chair suggest anything but ease.
The mirror is smoky. The curtains want washing. The carpet is frayed.
The table looks as if it would go over the instant anything was rested
on it. The grate is cheerless, the wall-paper hideous. The ceiling
appears to have had coffee spilt all over it, and the ornaments--well,
they are worse than the wallpaper.

There must surely be some special and secret manufactory for the
production of lodging-house ornaments. Precisely the same articles are
to be found at every lodging-house all over the kingdom, and they are
never seen anywhere else. There are the two--what do you call them? they
stand one at each end of the mantel-piece, where they are never safe,
and they are hung round with long triangular slips of glass that clank
against one another and make you nervous. In the commoner class of rooms
these works of art are supplemented by a couple of pieces of china which
might each be meant to represent a cow sitting upon its hind legs, or a
model of the temple of Diana at Ephesus, or a dog, or anything else
you like to fancy. Somewhere about the room you come across a
bilious-looking object, which at first you take to be a lump of dough
left about by one of the children, but which on scrutiny seems to
resemble an underdone cupid. This thing the landlady calls a statue.
Then there is a "sampler" worked by some idiot related to the family, a
picture of the "Huguenots," two or three Scripture texts, and a highly
framed and glazed certificate to the effect that the father has been
vaccinated, or is an Odd Fellow, or something of that sort.

You examine these various attractions and then dismally ask what the
rent is.

"That's rather a good deal," you say on hearing the figure.

"Well, to tell you the truth," answers the landlady with a sudden burst
of candor, "I've always had" (mentioning a sum a good deal in excess
of the first-named amount), "and before that I used to have" (a still
higher figure).

What the rent of apartments must have been twenty years ago makes one
shudder to think of. Every landlady makes you feel thoroughly ashamed of
yourself by informing you, whenever the subject crops up, that she used
to get twice as much for her rooms as you are paying. Young men lodgers
of the last generation must have been of a wealthier class than they are
now, or they must have ruined themselves. I should have had to live in
an attic.

Curious, that in lodgings the rule of life is reversed. The higher you
get up in the world the lower you come down in your lodgings. On
the lodging-house ladder the poor man is at the top, the rich man
underneath. You start in the attic and work your way down to the first
floor.

A good many great men have lived in attics and some have died there.
Attics, says the dictionary, are "places where lumber is stored," and
the world has used them to store a good deal of its lumber in at one
time or another. Its preachers and painters and poets, its deep-browed
men who will find out things, its fire-eyed men who will tell truths
that no one wants to hear--these are the lumber that the world hides
away in its attics. Haydn grew up in an attic and Chatterton starved in
one. Addison and Goldsmith wrote in garrets. Faraday and De Quincey knew
them well. Dr. Johnson camped cheerfully in them, sleeping soundly--too
soundly sometimes--upon their trundle-beds, like the sturdy old soldier
of fortune that he was, inured to hardship and all careless of himself.
Dickens spent his youth among them, Morland his old age--alas! a
drunken, premature old age. Hans Andersen, the fairy king, dreamed his
sweet fancies beneath their sloping roofs. Poor, wayward-hearted Collins
leaned his head upon their crazy tables; priggish Benjamin Franklin;
Savage, the wrong-headed, much troubled when he could afford any softer
bed than a doorstep; young Bloomfield, "Bobby" Burns, Hogarth, Watts the
engineer--the roll is endless. Ever since the habitations of men were
reared two stories high has the garret been the nursery of genius.

No one who honors the aristocracy of mind can feel ashamed of
acquaintanceship with them. Their damp-stained walls are sacred to
the memory of noble names. If all the wisdom of the world and all its
art--all the spoils that it has won from nature, all the fire that it
has snatched from heaven--were gathered together and divided into heaps,
and we could point and say, for instance, these mighty truths were
flashed forth in the brilliant _salon_ amid the ripple of light laughter
and the sparkle of bright eyes; and this deep knowledge was dug up in
the quiet study, where the bust of Pallas looks serenely down on the
leather-scented shelves; and this heap belongs to the crowded street;
and that to the daisied field--the heap that would tower up high above
the rest as a mountain above hills would be the one at which we should
look up and say: this noblest pile of all--these glorious paintings and
this wondrous music, these trumpet words, these solemn thoughts, these
daring deeds, they were forged and fashioned amid misery and pain in the
sordid squalor of the city garret. There, from their eyries, while the
world heaved and throbbed below, the kings of men sent forth their
eagle thoughts to wing their flight through the ages. There, where the
sunlight streaming through the broken panes fell on rotting boards and
crumbling walls; there, from their lofty thrones, those rag-clothed
Joves have hurled their thunderbolts and shaken, before now, the earth
to its foundations.

Huddle them up in your lumber-rooms, oh, world! Shut them fast in and
turn the key of poverty upon them. Weld close the bars, and let them
fret their hero lives away within the narrow cage. Leave them there to
starve, and rot, and die. Laugh at the frenzied beatings of their hands
against the door. Roll onward in your dust and noise and pass them by,
forgotten.

But take care lest they turn and sting you. All do not, like the fabled
phoenix, warble sweet melodies in their agony; sometimes they spit
venom--venom you must breathe whether you will or no, for you cannot
seal their mouths, though you may fetter their limbs. You can lock the
door upon them, but they burst open their shaky lattices and call
out over the house-tops so that men cannot but hear. You hounded wild
Rousseau into the meanest garret of the Rue St. Jacques and jeered at
his angry shrieks. But the thin, piping tones swelled a hundred years
later into the sullen roar of the French Revolution, and civilization to
this day is quivering to the reverberations of his voice.

As for myself, however, I like an attic. Not to live in: as residences
they are inconvenient. There is too much getting up and down stairs
connected with them to please me. It puts one unpleasantly in mind of
the tread-mill. The form of the ceiling offers too many facilities for
bumping your head and too few for shaving. And the note of the tomcat
as he sings to his love in the stilly night outside on the tiles becomes
positively distasteful when heard so near.

No, for living in give me a suit of rooms on the first floor of a
Piccadilly mansion (I wish somebody would!); but for thinking in let
me have an attic up ten flights of stairs in the densest quarter of the
city. I have all Herr Teufelsdrockh's affection for attics. There is a
sublimity about their loftiness. I love to "sit at ease and look down
upon the wasps' nest beneath;" to listen to the dull murmur of the human
tide ebbing and flowing ceaselessly through the narrow streets and
lanes below. How small men seem, how like a swarm of ants sweltering in
endless confusion on their tiny hill! How petty seems the work on which
they are hurrying and skurrying! How childishly they jostle against
one another and turn to snarl and scratch! They jabber and screech and
curse, but their puny voices do not reach up here. They fret, and fume,
and rage, and pant, and die; "but I, mein Werther, sit above it all; I
am alone with the stars."

The most extraordinary attic I ever came across was one a friend and I
once shared many years ago. Of all eccentrically planned things, from
Bradshaw to the maze at Hampton Court, that room was the most eccentric.
The architect who designed it must have been a genius, though I cannot
help thinking that his talents would have been better employed in
contriving puzzles than in shaping human habitations. No figure in
Euclid could give any idea of that apartment. It contained seven
corners, two of the walls sloped to a point, and the window was just
over the fireplace. The only possible position for the bedstead was
between the door and the cupboard. To get anything out of the cupboard
we had to scramble over the bed, and a large percentage of the various
commodities thus obtained was absorbed by the bedclothes. Indeed, so
many things were spilled and dropped upon the bed that toward night-time
it had become a sort of small cooperative store. Coal was what it always
had most in stock. We used to keep our coal in the bottom part of the
cupboard, and when any was wanted we had to climb over the bed, fill
a shovelful, and then crawl back. It was an exciting moment when we
reached the middle of the bed. We would hold our breath, fix our eyes
upon the shovel, and poise ourselves for the last move. The next instant
we, and the coals, and the shovel, and the bed would be all mixed up
together.

I've heard of the people going into raptures over beds of coal. We slept
in one every night and were not in the least stuck up about it.

But our attic, unique though it was, had by no means exhausted the
architect's sense of humor. The arrangement of the whole house was a
marvel of originality. All the doors opened outward, so that if any
one wanted to leave a room at the same moment that you were coming
downstairs it was unpleasant for you. There was no ground-floor--its
ground-floor belonged to a house in the next court, and the front
door opened direct upon a flight of stairs leading down to the cellar.
Visitors on entering the house would suddenly shoot past the person who
had answered the door to them and disappear down these stairs. Those of
a nervous temperament used to imagine that it was a trap laid for them,
and would shout murder as they lay on their backs at the bottom till
somebody came and picked them up.

It is a long time ago now that I last saw the inside of an attic. I have
tried various floors since but I have not found that they have made much
difference to me. Life tastes much the same, whether we quaff it from a
golden goblet or drink it out of a stone mug. The hours come laden with
the same mixture of joy and sorrow, no matter where we wait for them. A
waistcoat of broadcloth or of fustian is alike to an aching heart, and
we laugh no merrier on velvet cushions than we did on wooden chairs.
Often have I sighed in those low-ceilinged rooms, yet disappointments
have come neither less nor lighter since I quitted them. Life works upon
a compensating balance, and the happiness we gain in one direction we
lose in another. As our means increase, so do our desires; and we ever
stand midway between the two. When we reside in an attic we enjoy a
supper of fried fish and stout. When we occupy the first floor it takes
an elaborate dinner at the Continental to give us the same amount of
satisfaction.




ON DRESS AND DEPORTMENT.

They say--people who ought to be ashamed of themselves do--that the
consciousness of being well dressed imparts a blissfulness to the human
heart that religion is powerless to bestow. I am afraid these cynical
persons are sometimes correct. I know that when I was a very young man
(many, many years ago, as the story-books say) and wanted cheering up,
I used to go and dress myself in all my best clothes. If I had been
annoyed in any manner--if my washerwoman had discharged me, for
instance; or my blank-verse poem had been returned for the tenth time,
with the editor's compliments "and regrets that owing to want of space
he is unable to avail himself of kind offer;" or I had been snubbed by
the woman I loved as man never loved before--by the way, it's really
extraordinary what a variety of ways of loving there must be. We all do
it as it was never done before. I don't know how our great-grandchildren
will manage. They will have to do it on their heads by their time if
they persist in not clashing with any previous method.

Well, as I was saying, when these unpleasant sort of things happened and
I felt crushed, I put on all my best clothes and went out. It brought
back my vanishing self-esteem. In a glossy new hat and a pair of
trousers with a fold down the front (carefully preserved by keeping them
under the bed--I don't mean on the floor, you know, but between the
bed and the mattress), I felt I was somebody and that there were other
washerwomen: ay, and even other girls to love, and who would perhaps
appreciate a clever, good-looking young fellow. I didn't care; that
was my reckless way. I would make love to other maidens. I felt that in
those clothes I could do it.

They have a wonderful deal to do with courting, clothes have. It is half
the battle. At all events, the young man thinks so, and it generally
takes him a couple of hours to get himself up for the occasion. His
first half-hour is occupied in trying to decide whether to wear his
light suit with a cane and drab billycock, or his black tails with a
chimney-pot hat and his new umbrella. He is sure to be unfortunate in
either decision. If he wears his light suit and takes the stick it comes
on to rain, and he reaches the house in a damp and muddy condition and
spends the evening trying to hide his boots. If, on the other hand, he
decides in favor of the top hat and umbrella--nobody would ever dream
of going out in a top hat without an umbrella; it would be like letting
baby (bless it!) toddle out without its nurse. How I do hate a top
hat! One lasts me a very long while, I can tell you. I only wear it
when--well, never mind when I wear it. It lasts me a very long while.
I've had my present one five years. It was rather old-fashioned last
summer, but the shape has come round again now and I look quite stylish.

But to return to our young man and his courting. If he starts off with
the top hat and umbrella the afternoon turns out fearfully hot, and the
perspiration takes all the soap out of his mustache and converts the
beautifully arranged curl over his forehead into a limp wisp resembling
a lump of seaweed. The Fates are never favorable to the poor wretch. If
he does by any chance reach the door in proper condition, she has gone
out with her cousin and won't be back till late.

How a young lover made ridiculous by the gawkiness of modern costume
must envy the picturesque gallants of seventy years ago! Look at them
(on the Christmas cards), with their curly hair and natty hats, their
well-shaped legs incased in smalls, their dainty Hessian boots, their
ruffling frills, their canes and dangling seals. No wonder the little
maiden in the big poke-bonnet and the light-blue sash casts down her
eyes and is completely won. Men could win hearts in clothes like that.
But what can you expect from baggy trousers and a monkeyjacket?

Clothes have more effect upon us than we imagine. Our deportment depends
upon our dress. Make a man get into seedy, worn-out rags, and he will
skulk along with his head hanging down, like a man going out to fetch
his own supper beer. But deck out the same article in gorgeous raiment
and fine linen, and he will strut down the main thoroughfare, swinging
his cane and looking at the girls as perky as a bantam cock.

Clothes alter our very nature. A man could not help being fierce and
daring with a plume in his bonnet, a dagger in his belt, and a lot of
puffy white things all down his sleeves. But in an ulster he wants to
get behind a lamp-post and call police.

I am quite ready to admit that you can find sterling merit,
honest worth, deep affection, and all such like virtues of the
roast-beef-and-plum-pudding school as much, and perhaps more, under
broadcloth and tweed as ever existed beneath silk and velvet; but the
spirit of that knightly chivalry that "rode a tilt for lady's love" and
"fought for lady's smiles" needs the clatter of steel and the rustle of
plumes to summon it from its grave between the dusty folds of tapestry
and underneath the musty leaves of moldering chronicles.

The world must be getting old, I think; it dresses so very soberly now.
We have been through the infant period of humanity, when we used to run
about with nothing on but a long, loose robe, and liked to have our feet
bare. And then came the rough, barbaric age, the boyhood of our race. We
didn't care what we wore then, but thought it nice to tattoo ourselves
all over, and we never did our hair. And after that the world grew into
a young man and became foppish. It decked itself in flowing curls and
scarlet doublets, and went courting, and bragging, and bouncing--making
a brave show.

But all those merry, foolish days of youth are gone, and we are very
sober, very solemn--and very stupid, some say--now. The world is a
grave, middle-aged gentleman in this nineteenth century, and would be
shocked to see itself with a bit of finery on. So it dresses in black
coats and trousers, and black hats, and black boots, and, dear me, it
is such a very respectable gentleman--to think it could ever have gone
gadding about as a troubadour or a knight-errant, dressed in all those
fancy colors! Ah, well! we are more sensible in this age.

Or at least we think ourselves so. It is a general theory nowadays that
sense and dullness go together.

Goodness is another quality that always goes with blackness. Very good
people indeed, you will notice, dress altogether in black, even to
gloves and neckties, and they will probably take to black shirts before
long. Medium goods indulge in light trousers on week-days, and some
of them even go so far as to wear fancy waistcoats. On the other hand,
people who care nothing for a future state go about in light suits; and
there have been known wretches so abandoned as to wear a white hat. Such
people, however, are never spoken of in genteel society, and perhaps I
ought not to have referred to them here.

By the way, talking of light suits, have you ever noticed how people
stare at you the first time you go out in a new light suit They do
not notice it so much afterward. The population of London have got
accustomed to it by the third time you wear it. I say "you," because I
am not speaking from my own experience. I do not wear such things at all
myself. As I said, only sinful people do so.

I wish, though, it were not so, and that one could be good, and
respectable, and sensible without making one's self a guy. I look in
the glass sometimes at my two long, cylindrical bags (so picturesquely
rugged about the knees), my stand-up collar and billycock hat, and
wonder what right I have to go about making God's world hideous. Then
wild and wicked thoughts come into my heart. I don't want to be good and
respectable. (I never can be sensible, I'm told; so that don't matter.)
I want to put on lavender-colored tights, with red velvet breeches and a
green doublet slashed with yellow; to have a light-blue silk cloak on my
shoulder, and a black eagle's plume waving from my hat, and a big sword,
and a falcon, and a lance, and a prancing horse, so that I might go
about and gladden the eyes of the people. Why should we all try to look
like ants crawling over a dust-heap? Why shouldn't we dress a little
gayly? I am sure if we did we should be happier. True, it is a little
thing, but we are a little race, and what is the use of our pretending
otherwise and spoiling fun? Let philosophers get themselves up like old
crows if they like. But let me be a butterfly.

Women, at all events, ought to dress prettily. It is their duty. They
are the flowers of the earth and were meant to show it up. We abuse them
a good deal, we men; but, goodness knows, the old world would be dull
enough without their dresses and fair faces. How they brighten up
every place they come into! What a sunny commotion they--relations,
of course---make in our dingy bachelor chambers! and what a delightful
litter their ribbons and laces, and gloves and hats, and parasols and
'kerchiefs make! It is as if a wandering rainbow had dropped in to pay
us a visit.

It is one of the chief charms of the summer, to my mind, the way our
little maids come out in pretty colors. I like to see the pink and blue
and white glancing between the trees, dotting the green fields, and
flashing back the sunlight. You can see the bright colors such a long
way off. There are four white dresses climbing a hill in front of my
window now. I can see them distinctly, though it is three miles away. I
thought at first they were mile-stones out for a lark. It's so nice to
be able to see the darlings a long way off. Especially if they happen to
be your wife and your mother-in-law.

Talking of fields and mile-stones reminds me that I want to say, in all
seriousness, a few words about women's boots. The women of these islands
all wear boots too big for them. They can never get a boot to fit. The
bootmakers do not keep sizes small enough.

Over and over again have I known women sit down on the top rail of a
stile and declare they could not go a step further because their boots
hurt them so; and it has always been the same complaint--too big.

It is time this state of things was altered. In the name of the husbands
and fathers of England, I call upon the bootmakers to reform. Our wives,
our daughters, and our cousins are not to be lamed and tortured with
impunity. Why cannot "narrow twos" be kept more in stock? That is the
size I find most women take.

The waist-band is another item of feminine apparel that is always too
big. The dressmakers make these things so loose that the hooks and eyes
by which they are fastened burst off, every now and then, with a report
like thunder.

Why women suffer these wrongs--why they do not insist in having their
clothes made small enough for them I cannot conceive. It can hardly be
that they are disinclined to trouble themselves about matters of mere
dress, for dress is the one subject that they really do think about. It
is the only topic they ever get thoroughly interested in, and they talk
about it all day long. If you see two women together, you may bet your
bottom dollar they are discussing their own or their friends' clothes.
You notice a couple of child-like beings conversing by a window, and you
wonder what sweet, helpful words are falling from their sainted lips. So
you move nearer and then you hear one say:

"So I took in the waist-band and let out a seam, and it fits beautifully
now."

"Well," says the other, "I shall wear my plum-colored body to the
Jones', with a yellow plastron; and they've got some lovely gloves at
Puttick's, only one and eleven pence."

I went for a drive through a part of Derbyshire once with a couple of
ladies. It was a beautiful bit of country, and they enjoyed themselves
immensely. They talked dressmaking the whole time.

"Pretty view, that," I would say, waving my umbrella round. "Look at
those blue distant hills! That little white speck, nestling in the
woods, is Chatsworth, and over there--"

"Yes, very pretty indeed," one would reply. "Well, why not get a yard of
sarsenet?"

"What, and leave the skirt exactly as it is?"

"Certainly. What place d'ye call this?"

Then I would draw their attention to the fresh beauties that kept
sweeping into view, and they would glance round and say "charming,"
"sweetly pretty," and immediately go off into raptures over each other's
pocket-handkerchiefs, and mourn with one another over the decadence of
cambric frilling.

I believe if two women were cast together upon a desert island, they
would spend each day arguing the respective merits of sea-shells and
birds' eggs considered as trimmings, and would have a new fashion in
fig-leaves every month.

Very young men think a good deal about clothes, but they don't talk
about them to each other. They would not find much encouragement. A fop
is not a favorite with his own sex. Indeed, he gets a good deal more
abuse from them than is necessary. His is a harmless failing and it
soon wears out. Besides, a man who has no foppery at twenty will be
a slatternly, dirty-collar, unbrushed-coat man at forty. A little
foppishness in a young man is good; it is human. I like to see a young
cock ruffle his feathers, stretch his neck, and crow as if the whole
world belonged to him. I don't like a modest, retiring man. Nobody
does--not really, however much they may prate about modest worth and
other things they do not understand.

A meek deportment is a great mistake in the world. Uriah Heap's father
was a very poor judge of human nature, or he would not have told his
son, as he did, that people liked humbleness. There is nothing annoys
them more, as a rule. Rows are half the fun of life, and you can't have
rows with humble, meek-answering individuals. They turn away our wrath,
and that is just what we do not want. We want to let it out. We have
worked ourselves up into a state of exhilarating fury, and then just as
we are anticipating the enjoyment of a vigorous set-to, they spoil all
our plans with their exasperating humility.

Xantippe's life must have been one long misery, tied to that calmly
irritating man, Socrates. Fancy a married woman doomed to live on from
day to day without one single quarrel with her husband! A man ought to
humor his wife in these things.

Heaven knows their lives are dull enough, poor girls. They have none of
the enjoyments we have. They go to no political meetings; they may not
even belong to the local amateur parliament; they are excluded from
smoking-carriages on the Metropolitan Railway, and they never see a
comic paper--or if they do, they do not know it is comic: nobody tells
them.

Surely, with existence such a dreary blank for them as this, we might
provide a little row for their amusement now and then, even if we do
not feel inclined for it ourselves. A really sensible man does so and is
loved accordingly, for it is little acts of kindness such as this
that go straight to a woman's heart. It is such like proofs of loving
self-sacrifice that make her tell her female friends what a good husband
he was--after he is dead.

Yes, poor Xantippe must have had a hard time of it. The bucket episode
was particularly sad for her. Poor woman! she did think she would rouse
him up a bit with that. She had taken the trouble to fill the bucket,
perhaps been a long way to get specially dirty water. And she waited for
him. And then to be met in such a way, after all! Most likely she sat
down and had a good cry afterward. It must have seemed all so hopeless
to the poor child; and for all we know she had no mother to whom she
could go and abuse him.

What was it to her that her husband was a great philosopher? Great
philosophy don't count in married life.

There was a very good little boy once who wanted to go to sea. And
the captain asked him what he could do. He said he could do the
multiplication-table backward and paste sea-weed in a book; that he knew
how many times the word "begat" occurred in the Old Testament; and could
recite "The Boy Stood on the Burning Deck" and Wordsworth's "We Are
Seven."

"Werry good--werry good, indeed," said the man of the sea, "and ken ye
kerry coals?"

It is just the same when you want to marry. Great ability is not
required so much as little usefulness. Brains are at a discount in the
married state. There is no demand for them, no appreciation even.
Our wives sum us up according to a standard of their own, in which
brilliancy of intellect obtains no marks. Your lady and mistress is not
at all impressed by your cleverness and talent, my dear reader--not
in the slightest. Give her a man who can do an errand neatly, without
attempting to use his own judgment over it or any nonsense of that kind;
and who can be trusted to hold a child the right way up, and not make
himself objectionable whenever there is lukewarm mutton for dinner.
That is the sort of a husband a sensible woman likes; not one of your
scientific or literary nuisances, who go upsetting the whole house and
putting everybody out with their foolishness.




ON MEMORY.

     "I remember, I remember,
     In the days of chill November,
     How the blackbird on the--"

I forget the rest. It is the beginning of the first piece of poetry I
ever learned; for

     "Hey, diddle diddle,
     The cat and the fiddle,"

I take no note of, it being of a frivolous character and lacking in the
qualities of true poetry. I collected fourpence by the recital of "I
remember, I remember." I knew it was fourpence, because they told me
that if I kept it until I got twopence more I should have sixpence,
which argument, albeit undeniable, moved me not, and the money was
squandered, to the best of my recollection, on the very next morning,
although upon what memory is a blank.

That is just the way with Memory; nothing that she brings to us is
complete. She is a willful child; all her toys are broken. I remember
tumbling into a huge dust-hole when a very small boy, but I have not the
faintest recollection of ever getting out again; and if memory were all
we had to trust to, I should be compelled to believe I was there still.

At another time--some years later--I was assisting at an exceedingly
interesting love scene; but the only thing about it I can call to mind
distinctly is that at the most critical moment somebody suddenly opened
the door and said, "Emily, you're wanted," in a sepulchral tone that
gave one the idea the police had come for her. All the tender words
she said to me and all the beautiful things I said to her are utterly
forgotten.

Life altogether is but a crumbling ruin when we turn to look behind: a
shattered column here, where a massive portal stood; the broken shaft
of a window to mark my lady's bower; and a moldering heap of blackened
stones where the glowing flames once leaped, and over all the tinted
lichen and the ivy clinging green.

For everything looms pleasant through the softening haze of time. Even
the sadness that is past seems sweet. Our boyish days look very merry to
us now, all nutting, hoop, and gingerbread. The snubbings and toothaches
and the Latin verbs are all forgotten--the Latin verbs especially. And
we fancy we were very happy when we were hobbledehoys and loved; and we
wish that we could love again. We never think of the heartaches, or the
sleepless nights, or the hot dryness of our throats, when she said she
could never be anything to us but a sister--as if any man wanted more
sisters!

Yes, it is the brightness, not the darkness, that we see when we look
back. The sunshine casts no shadows on the past. The road that we have
traversed stretches very fair behind us. We see not the sharp stones. We
dwell but on the roses by the wayside, and the strong briers that stung
us are, to our distant eyes, but gentle tendrils waving in the wind. God
be thanked that it is so--that the ever-lengthening chain of memory has
only pleasant links, and that the bitterness and sorrow of to-day are
smiled at on the morrow.

It seems as though the brightest side of everything were also its
highest and best, so that as our little lives sink back behind us into
the dark sea of forgetfulness, all that which is the lightest and the
most gladsome is the last to sink, and stands above the waters, long in
sight, when the angry thoughts and smarting pain are buried deep below
the waves and trouble us no more.

It is this glamour of the past, I suppose, that makes old folk talk so
much nonsense about the days when they were young. The world appears to
have been a very superior sort of place then, and things were more
like what they ought to be. Boys were boys then, and girls were very
different. Also winters were something like winters, and summers not
at all the wretched-things we get put off with nowadays. As for the
wonderful deeds people did in those times and the extraordinary events
that happened, it takes three strong men to believe half of them.

I like to hear one of the old boys telling all about it to a party
of youngsters who he knows cannot contradict him. It is odd if, after
awhile, he doesn't swear that the moon shone every night when he was a
boy, and that tossing mad bulls in a blanket was the favorite sport at
his school.

It always has been and always will be the same. The old folk of our
grandfathers' young days sang a song bearing exactly the same burden;
and the young folk of to-day will drone out precisely similar nonsense
for the aggravation of the next generation. "Oh, give me back the
good old days of fifty years ago," has been the cry ever since Adam's
fifty-first birthday. Take up the literature of 1835, and you will find
the poets and novelists asking for the same impossible gift as did the
German Minnesingers long before them and the old Norse Saga writers long
before that. And for the same thing sighed the early prophets and the
philosophers of ancient Greece. From all accounts, the world has been
getting worse and worse ever since it was created. All I can say is that
it must have been a remarkably delightful place when it was first opened
to the public, for it is very pleasant even now if you only keep as much
as possible in the sunshine and take the rain good-temperedly.

Yet there is no gainsaying but that it must have been somewhat sweeter
in that dewy morning of creation, when it was young and fresh, when the
feet of the tramping millions had not trodden its grass to dust, nor the
din of the myriad cities chased the silence forever away. Life must have
been noble and solemn to those free-footed, loose-robed fathers of the
human race, walking hand in hand with God under the great sky. They
lived in sunkissed tents amid the lowing herds. They took their simple
wants from the loving hand of Nature. They toiled and talked and
thought; and the great earth rolled around in stillness, not yet laden
with trouble and wrong.

Those days are past now. The quiet childhood of Humanity, spent in the
far-off forest glades and by the murmuring rivers, is gone forever; and
human life is deepening down to manhood amid tumult, doubt, and hope.
Its age of restful peace is past. It has its work to finish and must
hasten on. What that work may be--what this world's share is in the
great design--we know not, though our unconscious hands are helping to
accomplish it. Like the tiny coral insect working deep under the dark
waters, we strive and struggle each for our own little ends, nor dream
of the vast fabric we are building up for God.

Let us have done with vain regrets and longings for the days that
never will be ours again. Our work lies in front, not behind us; and
"Forward!" is our motto. Let us not sit with folded hands, gazing upon
the past as if it were the building; it is but the foundation. Let us
not waste heart and life thinking of what might have been and forgetting
the may be that lies before us. Opportunities flit by while we sit
regretting the chances we have lost, and the happiness that comes to us
we heed not, because of the happiness that is gone.

Years ago, when I used to wander of an evening from the fireside to
the pleasant land of fairy-tales, I met a doughty knight and true. Many
dangers had he overcome, in many lands had been; and all men knew him
for a brave and well-tried knight, and one that knew not fear; except,
maybe, upon such seasons when even a brave man might feel afraid and yet
not be ashamed. Now, as this knight one day was pricking wearily along a
toilsome road, his heart misgave him and was sore within him because of
the trouble of the way. Rocks, dark and of a monstrous size, hung high
above his head, and like enough it seemed unto the knight that they
should fall and he lie low beneath them. Chasms there were on either
side, and darksome caves wherein fierce robbers lived, and dragons,
very terrible, whose jaws dripped blood. And upon the road there hung a
darkness as of night. So it came over that good knight that he would no
more press forward, but seek another road, less grievously beset with
difficulty unto his gentle steed. But when in haste he turned and looked
behind, much marveled our brave knight, for lo! of all the way that he
had ridden there was naught for eye to see; but at his horse's heels
there yawned a mighty gulf, whereof no man might ever spy the bottom,
so deep was that same gulf. Then when Sir Ghelent saw that of going back
there was none, he prayed to good Saint Cuthbert, and setting spurs into
his steed rode forward bravely and most joyously. And naught harmed him.

There is no returning on the road of life. The frail bridge of time on
which we tread sinks back into eternity at every step we take. The past
is gone from us forever. It is gathered in and garnered. It belongs
to us no more. No single word can ever be unspoken; no single step
retraced. Therefore it beseems us as true knights to prick on bravely,
not idly weep because we cannot now recall.

A new life begins for us with every second. Let us go forward joyously
to meet it. We must press on whether we will or no, and we shall walk
better with our eyes before us than with them ever cast behind.

A friend came to me the other day and urged me very eloquently to learn
some wonderful system by which you never forgot anything. I don't know
why he was so eager on the subject, unless it be that I occasionally
borrow an umbrella and have a knack of coming out, in the middle of a
game of whist, with a mild "Lor! I've been thinking all along that
clubs were trumps." I declined the suggestion, however, in spite of
the advantages he so attractively set forth. I have no wish to remember
everything. There are many things in most men's lives that had better be
forgotten. There is that time, many years ago, when we did not act quite
as honorably, quite as uprightly, as we perhaps should have done--that
unfortunate deviation from the path of strict probity we once committed,
and in which, more unfortunate still, we were found out--that act of
folly, of meanness, of wrong. Ah, well! we paid the penalty, suffered
the maddening hours of vain remorse, the hot agony of shame, the scorn,
perhaps, of those we loved. Let us forget. Oh, Father Time, lift with
your kindly hands those bitter memories from off our overburdened
hearts, for griefs are ever coming to us with the coming hours, and our
little strength is only as the day.

Not that the past should be buried. The music of life would be mute
if the chords of memory were snapped asunder. It is but the poisonous
weeds, not the flowers, that we should root out from the garden of
Mnemosyne. Do you remember Dickens' "Haunted Man"--how he prayed for
forgetfulness, and how, when his prayer was answered, he prayed for
memory once more? We do not want all the ghosts laid. It is only the
haggard, cruel-eyed specters that we flee from. Let the gentle, kindly
phantoms haunt us as they will; we are not afraid of them.

Ah me! the world grows very full of ghosts as we grow older. We need
not seek in dismal church-yards nor sleep in moated granges to see the
shadowy faces and hear the rustling of their garments in the night.
Every house, every room, every creaking chair has its own particular
ghost. They haunt the empty chambers of our lives, they throng around us
like dead leaves whirled in the autumn wind. Some are living, some are
dead. We know not. We clasped their hands once, loved them, quarreled
with them, laughed with them, told them our thoughts and hopes and aims,
as they told us theirs, till it seemed our very hearts had joined in a
grip that would defy the puny power of Death. They are gone now; lost to
us forever. Their eyes will never look into ours again and their voices
we shall never hear. Only their ghosts come to us and talk with us. We
see them, dim and shadowy, through our tears. We stretch our yearning
hands to them, but they are air.

Ghosts! They are with us night and day. They walk beside us in the busy
street under the glare of the sun. They sit by us in the twilight at
home. We see their little faces looking from the windows of the old
school-house. We meet them in the woods and lanes where we shouted and
played as boys. Hark! cannot you hear their low laughter from behind the
blackberry-bushes and their distant whoops along the grassy glades?
Down here, through the quiet fields and by the wood, where the evening
shadows are lurking, winds the path where we used to watch for her at
sunset. Look, she is there now, in the dainty white frock we knew so
well, with the big bonnet dangling from her little hands and the sunny
brown hair all tangled. Five thousand miles away! Dead for all we know!
What of that? She is beside us now, and we can look into her laughing
eyes and hear her voice. She will vanish at the stile by the wood and we
shall be alone; and the shadows will creep out across the fields and the
night wind will sweep past moaning. Ghosts! they are always with us and
always will be while the sad old world keeps echoing to the sob of long
good-bys, while the cruel ships sail away across the great seas, and the
cold green earth lies heavy on the hearts of those we loved.

But, oh, ghosts, the world would be sadder still without you. Come to
us and speak to us, oh you ghosts of our old loves! Ghosts of playmates,
and of sweethearts, and old friends, of all you laughing boys and girls,
oh, come to us and be with us, for the world is very lonely, and new
friends and faces are not like the old, and we cannot love them, nay,
nor laugh with them as we have loved and laughed with you. And when we
walked together, oh, ghosts of our youth, the world was very gay and
bright; but now it has grown old and we are growing weary, and only you
can bring the brightness and the freshness back to us.

Memory is a rare ghost-raiser. Like a haunted house, its walls are
ever echoing to unseen feet. Through the broken casements we watch the
flitting shadows of the dead, and the saddest shadows of them all are
the shadows of our own dead selves.

Oh, those young bright faces, so full of truth and honor, of pure, good
thoughts, of noble longings, how reproachfully they look upon us with
their deep, clear eyes!

I fear they have good cause for their sorrow, poor lads. Lies and
cunning and disbelief have crept into our hearts since those preshaving
days--and we meant to be so great and good.

It is well we cannot see into the future. There are few boys of fourteen
who would not feel ashamed of themselves at forty.

I like to sit and have a talk sometimes with that odd little chap that
was myself long ago. I think he likes it too, for he comes so often of
an evening when I am alone with my pipe, listening to the whispering
of the flames. I see his solemn little face looking at me through the
scented smoke as it floats upward, and I smile at him; and he smiles
back at me, but his is such a grave, old-fashioned smile. We chat about
old times; and now and then he takes me by the hand, and then we slip
through the black bars of the grate and down the dusky glowing caves
to the land that lies behind the firelight. There we find the days that
used to be, and we wander along them together. He tells me as we walk
all he thinks and feels. I laugh at him now and then, but the next
moment I wish I had not, for he looks so grave I am ashamed of being
frivolous. Besides, it is not showing proper respect to one so much
older than myself--to one who was myself so very long before I became
myself.

We don't talk much at first, but look at one another; I down at his
curly hair and little blue bow, he up sideways at me as he trots. And
some-how I fancy the shy, round eyes do not altogether approve of me,
and he heaves a little sigh, as though he were disappointed. But after
awhile his bashfulness wears off and he begins to chat. He tells me
his favorite fairy-tales, he can do up to six times, and he has a
guinea-pig, and pa says fairy-tales ain't true; and isn't it a pity?
'cos he would so like to be a knight and fight a dragon and marry a
beautiful princess. But he takes a more practical view of life when he
reaches seven, and would prefer to grow up be a bargee, and earn a lot
of money. Maybe this is the consequence of falling in love, which he
does about this time with the young lady at the milk shop aet. six. (God
bless her little ever-dancing feet, whatever size they may be now!)
He must be very fond of her, for he gives her one day his chiefest
treasure, to wit, a huge pocket-knife with four rusty blades and a
corkscrew, which latter has a knack of working itself out in some
mysterious manner and sticking into its owner's leg. She is an
affectionate little thing, and she throws her arms round his neck and
kisses him for it, then and there, outside the shop. But the stupid
world (in the person of the boy at the cigar emporium next door) jeers
at such tokens of love. Whereupon my young friend very properly prepares
to punch the head of the boy at the cigar emporium next door; but fails
in the attempt, the boy at the cigar emporium next door punching his
instead.

And then comes school life, with its bitter little sorrows and its
joyous shoutings, its jolly larks, and its hot tears falling on beastly
Latin grammars and silly old copy-books. It is at school that he injures
himself for life--as I firmly believe--trying to pronounce German;
and it is there, too, that he learns of the importance attached by the
French nation to pens, ink, and paper. "Have you pens, ink, and paper?"
is the first question asked by one Frenchman of another on their
meeting. The other fellow has not any of them, as a rule, but says
that the uncle of his brother has got them all three. The first fellow
doesn't appear to care a hang about the uncle of the other fellow's
brother; what he wants to know now is, has the neighbor of the other
fellow's mother got 'em? "The neighbor of my mother has no pens, no ink,
and no paper," replies the other man, beginning to get wild. "Has the
child of thy female gardener some pens, some ink, or some paper?" He has
him there. After worrying enough about these wretched inks, pens, and
paper to make everybody miserable, it turns out that the child of his
own female gardener hasn't any. Such a discovery would shut up any one
but a French exercise man. It has no effect at all, though, on this
shameless creature. He never thinks of apologizing, but says his aunt
has some mustard.

So in the acquisition of more or less useless knowledge, soon happily to
be forgotten, boyhood passes away. The red-brick school-house fades from
view, and we turn down into the world's high-road. My little friend is
no longer little now. The short jacket has sprouted tails. The battered
cap, so useful as a combination of pocket-handkerchief, drinking-cup,
and weapon of attack, has grown high and glossy; and instead of a
slate-pencil in his mouth there is a cigarette, the smoke of which
troubles him, for it will get up his nose. He tries a cigar a little
later on as being more stylish--a big black Havanna. It doesn't seem
altogether to agree with him, for I find him sitting over a bucket in
the back kitchen afterward, solemnly swearing never to smoke again.

And now his mustache begins to be almost visible to the naked eye,
whereupon he immediately takes to brandy-and-sodas and fancies himself
a man. He talks about "two to one against the favorite," refers to
actresses as "Little Emmy" and "Kate" and "Baby," and murmurs about his
"losses at cards the other night" in a style implying that thousands
have been squandered, though, to do him justice, the actual amount is
most probably one-and-twopence. Also, if I see aright--for it is always
twilight in this land of memories--he sticks an eyeglass in his eye and
stumbles over everything.

His female relations, much troubled at these things, pray for him (bless
their gentle hearts!) and see visions of Old Bailey trials and halters
as the only possible outcome of such reckless dissipation; and the
prediction of his first school-master, that he would come to a bad end,
assumes the proportions of inspired prophecy.

He has a lordly contempt at this age for the other sex, a blatantly good
opinion of himself, and a sociably patronizing manner toward all the
elderly male friends of the family. Altogether, it must be confessed, he
is somewhat of a nuisance about this time.

It does not last long, though. He falls in love in a little while, and
that soon takes the bounce out of him. I notice his boots are much too
small for him now, and his hair is fearfully and wonderfully arranged.
He reads poetry more than he used, and he keeps a rhyming dictionary in
his bedroom. Every morning Emily Jane finds scraps of torn-up paper on
the floor and reads thereon of "cruel hearts and love's deep darts," of
"beauteous eyes and lovers' sighs," and much more of the old, old song
that lads so love to sing and lassies love to listen to while giving
their dainty heads a toss and pretending never to hear.

The course of love, however, seems not to have run smoothly, for later
on he takes more walking exercise and less sleep, poor boy, than is good
for him; and his face is suggestive of anything but wedding-bells and
happiness ever after.

And here he seems to vanish. The little, boyish self that has grown up
beside me as we walked is gone.

I am alone and the road is very dark. I stumble on, I know not how nor
care, for the way seems leading nowhere, and there is no light to guide.

But at last the morning comes, and I find that I have grown into myself.

THE END.








TO THE GENTLE READER;
also
TO THE GENTLE CRITIC.


Once upon a time, I wrote a little story of a woman who was crushed to
death by a python.  A day or two after its publication, a friend stopped
me in the street.  "Charming little story of yours," he said, "that about
the woman and the snake; but it's not as funny as some of your things!"
The next week, a newspaper, referring to the tale, remarked, "We have
heard the incident related before with infinitely greater humour."

With this--and many similar experiences--in mind, I wish distinctly to
state that "John Ingerfield," "The Woman of the Saeter," and
"Silhouettes," are not intended to be amusing.  The two other
items--"Variety Patter," and "The Lease of the Cross Keys"--I give over
to the critics of the new humour to rend as they will; but "John
Ingerfield," "The Woman of the Saeter," and "Silhouettes," I repeat, I
should be glad if they would judge from some other standpoint than that
of humour, new or old.




IN REMEMBRANCE OF JOHN INGERFIELD, AND OF ANNE, HIS WIFE
A STORY OF OLD LONDON, IN TWO CHAPTERS


CHAPTER I.


If you take the Underground Railway to Whitechapel Road (the East
station), and from there take one of the yellow tramcars that start from
that point, and go down the Commercial Road, past the George, in front of
which starts--or used to stand--a high flagstaff, at the base of which
sits--or used to sit--an elderly female purveyor of pigs' trotters at
three-ha'pence apiece, until you come to where a railway arch crosses the
road obliquely, and there get down and turn to the right up a narrow,
noisy street leading to the river, and then to the right again up a still
narrower street, which you may know by its having a public-house at one
corner (as is in the nature of things) and a marine store-dealer's at the
other, outside which strangely stiff and unaccommodating garments of
gigantic size flutter ghost-like in the wind, you will come to a dingy
railed-in churchyard, surrounded on all sides by cheerless, many-peopled
houses.  Sad-looking little old houses they are, in spite of the tumult
of life about their ever open doors.  They and the ancient church in
their midst seem weary of the ceaseless jangle around them.  Perhaps,
standing there for so many years, listening to the long silence of the
dead, the fretful voices of the living sound foolish in their ears.

Peering through the railings on the side nearest the river, you will see
beneath the shadow of the soot-grimed church's soot-grimed porch--that
is, if the sun happen, by rare chance, to be strong enough to cast any
shadow at all in that region of grey light--a curiously high and narrow
headstone that once was white and straight, not tottering and bent with
age as it is now.  There is upon this stone a carving in bas-relief, as
you will see for yourself if you will make your way to it through the
gateway on the opposite side of the square.  It represents, so far as can
be made out, for it is much worn by time and dirt, a figure lying on the
ground with another figure bending over it, while at a little distance
stands a third object.  But this last is so indistinct that it might be
almost anything, from an angel to a post.

And below the carving are the words (already half obliterated) that I
have used for the title of this story.

Should you ever wander of a Sunday morning within sound of the cracked
bell that calls a few habit-bound, old-fashioned folk to worship within
those damp-stained walls, and drop into talk with the old men who on such
days sometimes sit, each in his brass-buttoned long brown coat, upon the
low stone coping underneath those broken railings, you might hear this
tale from them, as I did, more years ago than I care to recollect.

But lest you do not choose to go to all this trouble, or lest the old men
who could tell it you have grown tired of all talk, and are not to be
roused ever again into the telling of tales, and you yet wish for the
story, I will here set it down for you.

But I cannot recount it to you as they told it to me, for to me it was
only a tale that I heard and remembered, thinking to tell it again for
profit, while to them it was a thing that had been, and the threads of it
were interwoven with the woof of their own life.  As they talked, faces
that I did not see passed by among the crowd and turned and looked at
them, and voices that I did not hear spoke to them below the clamour of
the street, so that through their thin piping voices there quivered the
deep music of life and death, and my tale must be to theirs but as a
gossip's chatter to the story of him whose breast has felt the press of
battle.

* * * * *

John Ingerfield, oil and tallow refiner, of Lavender Wharf, Limehouse,
comes of a hard-headed, hard-fisted stock.  The first of the race that
the eye of Record, piercing the deepening mists upon the centuries behind
her, is able to discern with any clearness is a long-haired, sea-bronzed
personage, whom men call variously Inge or Unger.  Out of the wild North
Sea he has come.  Record observes him, one of a small, fierce group,
standing on the sands of desolate Northumbria, staring landward, his
worldly wealth upon his back.  This consists of a two-handed battle-axe,
value perhaps some forty stycas in the currency of the time.  A careful
man, with business capabilities, may, however, manipulate a small capital
to great advantage.  In what would appear, to those accustomed to our
slow modern methods, an incredibly short space of time, Inge's two-handed
battle-axe has developed into wide lands and many head of cattle; which
latter continue to multiply with a rapidity beyond the dreams of present-
day breeders.  Inge's descendants would seem to have inherited the genius
of their ancestor, for they prosper and their worldly goods increase.
They are a money-making race.  In all times, out of all things, by all
means, they make money.  They fight for money, marry for money, live for
money, are ready to die for money.

In the days when the most saleable and the highest priced article in the
markets of Europe was a strong arm and a cool head, then each Ingerfield
(as "Inge," long rooted in Yorkshire soil, had grown or been corrupted
to) was a soldier of fortune, and offered his strong arm and his cool
head to the highest bidder.  They fought for their price, and they took
good care that they obtained their price; but, the price settled, they
fought well, for they were staunch men and true, according to their
lights, though these lights may have been placed somewhat low down, near
the earth.

Then followed the days when the chief riches of the world lay tossed for
daring hands to grasp upon the bosom of the sea, and the sleeping spirit
of the old Norse Rover stirred in their veins, and the lilt of a wild sea-
song they had never heard kept ringing in their ears; and they built them
ships and sailed for the Spanish Main, and won much wealth, as was their
wont.

Later on, when Civilisation began to lay down and enforce sterner rules
for the game of life, and peaceful methods promised to prove more
profitable than violent, the Ingerfields became traders and merchants of
grave mien and sober life; for their ambition from generation to
generation remains ever the same, their various callings being but means
to an end.

A hard, stern race of men they would seem to have been, but just--so far
as they understood justice.  They have the reputation of having been good
husbands, fathers, and masters; but one cannot help thinking of them as
more respected than loved.

They were men to exact the uttermost farthing due to them, yet not
without a sense of the thing due from them, their own duty and
responsibility--nay, not altogether without their moments of heroism,
which is the duty of great men.  History relates how a certain Captain
Ingerfield, returning with much treasure from the West Indies--how
acquired it were, perhaps, best not to inquire too closely--is overhauled
upon the high seas by King's frigate.  Captain of King's frigate sends
polite message to Captain Ingerfield requesting him to be so kind as to
promptly hand over a certain member of his ship's company, who, by some
means or another, has made himself objectionable to King's friends, in
order that he (the said objectionable person) may be forthwith hanged
from the yard-arm.

Captain Ingerfield returns polite answer to Captain of King's frigate
that he (Captain Ingerfield) will, with much pleasure, hang any member of
his ship's company that needs hanging, but that neither the King of
England nor any one else on God Almighty's sea is going to do it for him.
Captain of King's frigate sends back word that if objectionable person be
not at once given up he shall be compelled with much regret to send
Ingerfield and his ship to the bottom of the Atlantic.  Replies Captain
Ingerfield, "That is just what he will have to do before I give up one of
my people," and fights the big frigate--fights it so fiercely that after
three hours Captain of King's frigate thinks it will be good to try
argument again, and sends therefore a further message, courteously
acknowledging Captain Ingerfield's courage and skill, and suggesting
that, he having done sufficient to vindicate his honour and renown, it
would be politic to now hand over the unimportant cause of contention,
and so escape with his treasure.

"Tell your Captain," shouts back this Ingerfield, who has discovered
there are sweeter things to fight for than even money, "that the _Wild
Goose_ has flown the seas with her belly full of treasure before now, and
will, if it be God's pleasure, so do again, but that master and man in
her sail together, fight together, and die together."

Whereupon King's frigate pounds away more vigorously than ever, and
succeeds eventually in carrying out her threat.  Down goes the _Wild
Goose_, her last chase ended--down she goes with a plunge, spit foremost
with her colours flying; and down with her goes every man left standing
on her decks; and at the bottom of the Atlantic they lie to this day,
master and man side by side, keeping guard upon their treasure.

Which incident, and it is well authenticated, goes far to prove that the
Ingerfields, hard men and grasping men though they be--men caring more
for the getting of money than for the getting of love--loving more the
cold grip of gold than the grip of kith or kin, yet bear buried in their
hearts the seeds of a nobler manhood, for which, however, the barren soil
of their ambition affords scant nourishment.

The John Ingerfield of this story is a man very typical of his race.  He
has discovered that the oil and tallow refining business, though not a
pleasant one, is an exceedingly lucrative one.  These are the good days
when George the Third is king, and London is rapidly becoming a city of
bright night.  Tallow and oil and all materials akin thereto are in ever-
growing request, and young John Ingerfield builds himself a large
refining house and warehouse in the growing suburb of Limehouse, which
lies between the teeming river and the quiet fields, gathers many people
round about him, puts his strong heart into his work, and prospers.

All the days of his youth he labours and garners, and lays out and
garners yet again.  In early middle age he finds himself a wealthy man.
The chief business of life, the getting of money, is practically done;
his enterprise is firmly established, and will continue to grow with ever
less need of husbandry.  It is time for him to think about the secondary
business of life, the getting together of a wife and home, for the
Ingerfields have ever been good citizens, worthy heads of families,
openhanded hosts, making a brave show among friends and neighbours.

John Ingerfield, sitting in his stiff, high-backed chair, in his stiffly,
but solidly, furnished dining-room, above his counting-house, sipping
slowly his one glass of port, takes counsel with himself.

What shall she be?

He is rich, and can afford a good article.  She must be young and
handsome, fit to grace the fine house he will take for her in fashionable
Bloomsbury, far from the odour and touch of oil and tallow.  She must be
well bred, with a gracious, noble manner, that will charm his guests and
reflect honour and credit upon himself; she must, above all, be of good
family, with a genealogical tree sufficiently umbrageous to hide Lavender
Wharf from the eyes of Society.

What else she may or may not be he does not very much care.  She will, of
course, be virtuous and moderately pious, as it is fit and proper that
women should be.  It will also be well that her disposition be gentle and
yielding, but that is of minor importance, at all events so far as he is
concerned: the Ingerfield husbands are not the class of men upon whom
wives vent their tempers.

Having decided in his mind _what_ she shall be, he proceeds to discuss
with himself _who_ she shall be.  His social circle is small.
Methodically, in thought, he makes the entire round of it, mentally
scrutinising every maiden that he knows.  Some are charming, some are
fair, some are rich; but no one of them approaches near to his carefully
considered ideal.

He keeps the subject in his mind, and muses on it in the intervals of
business.  At odd moments he jots down names as they occur to him upon a
slip of paper, which he pins for the purpose on the inside of the cover
of his desk.  He arranges them alphabetically, and when it is as complete
as his memory can make it, he goes critically down the list, making a few
notes against each.  As a result, it becomes clear to him that he must
seek among strangers for his wife.

He has a friend, or rather an acquaintance, an old school-fellow, who has
developed into one of those curious social flies that in all ages are to
be met with buzzing contentedly within the most exclusive circles, and
concerning whom, seeing that they are neither rare nor rich, nor
extraordinarily clever nor well born, one wonders "how the devil they got
there!"  Meeting this man by chance one afternoon, he links his arm in
his and invites him home to dinner.

So soon as they are left alone, with the walnuts and wine between them,
John Ingerfield says, thoughtfully cracking a hard nut between his
fingers--

"Will, I'm going to get married."

"Excellent idea--delighted to hear it, I'm sure," replies Will, somewhat
less interested in the information than in the delicately flavoured
Madeira he is lovingly sipping.  "Who's the lady?"

"I don't know, yet," is John Ingerfield's answer.

His friend glances slyly at him over his glass, not sure whether he is
expected to be amused or sympathetically helpful.

"I want you to find one for me."

Will Cathcart puts down his glass and stares at his host across the
table.

"Should be delighted to help you, Jack," he stammers, in an alarmed
tone--"'pon my soul I should; but really don't know a damned woman I
could recommend--'pon my soul I don't."

"You must see a good many: I wish you'd look out for one that you _could_
recommend."

"Certainly I will, my dear Jack!" answers the other, in a relieved voice.
"Never thought about 'em in that way before.  Daresay I shall come across
the very girl to suit you.  I'll keep my eyes open and let you know."

"I shall be obliged to you if you will," replies John Ingerfield,
quietly; "and it's your turn, I think, to oblige me, Will.  I have
obliged you, if you recollect."

"Shall never forget it, my dear Jack," murmurs Will, a little uneasily.
"It was uncommonly good of you.  You saved me from ruin, Jack: shall
think about it to my dying day--'pon my soul I shall."

"No need to let it worry you for so long a period as that," returns John,
with the faintest suspicion of a smile playing round his firm mouth.  "The
bill falls due at the end of next month.  You can discharge the debt
then, and the matter will be off your mind."

Will finds his chair growing uncomfortable under him, while the Madeira
somehow loses its flavour.  He gives a short, nervous laugh.

"By Jove," he says: "so soon as that?  The date had quite slipped my
memory."

"Fortunate that I reminded you," says John, the smile round his lips
deepening.

Will fidgets on his seat.  "I'm afraid, my dear Jack," he says, "I shall
have to get you to renew it, just for a month or two,--deuced awkward
thing, but I'm remarkably short of money this year.  Truth is, I can't
get what's owing to myself."

"That's very awkward, certainly," replies his friend, "because I am not
at all sure that I shall be able to renew it."

Will stares at him in some alarm.  "But what am I to do if I hav'n't the
money?"

John Ingerfield shrugs his shoulders.

"You don't mean, my dear Jack, that you would put me in prison?"

"Why not?  Other people have to go there who can't pay their debts."

Will Cathcart's alarm grows to serious proportions.  "But our
friendship," he cries, "our--"

"My dear Will," interrupts the other, "there are few friends I would lend
three hundred pounds to and make no effort to get it back.  You,
certainly, are not one of them."

"Let us make a bargain," he continues.  "Find me a wife, and on the day
of my marriage I will send you back that bill with, perhaps, a couple of
hundred added.  If by the end of next month you have not introduced me to
a lady fit to be, and willing to be, Mrs. John Ingerfield, I shall
decline to renew it."

John Ingerfield refills his own glass and hospitably pushes the bottle
towards his guest--who, however, contrary to his custom, takes no notice
of it, but stares hard at his shoe-buckles.

"Are you serious?" he says at length.

"Quite serious," is the answer.  "I want to marry.  My wife must be a
lady by birth and education.  She must be of good family--of family
sufficiently good, indeed, to compensate for the refinery.  She must be
young and beautiful and charming.  I am purely a business man.  I want a
woman capable of conducting the social department of my life.  I know of
no such lady myself.  I appeal to you, because you, I know, are intimate
with the class among whom she must be sought."

"There may be some difficulty in persuading a lady of the required
qualifications to accept the situation," says Cathcart, with a touch of
malice.

"I want you to find one who will," says John Ingerfield.

Early in the evening Will Cathcart takes leave of his host, and departs
thoughtful and anxious; and John Ingerfield strolls contemplatively up
and down his wharf, for the smell of oil and tallow has grown to be very
sweet to him, and it is pleasant to watch the moonbeams shining on the
piled-up casks.

Six weeks go by.  On the first day of the seventh John takes Will
Cathcart's acceptance from its place in the large safe, and lays it in
the smaller box beside his desk, devoted to more pressing and immediate
business.  Two days later Cathcart picks his way across the slimy yard,
passes through the counting-house, and enters his friend's inner sanctum,
closing the door behind him.

He wears a jubilant air, and slaps the grave John on the back.  "I've got
her, Jack," he cries.  "It's been hard work, I can tell you: sounding
suspicious old dowagers, bribing confidential servants, fishing for
information among friends of the family.  By Jove, I shall be able to
join the Duke's staff as spy-in-chief to His Majesty's entire forces
after this!"

"What is she like?" asks John, without stopping his writing.

"Like!  My dear Jack, you'll fall over head and ears in love with her the
moment you see her.  A little cold, perhaps, but that will just suit
you."

"Good family?" asks John, signing and folding the letter he has finished.

"So good that I was afraid at first it would be useless thinking of her.
But she's a sensible girl, no confounded nonsense about her, and the
family are poor as church mice.  In fact--well, to tell the truth, we
have become most excellent friends, and she told me herself frankly that
she meant to marry a rich man, and didn't much care whom."

"That sounds hopeful," remarks the would-be bridegroom, with his peculiar
dry smile: "when shall I have the pleasure of seeing her?"

"I want you to come with me to-night to the Garden," replies the other;
"she will be in Lady Heatherington's box, and I will introduce you."

So that evening John Ingerfield goes to Covent Garden Theatre, with the
blood running a trifle quicker in his veins, but not much, than would be
the case were he going to the docks to purchase tallow--examines,
covertly, the proposed article from the opposite side of the house, and
approves her--is introduced to her, and, on closer inspection, approves
her still more--receives an invitation to visit--visits frequently, and
each time is more satisfied of the rarity, serviceableness, and quality
of the article.

If all John Ingerfield requires for a wife is a beautiful social machine,
surely here he has found his ideal.  Anne Singleton, only daughter of
that persistently unfortunate but most charming of baronets, Sir Harry
Singleton (more charming, it is rumoured, outside his family circle than
within it), is a stately graceful, high-bred woman.  Her portrait, by
Reynolds, still to be seen above the carved wainscoting of one of the old
City halls, shows a wonderfully handsome and clever face, but at the same
time a wonderfully cold and heartless one.  It is the face of a woman
half weary of, half sneering at the world.  One reads in old family
letters, whereof the ink is now very faded and the paper very yellow,
long criticisms of this portrait.  The writers complain that if the
picture is at all like her she must have greatly changed since her
girlhood, for they remember her then as having a laughing and winsome
expression.

They say--they who knew her in after-life--that this earlier face came
back to her in the end, so that the many who remembered opening their
eyes and seeing her bending down over them could never recognise the
portrait of the beautiful sneering lady, even when they were told whom it
represented.

But at the time of John Ingerfield's strange wooing she was the Anne
Singleton of Sir Joshua's portrait, and John Ingerfield liked her the
better that she was.

He had no feeling of sentiment in the matter himself, and it simplified
the case that she had none either.  He offered her a plain bargain, and
she accepted it.  For all he knew or cared, her attitude towards this
subject of marriage was the usual one assumed by women.  Very young girls
had their heads full of romantic ideas.  It was better for her and for
him that she had got rid of them.

"Ours will be a union founded on good sense," said John Ingerfield.

"Let us hope the experiment will succeed," said Anne Singleton.



CHAPTER II.


But the experiment does not succeed.  The laws of God decree that man
shall purchase woman, that woman shall give herself to man, for other
coin than that of good sense.  Good sense is not a legal tender in the
marriage mart.  Men and women who enter therein with only sense in their
purse have no right to complain if, on reaching home, they find they have
concluded an unsatisfactory bargain.

John Ingerfield, when he asked Anne Singleton to be his wife, felt no
more love for her than he felt for any of the other sumptuous household
appointments he was purchasing about the same time, and made no pretence
of doing so.  Nor, had he done so, would she have believed him; for Anne
Singleton has learned much in her twenty-two summers and winters, and
knows that love is only a meteor in life's sky, and that the true
lodestar of this world is gold.  Anne Singleton has had her romance and
buried it deep down in her deep nature and over its grave, to keep its
ghost from rising, has piled the stones of indifference and contempt, as
many a woman has done before and since.  Once upon a time Anne Singleton
sat dreaming out a story.  It was a story old as the hills--older than
some of them--but to her, then, it was quite new and very wonderful.  It
contained all the usual stock material common to such stories: the lad
and the lass, the plighted troth, the richer suitors, the angry parents,
the love that was worth braving all the world for.  One day into this
dream there fell from the land of the waking a letter, a poor, pitiful
letter: "You know I love you and only you," it ran; "my heart will always
be yours till I die.  But my father threatens to stop my allowance, and,
as you know, I have nothing of my own except debts.  Some would call her
handsome, but how can I think of her beside you?  Oh, why was money ever
let to come into the world to curse us?" with many other puzzling
questions of a like character, and much severe condemnation of Fate and
Heaven and other parties generally, and much self-commiseration.

Anne Singleton took long to read the letter.  When she had finished it,
and had read it through again, she rose, and, crushing it her hand, flung
it in the fire with a laugh, and as the flame burnt up and died away felt
that her life had died with it, not knowing that bruised hearts can heal.

So when John Ingerfield comes wooing, and speaks to her no word of love
but only of money, she feels that here at last is a genuine voice that
she can trust.  Love of the lesser side of life is still left to her.  It
will be pleasant to be the wealthy mistress of a fine house, to give
great receptions, to exchange the secret poverty of home for display and
luxury.  These things are offered to her on the very terms she would have
suggested herself.  Accompanied by love she would have refused them,
knowing she could give none in return.

But a woman finds it one thing not to desire affection and another thing
not to possess it.  Day by day the atmosphere of the fine house in
Bloomsbury grows cold and colder about her heart.  Guests warm it at
times for a few hours, then depart, leaving it chillier than before.

For her husband she attempts to feel indifference, but living creatures
joined together cannot feel indifference for each other.  Even two dogs
in a leash are compelled to think of one another.  A man and wife must
love or hate, like or dislike, in degree as the bond connecting them is
drawn tight or allowed to hang slack.  By mutual desire their chains of
wedlock have been fastened as loosely as respect for security will
permit, with the happy consequence that her aversion to him does not
obtrude itself beyond the limits of politeness.

Her part of the contract she faithfully fulfils, for the Singletons also
have their code of honour.  Her beauty, her tact, her charm, her
influence, are devoted to his service--to the advancement of his
position, the furtherance of his ambition.  Doors that would otherwise
remain closed she opens to him.  Society, that would otherwise pass by
with a sneer, sits round his table.  His wishes and pleasures are hers.
In all things she yields him wifely duty, seeks to render herself
agreeable to him, suffers in silence his occasional caresses.  Whatever
was implied in the bargain, that she will perform to the letter.

He, on his side, likewise performs his part with businesslike
conscientiousness--nay, seeing that the pleasing of her brings no
personal gratification to himself--not without generosity.   He is ever
thoughtful of and deferential to her, awarding her at all times an
unvarying courteousness that is none the less sincere for being studied.
Her every expressed want is gratified, her every known distaste
respected.  Conscious of his presence being an oppression to her, he is
even careful not to intrude it upon her oftener than is necessary.

At times he asks himself, somewhat pertinently, what he has gained by
marriage--wonders whether this social race was quite the most interesting
game he could have elected to occupy his leisure--wonders whether, after
all, he would not have been happier over his counting-house than in these
sumptuous, glittering rooms, where he always seems, and feels himself to
be, the uninvited guest.

The only feeling that a closer intimacy has created in him for his wife
is that of indulgent contempt.  As there is no equality between man and
woman, so there can be no respect.  She is a different being.  He must
either look up to her as superior to himself, or down upon her as
inferior.  When a man does the former he is more or less in love, and
love to John Ingerfield is an unknown emotion.  Her beauty, her charm,
her social tact--even while he makes use of them for his own purposes, he
despises as the weapons of a weak nature.

So in their big, cold mansion John Ingerfield and Anne, his wife, sit far
apart, strangers to one another, neither desiring to know the other
nearer.

About his business he never speaks to her, and she never questions him.
To compensate for the slight shrinkage of time he is able to devote to
it, he becomes more strict and exacting; grows a harsher master to his
people, a sterner creditor, a greedier dealer, squeezing the uttermost
out of every one, feverish to grow richer, so that he may spend more upon
the game that day by day he finds more tiresome and uninteresting.

And the piled-up casks upon his wharves increase and multiply; and on the
dirty river his ships and barges lie in ever-lengthening lines; and round
his greasy cauldrons sweating, witch-like creatures swarm in ever-denser
numbers, stirring oil and tallow into gold.

Until one summer, from its nest in the far East, there flutters westward
a foul thing.  Hovering over Limehouse suburb, seeing it crowded and
unclean, liking its fetid smell, it settles down upon it.

Typhus is the creature's name.  At first it lurks there unnoticed,
battening upon the rich, rank food it finds around it, until, grown too
big to hide longer, it boldly shows its hideous head, and the white face
of Terror runs swiftly through alley and street, crying as it runs,
forces itself into John Ingerfield's counting-house, and tells its tale.
John Ingerfield sits for a while thinking.  Then he mounts his horse and
rides home at as hard a pace as the condition of the streets will allow.
In the hall he meets Anne going out, and stops her.

"Don't come too near me," he says quietly.  "Typhus fever has broken out
at Limehouse, and they say one can communicate it, even without having it
oneself.  You had better leave London for a few weeks.  Go down to your
father's: I will come and fetch you when it is all over."

He passes her, giving her a wide berth, and goes upstairs, where he
remains for some minutes in conversation with his valet.  Then, coming
down, he remounts and rides off again.

After a little while Anne goes up into his room.  His man is kneeling in
the middle of the floor, packing a valise.

"Where are you to take it?" she asks.

"Down to the wharf, ma'am," answers the man: "Mr. Ingerfield is going to
be there for a day or two."

Then Anne sits in the great empty drawing-room, and takes _her_ turn at
thinking.

John Ingerfield finds, on his return to Limehouse, that the evil has
greatly increased during the short time he has been away.  Fanned by fear
and ignorance, fed by poverty and dirt, the scourge is spreading through
the district like a fire.  Long smouldering in secret, it has now burst
forth at fifty different points at once.  Not a street, not a court but
has its "case."  Over a dozen of John's hands are down with it already.
Two more have sunk prostrate beside their work within the last hour.  The
panic grows grotesque.  Men and women tear their clothes off, looking to
see if they have anywhere upon them a rash or a patch of mottled skin,
find that they have, or imagine that they have, and rush, screaming, half-
undressed, into the street.  Two men, meeting in a narrow passage, both
rush back, too frightened to pass each other.  A boy stoops down and
scratches his leg--not an action that under ordinary circumstances would
excite much surprise in that neighbourhood.  In an instant there is a
wild stampede from the room, the strong trampling on the weak in their
eagerness to escape.

These are not the days of organised defence against disease.  There are
kind hearts and willing hands in London town, but they are not yet
closely enough banded together to meet a swift foe such as this.  There
are hospitals and charities galore, but these are mostly in the City,
maintained by the City Fathers for the exclusive benefit of poor citizens
and members of the guilds.  The few free hospitals are already
over-crowded and ill-prepared.  Squalid, outlying Limehouse, belonging to
nowhere, cared for by nobody, must fight for itself.

John Ingerfield calls the older men together, and with their help
attempts to instil some sense and reason into his terrified people.
Standing on the step of his counting-house, and addressing as many of
them as are not too scared to listen, he tells them of the danger of fear
and of the necessity for calmness and courage.

"We must face and fight this thing like men," he cries, in that deep, din-
conquering voice that has served the Ingerfields in good stead on many a
steel-swept field, on many a storm-struck sea; "there must be no cowardly
selfishness, no faint-hearted despair.  If we've got to die we'll die;
but please God we'll live.  Anyhow, we will stick together, and help each
other.  I mean to stop here with you, and do what I can for you.  None of
my people shall want."

John Ingerfield ceases, and as the vibrations of his strong tones roll
away a sweet voice from beside him rises clear and firm:--

"I have come down to be with you also, and to help my husband.  I shall
take charge of the nursing and tending of your sick, and I hope I shall
be of some real use to you.  My husband and I are so sorry for you in
your trouble.  I know you will be brave and patient.  We will all do our
best, and be hopeful."

He turns, half expecting to see only the empty air and to wonder at the
delirium in his brain.  She puts her hand in his, and their eyes meet;
and in that moment, for the first time in their lives, these two see one
another.

They speak no word.  There is no opportunity for words.  There is work to
be done, and done quickly, and Anne grasps it with the greed of a woman
long hungry for the joy of doing.  As John watches her moving swiftly and
quietly through the bewildered throng, questioning, comforting, gently
compelling, the thought comes to him, Ought he to allow her to be here,
risking her life for his people? followed by the thought, How is he going
to prevent it?  For in this hour the knowledge is born within him that
Anne is not his property; that he and she are fellow hands taking their
orders from the same Master; that though it be well for them to work
together and help each other, they must not hinder one another.

As yet John does not understand all this.  The idea is new and strange to
him.  He feels as the child in a fairy story on suddenly discovering that
the trees and flowers has he passed by carelessly a thousand times can
think and talk.  Once he whispers to her of the labour and the danger,
but she answers simply, "They are my people too, John: it is my work";
and he lets her have her way.

Anne has a true woman's instinct for nursing, and her strong sense stands
her in stead of experience.  A glance into one or two of the squalid dens
where these people live tells her that if her patients are to be saved
they must be nursed away from their own homes; and she determines to
convert the large counting-house--a long, lofty room at the opposite end
of the wharf to the refinery--into a temporary hospital.  Selecting some
seven or eight of the most reliable women to assist her, she proceeds to
prepare it for its purpose.  Ledgers might be volumes of poetry, bills of
lading mere street ballads, for all the respect that is shown to them.
The older clerks stand staring aghast, feeling that the end of all things
is surely at hand, and that the universe is rushing down into space,
until, their idleness being detected, they are themselves promptly
impressed for the sacrilegious work, and made to assist in the demolition
of their own temple.

Anne's commands are spoken very sweetly, and are accompanied by the
sweetest of smiles; but they are nevertheless commands, and somehow it
does not occur to any one to disobey them.  John--stern, masterful,
authoritative John, who has never been approached with anything more
dictatorial than a timid request since he left Merchant Taylors' School
nineteen years ago, who would have thought that something had suddenly
gone wrong with the laws of Nature if he had been--finds himself hurrying
along the street on his way to a druggist's shop, slackens his pace an
instant to ask himself why and wherefore he is doing so, recollects that
he was told to do so and to make haste back, marvels who could have dared
to tell him to do anything and to make haste back, remembers that it was
Anne, is not quite sure what to think about it, but hurries on.  He
"makes haste back," is praised for having been so quick, and feels
pleased with himself; is sent off again in another direction, with
instructions what to say when he gets there.  He starts off (he is
becoming used to being ordered about now).  Halfway there great alarm
seizes him, for on attempting to say over the message to himself, to be
sure that he has it quite right, he discovers he has forgotten it.  He
pauses, nervous and excited; cogitates as to whether it will be safe for
him to concoct a message of his own, weighs anxiously the
chances--supposing that he does so--of being found out.  Suddenly, to his
intense surprise and relief, every word of what he was told to say comes
back to him; and he hastens on, repeating it over and over to himself as
he walks, lest it should escape him again.

And then a few hundred yards farther on there occurs one of the most
extraordinary events that has ever happened in that street before or
since: John Ingerfield laughs.

John Ingerfield, of Lavender Wharf, after walking two-thirds of Creek
Lane, muttering to himself with his eyes on the ground, stops in the
middle of the road and laughs; and one small boy, who tells the story to
his dying day, sees him and hears him, and runs home at the top of his
speed with the wonderful news, and is conscientiously slapped by his
mother for telling lies.

All that day Anne works like a heroine, John helping her, and
occasionally getting in the way.  By night she has her little hospital
prepared and three beds already up and occupied; and, all now done that
can be done, she and John go upstairs to his old rooms above the counting-
house.

John ushers her into them with some misgiving, for by contrast with the
house at Bloomsbury they are poor and shabby.  He places her in the arm-
chair near the fire, begging her to rest quiet, and then assists his old
housekeeper, whose wits, never of the strongest, have been scared by the
day's proceeding, to lay the meal.

Anne's eyes follow him as he moves about the room.  Perhaps here, where
all the real part of his life has been passed, he is more his true self
than amid the unfamiliar surroundings of fashion; perhaps this simpler
frame shows him to greater advantage; but Anne wonders how it is she has
never noticed before that he is a well-set, handsome man.  Nor, indeed,
is he so very old-looking.  Is it a trick of the dim light, or what?  He
looks almost young.  But why should he not look young, seeing he is only
thirty-six, and at thirty-six a man is in his prime?  Anne wonders why
she has always thought of him as an elderly person.

A portrait of one of John's ancestors hangs over the great mantelpiece--of
that sturdy Captain Ingerfield who fought the King's frigate rather than
give up one of his people.  Anne glances from the dead face to the living
and notes the strong likeness between them.  Through her half-closed eyes
she sees the grim old captain hurling back his message of defiance, and
his face is the face she saw a few hours ago, saying, "I mean to stop
here with you and do what I can for you.  None of my people shall want."

John is placing a chair for her at the table, and the light from the
candles falls upon him.  She steals another glance at his face--a strong,
stern, handsome face, capable of becoming a noble face.  Anne wonders if
it has ever looked down tenderly at anyone; feels a sudden fierce pain at
the thought; dismisses the thought as impossible; wonders, nevertheless,
how tenderness would suit it; thinks she would like to see a look of
tenderness upon it, simply out of curiosity; wonders if she ever will.

She rouses herself from her reverie as John, with a smile, tells her
supper is ready, and they seat themselves opposite each other, an odd air
of embarrassment pervading.

Day by day their work grows harder; day by day the foe grows stronger,
fiercer, more all-conquering; and day by day, fighting side by side
against it, John Ingerfield and Anne, his wife, draw closer to each
other.  On the battle-field of life we learn the worth of strength.  Anne
feels it good, when growing weary, to glance up and find him near her;
feels it good, amid the troubled babel round her, to hear the deep,
strong music of his voice.

And John, watching Anne's fair figure moving to and fro among the
stricken and the mourning; watching her fair, fluttering hands, busy with
their holy work, her deep, soul-haunting eyes, changeful with the light
and shade of tenderness; listening to her sweet, clear voice, laughing
with the joyous, comforting the comfortless, gently commanding, softly
pleading, finds creeping into his brain strange new thoughts concerning
women--concerning this one woman in particular.

One day, rummaging over an old chest, he comes across a coloured picture-
book of Bible stories.  He turns the torn pages fondly, remembering the
Sunday afternoons of long ago.  At one picture, wherein are represented
many angels, he pauses; for in one of the younger angels of the group--one
not quite so severe of feature as her sisters--he fancies he can trace
resemblance to Anne.  He lingers long over it.  Suddenly there rushes
through his brain the thought, How good to stoop and kiss the sweet feet
of such a woman! and, thinking it, he blushes like a boy.

So from the soil of human suffering spring the flowers of human love and
joy, and from the flowers there fall the seeds of infinite pity for human
pain, God shaping all things to His ends.

Thinking of Anne, John's face grows gentler, his hand kinder; dreaming of
him, her heart grows stronger, deeper, fuller.  Every available room in
the warehouse has been turned into a ward, and the little hospital is
open free to all, for John and Anne feel that the whole world are their
people.  The piled-up casks are gone--shipped to Woolwich and Gravesend,
bundled anywhere out of the way, as though oil and tallow and the gold
they can be stirred into were matters of small moment in this world, not
to be thought of beside such a thing as the helping of a human brother in
sore strait.

All the labour of the day seems light to them, looking forward to the
hour when they sit together in John's old shabby dining-room above the
counting-house.  Yet a looker-on might imagine such times dull to them;
for they are strangely shy of one another, strangely sparing of
words--fearful of opening the flood-gates of speech, feeling the pressure
of the pent-up thought.

One evening, John, throwing out words, not as a sop to the necessity for
talk, but as a bait to catch Anne's voice, mentions girdle-cakes,
remembers that his old housekeeper used to be famous for the making of
them, and wonders if she has forgotten the art.

Anne, answering tremulously, as though girdle-cakes were a somewhat
delicate topic, claims to be a successful amateur of them herself.  John,
having been given always to understand that the talent for them was
exceedingly rare, and one usually hereditary, respectfully doubts Anne's
capabilities, deferentially suggesting that she is thinking of scones.
Anne indignantly repudiates the insinuation, knows quite well the
difference between girdle-cakes and scones, offers to prove her powers by
descending into the kitchen and making some then and there, if John will
accompany her and find the things for her.

John accepts the challenge, and, guiding Anne with one shy, awkward hand,
while holding aloft a candle in the other, leads the way.  It is past ten
o'clock, and the old housekeeper is in bed.  At each creaking stair they
pause, to listen if the noise has awakened her; then, finding all silent,
creep forward again, with suppressed laughter, wondering with alarm, half
feigned, half real, what the prim, methodical dame would say were she to
come down and catch them.

They reach the kitchen, thanks more to the suggestions of a friendly cat
than to John's acquaintanceship with the geography of his own house; and
Anne rakes together the fire and clears the table for her work.  What
possible use John is to her--what need there was for her stipulating that
he should accompany her, Anne might find it difficult, if examined, to
explain satisfactorily.  As for his "finding the things" for her, he has
not the faintest notion where they are, and possesses no natural aptitude
for discovery.  Told to find flour, he industriously searches for it in
the dresser drawers; sent for the rolling-pin--the nature and
characteristics of rolling-pins being described to him for his
guidance--he returns, after a prolonged absence, with the copper stick.
Anne laughs at him; but really it would seem as though she herself were
almost as stupid, for not until her hands are covered with flour does it
occur to her that she has not taken that preliminary step in all cooking
operations of rolling up her sleeves.

She holds out her arms to John, first one and then the other, asking him
sweetly if he minds doing it for her.  John is very slow and clumsy, but
Anne stands very patient.  Inch by inch he peels the black sleeve from
the white round arm.  Hundreds of times must he have seen those fair
arms, bare to the shoulder, sparkling with jewels; but never before has
he seen their wondrous beauty.  He longs to clasp them round his neck,
yet is fearful lest his trembling fingers touching them as he performs
his tantalising task may offend her.  Anne thanks him, and apologises for
having given him so much trouble, and he murmurs some meaningless reply,
and stands foolishly silent, watching her.

Anne seems to find one hand sufficient for her cake-making, for the other
rests idly on the table--very near to one of John's, as she would see
were not her eyes so intent upon her work.  How the impulse came to him,
where he--grave, sober, business-man John--learnt such story-book ways
can never be known; but in one instant he is down on both knees,
smothering the floury hand with kisses, and the next moment Anne's arms
are round his neck and her lips against his, and the barrier between them
is swept away, and the deep waters of their love rush together.

With that kiss they enter a new life whereinto one may not follow them.
One thinks it must have been a life made strangely beautiful by
self-forgetfulness, strangely sweet by mutual devotion--a life too ideal,
perhaps, to have remained for long undimmed by the mists of earth.

They who remember them at that time speak of them in hushed tones, as one
speaks of visions.  It would almost seem as though from their faces in
those days there shone a radiance, as though in their voices dwelt a
tenderness beyond the tenderness of man.

They seem never to rest, never to weary.  Day and night, through that
little stricken world, they come and go, bearing healing and peace, till
at last the plague, like some gorged beast of prey, slinks slowly back
towards its lair, and men raise their heads and breathe.

One afternoon, returning from a somewhat longer round than usual, John
feels a weariness creeping into his limbs, and quickens his step, eager
to reach home and rest.  Anne, who has been up all the previous night, is
asleep, and not wishing to disturb her, he goes into the dining-room and
sits down in the easy chair before the fire.  The room strikes cold.  He
stirs the logs, but they give out no greater heat.  He draws his chair
right in front of them, and sits leaning over them with his feet on the
hearth and his hands outstretched towards the blaze; yet he still
shivers.

Twilight fills the room and deepens into dusk.  He wonders listlessly how
it is that Time seems to be moving with such swift strides.  After a
while he hears a voice close to him, speaking in a slow, monotonous
tone--a voice curiously familiar to him, though he cannot tell to whom it
belongs.  He does not turn his head, but sits listening to it drowsily.
It is talking about tallow: one hundred and ninety-four casks of tallow,
and they must all stand one inside the other.  It cannot be done, the
voice complains pathetically.  They will not go inside each other.  It is
no good pushing them.  See! they only roll out again.

The voice grows wearily fretful.  Oh! why do they persist when they see
it is impossible?  What fools they all are!

Suddenly he recollects the voice, and starts up and stares wildly about
him, trying to remember where he is.  With a fierce straining of his will
he grips the brain that is slipping away from him, and holds it.  As soon
as he feels sure of himself he steals out of the room and down the
stairs.

In the hall he stands listening; the house is very silent.  He goes to
the head of the stairs leading to the kitchen and calls softly to the old
housekeeper, and she comes up to him, panting and grunting as she climbs
each step.  Keeping some distance from her, he asks in a whisper where
Anne is.  The woman answers that she is in the hospital.

"Tell her I have been called away suddenly on business," he says,
speaking in quick, low tones: "I shall be away for some days.  Tell her
to leave here and return home immediately.  They can do without her here
now.  Tell her to go back home at once.  I will join her there."

He moves toward the door but stops and faces round again.

"Tell her I beg and entreat her not to stop in this place an hour longer.
There is nothing to keep her now.  It is all over: there is nothing that
cannot be done by any one.  Tell her she must go home--this very night.
Tell her if she loves me to leave this place at once."

The woman, a little bewildered by his vehemence, promises, and disappears
down the stairs.  He takes his hat and cloak from the chair on which he
had thrown them, and turns once more to cross the hall.  As he does so,
the door opens and Anne enters.

He darts back into the shadow, squeezing himself against the wall.  Anne
calls to him laughingly, then, as he does not answer, with a frightened
accent:

"John,--John, dear.  Was not that you?  Are not you there?"

He holds his breath, and crouches still closer into the dark corner; and
Anne, thinking she must have been mistaken in the dim light, passes him
and goes upstairs.

Then he creeps stealthily to the door, lets himself out and closes it
softly behind him.

After the lapse of a few minutes the old housekeeper plods upstairs and
delivers John's message.  Anne, finding it altogether incomprehensible,
subjects the poor dame to severe examination, but fails to elicit
anything further.  What is the meaning of it?  What "business" can have
compelled John, who for ten weeks has never let the word escape his lips,
to leave her like this--without a word! without a kiss!  Then suddenly
she remembers the incident of a few moments ago, when she had called to
him, thinking she saw him, and he did not answer; and the whole truth
strikes her full in the heart.

She refastens the bonnet-strings she has been slowly untying, and goes
down and out into the wet street.

She makes her way rapidly to the house of the only doctor resident in the
neighbourhood--a big, brusque-mannered man, who throughout these terrible
two months has been their chief stay and help.  He meets her on her
entrance with an embarrassed air that tells its own tale, and at once
renders futile his clumsy attempts at acting:--

How should he know where John is?  Who told her John had the fever--a
great, strong, hulking fellow like that?  She has been working too hard,
and has got fever on the brain.  She must go straight back home, or she
will be having it herself.  She is more likely to take it than John.

Anne, waiting till he has finished jerking out sentences while stamping
up and down the room, says gently, taking no notice of his denials,--"If
you will not tell me I must find out from some one else--that is all."
Then, her quick eyes noting his momentary hesitation, she lays her little
hand on his rough paw, and, with the shamelessness of a woman who loves
deeply, wheedles everything out of him that he has promised to keep
secret.

He stops her, however, as she is leaving the room.  "Don't go in to him
now," he says; "he will worry about you.  Wait till to-morrow."

So, while John lies counting endless casks of tallow, Anne sits by his
side, tending her last "case."

Often in his delirium he calls her name, and she takes his fevered hand
in hers and holds it, and he falls asleep.

Each morning the doctor comes and looks at him, asks a few questions and
gives a few commonplace directions, but makes no comment.  It would be
idle his attempting to deceive her.

The days move slowly through the darkened room.  Anne watches his thin
hands grow thinner, his sunken eyes grow bigger; yet remains strangely
calm, almost contented.

Very near the end there comes an hour when John wakes as from a dream,
and remembers all things clearly.

He looks at her half gratefully, half reproachfully.

"Anne, why are you here?" he asks, in a low, laboured voice.  "Did they
not give you my message?"

For answer she turns her deep eyes upon him.

"Would you have gone away and left me here to die?" she questions him,
with a faint smile.

She bends her head down nearer to him, so that her soft hair falls about
his face.

"Our lives were one, dear," she whispers to him.  "I could not have lived
without you; God knew that.  We shall be together always."

She kisses him, and laying his head upon her breast, softly strokes it as
she might a child's; and he puts his weak arms around her.

Later on she feels them growing cold about her, and lays him gently back
upon the bed, looks for the last time into his eyes, then draws the lids
down over them.

His people ask that they may bury him in the churchyard hard by, so that
he may always be among them; and, Anne consenting, they do all things
needful with their own hands, wishful that no unloving labour may be
mingled with their work.  They lay him close to the porch, where, going
in and out the church, their feet will pass near to him; and one among
them who is cunning with the graver's chisel shapes the stone.

At the head he carves in bas-relief the figure of the good Samaritan
tending the brother fallen by the way, and underneath the letters, "In
Remembrance of John Ingerfield."

He thinks to put a verse of Scripture immediately after; but the gruff
doctor says, "Better leave a space, in case you want to add another
name."

So the stone remains a little while unfinished; till the same hand carves
thereon, a few weeks later, "And of Anne, his Wife."




THE WOMAN OF THE SAETER.


Wild-reindeer stalking is hardly so exciting a sport as the evening's
verandah talk in Norroway hotels would lead the trustful traveller to
suppose.  Under the charge of your guide, a very young man with the
dreamy, wistful eyes of those who live in valleys, you leave the
farmstead early in the forenoon, arriving towards twilight at the
desolate hut which, for so long as you remain upon the uplands, will be
your somewhat cheerless headquarters.

Next morning, in the chill, mist-laden dawn, you rise; and, after a
breakfast of coffee and dried fish, shoulder your Remington, and step
forth silently into the raw, damp air; the guide locking the door behind
you, the key grating harshly in the rusty lock.

For hour after hour you toil over the steep, stony ground, or wind
through the pines, speaking in whispers, lest your voice reach the quick
ears of your prey, that keeps its head ever pressed against the wind.
Here and there, in the hollows of the hills lie wide fields of snow, over
which you pick your steps thoughtfully, listening to the smothered
thunder of the torrent, tunnelling its way beneath your feet, and
wondering whether the frozen arch above it be at all points as firm as is
desirable.  Now and again, as in single file you walk cautiously along
some jagged ridge, you catch glimpses of the green world, three thousand
feet below you; though you gaze not long upon the view, for your
attention is chiefly directed to watching the footprints of the guide,
lest by deviating to the right or left you find yourself at one stride
back in the valley--or, to be more correct, are found there.

These things you do, and as exercise they are healthful and invigorating.
But a reindeer you never see, and unless, overcoming the prejudices of
your British-bred conscience, you care to take an occasional pop at a
fox, you had better have left your rifle at the hut, and, instead, have
brought a stick which would have been helpful.  Notwithstanding which the
guide continues sanguine, and in broken English, helped out by stirring
gesture, tells of the terrible slaughter generally done by sportsmen
under his superintendence, and of the vast herds that generally infest
these fields; and when you grow sceptical upon the subject of Reins he
whispers alluringly of Bears.

Once in a way you will come across a track, and will follow it
breathlessly for hours, and it will lead to a sheer precipice.  Whether
the explanation is suicide, or a reprehensible tendency on the part of
the animal towards practical joking, you are left to decide for yourself.
Then, with many rough miles between you and your rest, you abandon the
chase.

But I speak from personal experience merely.

All day long we had tramped through the pitiless rain, stopping only for
an hour at noon to eat some dried venison and smoke a pipe beneath the
shelter of an overhanging cliff.  Soon afterwards Michael knocked over a
ryper (a bird that will hardly take the trouble to hop out of your way)
with his gun-barrel, which incident cheered us a little; and, later on,
our flagging spirits were still further revived by the discovery of
apparently very recent deer-tracks.  These we followed, forgetful, in our
eagerness, of the lengthening distance back to the hut, of the fading
daylight, of the gathering mist.  The track led us higher and higher,
farther and farther into the mountains, until on the shores of a desolate
rock-bound vand it abruptly ended, and we stood staring at one another,
and the snow began to fall.

Unless in the next half-hour we could chance upon a saeter, this meant
passing the night upon the mountain.  Michael and I looked at the guide;
but though, with characteristic Norwegian sturdiness, he put a bold face
upon it, we could see that in that deepening darkness he knew no more
than we did.  Wasting no time on words, we made straight for the nearest
point of descent, knowing that any human habitation must be far below us.

Down we scrambled, heedless of torn clothes and bleeding hands, the
darkness pressing closer round us.  Then suddenly it became black--black
as pitch--and we could only hear each other.  Another step might mean
death.  We stretched out our hands, and felt each other.  Why we spoke in
whispers, I do not know, but we seemed afraid of our own voices.  We
agreed there was nothing for it but to stop where we were till morning,
clinging to the short grass; so we lay there side by side, for what may
have been five minutes or may have been an hour.  Then, attempting to
turn, I lost my grip and rolled.  I made convulsive efforts to clutch the
ground, but the incline was too steep.  How far I fell I could not say,
but at last something stopped me.  I felt it cautiously with my foot: it
did not yield, so I twisted myself round and touched it with my hand.  It
seemed planted firmly in the earth.  I passed my arm along to the right,
then to the left.  I shouted with joy.  It was a fence.

Rising and groping about me, I found an opening, and passed through, and
crept forward with palms outstretched until I touched the logs of a hut;
then, feeling my way round, discovered the door, and knocked.  There came
no response, so I knocked louder; then pushed, and the heavy woodwork
yielded, groaning.  But the darkness within was even darker than the
darkness without.  The others had contrived to crawl down and join me.
Michael struck a wax vesta and held it up, and slowly the room came out
of the darkness and stood round us.

Then something rather startling happened.  Giving one swift glance about
him, our guide uttered a cry, and rushed out into the night.  We followed
to the door, and called after him, but only a voice came to us out of the
blackness, and the only words that we could catch, shrieked back in
terror, were: "_Saetervronen_!  _Saetervronen_!"  ("The woman of the
saeter").

"Some foolish superstition about the place, I suppose," said Michael.  "In
these mountain solitudes men breed ghosts for company.  Let us make a
fire.  Perhaps, when he sees the light, his desire for food and shelter
may get the better of his fears."

We felt about in the small enclosure round the house, and gathered
juniper and birch-twigs, and kindled a fire upon the open stove built in
the corner of the room.  Fortunately, we had some dried reindeer and
bread in our bag, and on that and the ryper and the contents of our
flasks we supped.  Afterwards, to while away the time, we made an
inspection of the strange eyrie we had lighted on.

It was an old log-built saeter.  Some of these mountain farmsteads are as
old as the stone ruins of other countries.  Carvings of strange beasts
and demons were upon its blackened rafters, and on the lintel, in runic
letters, ran this legend: "Hund builded me in the days of Haarfager."  The
house consisted of two large apartments.  Originally, no doubt, these had
been separate dwellings standing beside one another, but they were now
connected by a long, low gallery.  Most of the scanty furniture was
almost as ancient as the walls themselves, but many articles of a
comparatively recent date had been added.  All was now, however, rotting
and falling into decay.

The place appeared to have been deserted suddenly by its last occupants.
Household utensils lay as they were left, rust and dirt encrusted on
them.  An open book, limp and mildewed, lay face downwards on the table,
while many others were scattered about both rooms, together with much
paper, scored with faded ink.  The curtains hung in shreds about the
windows; a woman's cloak, of an antiquated fashion, drooped from a nail
behind the door.  In an oak chest we found a tumbled heap of yellow
letters.  They were of various dates, extending over a period of four
months; and with them, apparently intended to receive them, lay a large
envelope, inscribed with an address in London that has since disappeared.

Strong curiosity overcoming faint scruples, we read them by the dull glow
of the burning juniper twigs, and, as we lay aside the last of them,
there rose from the depths below us a wailing cry, and all night long it
rose and died away, and rose again, and died away again; whether born of
our brain or of some human thing, God knows.

And these, a little altered and shortened, are the letters:--

_Extract from first letter_:

   "I cannot tell you, my dear Joyce, what a haven of peace this place is
   to me after the racket and fret of town.  I am almost quite recovered
   already, and am growing stronger every day; and, joy of joys, my brain
   has come back to me, fresher and more vigorous, I think, for its
   holiday.  In this silence and solitude my thoughts flow freely, and
   the difficulties of my task are disappearing as if by magic.  We are
   perched upon a tiny plateau halfway up the mountain.  On one side the
   rock rises almost perpendicularly, piercing the sky; while on the
   other, two thousand feet below us, the torrent hurls itself into the
   black waters of the fiord.  The house consists of two rooms--or,
   rather, it is two cabins connected by a passage.  The larger one we
   use as a living room, and the other is our sleeping apartment.  We
   have no servant, but do everything for ourselves.  I fear sometimes
   Muriel must find it lonely.  The nearest human habitation is eight
   miles away, across the mountain, and not a soul comes near us.  I
   spend as much time as I can with her, however, during the day, and
   make up for it by working at night after she has gone to sleep; and
   when I question her, she only laughs, and answers that she loves to
   have me all to herself.  (Here you will smile cynically, I know, and
   say, 'Humph, I wonder will she say the same when they have been
   married six years instead of six months.')  At the rate I am working
   now I shall have finished my first volume by the spring, and then, my
   dear fellow, you must try and come over, and we will walk and talk
   together 'amid these storm-reared temples of the gods.'  I have felt a
   new man since I arrived here.  Instead of having to 'cudgel my
   brains,' as we say, thoughts crowd upon me.  This work will make my
   name."

_Part of the third letter_, _the second being mere talk about the book_
(_a history apparently_) _that the man was writing_:

   "MY DEAR JOYCE,--I have written you two letters--this will make the
   third--but have been unable to post them.  Every day I have been
   expecting a visit from some farmer or villager, for the Norwegians are
   kindly people towards strangers--to say nothing of the inducements of
   trade.  A fortnight having passed, however, and the commissariat
   question having become serious, I yesterday set out before dawn, and
   made my way down to the valley; and this gives me something to tell
   you.  Nearing the village, I met a peasant woman.  To my intense
   surprise, instead of returning my salutation, she stared at me, as if
   I were some wild animal, and shrank away from me as far as the width
   of the road would permit.  In the village the same experience awaited
   me.  The children ran from me, the people avoided me.  At last a grey-
   haired old man appeared to take pity on me, and from him I learnt the
   explanation of the mystery.  It seems there is a strange superstition
   attaching to this house in which we are living.  My things were
   brought up here by the two men who accompanied me from Drontheim, but
   the natives are afraid to go near the place, and prefer to keep as far
   as possible from any one connected with it.

"The story is that the house was built by one Hund, 'a maker of runes'
(one of the old saga writers, no doubt), who lived here with his young
wife.  All went peacefully until, unfortunately for him, a certain maiden
stationed at a neighbouring saeter grew to love him.

"Forgive me if I am telling you what you know, but a 'saeter' is the name
given to the upland pastures to which, during the summer, are sent the
cattle, generally under the charge of one or more of the maids.  Here for
three months these girls will live in their lonely huts, entirely shut
off from the world.  Customs change little in this land.  Two or three
such stations are within climbing distance of this house, at this day,
looked after by the farmers' daughters, as in the days of Hund, 'maker of
runes.'

"Every night, by devious mountain paths, the woman would come and tap
lightly at Hund's door.  Hund had built himself two cabins, one behind
the other (these are now, as I think I have explained to you, connected
by a passage); the smaller one was the homestead; in the other he carved
and wrote, so that while the young wife slept the 'maker of runes' and
the saeter woman sat whispering.

"One night, however, the wife learnt all things, but said no word.  Then,
as now, the ravine in front of the enclosure was crossed by a slight
bridge of planks, and over this bridge the woman of the saeter passed and
repassed each night.  On a day when Hund had gone down to fish in the
fiord, the wife took an axe, and hacked and hewed at the bridge, yet it
still looked firm and solid; and that night, as Hund sat waiting in his
workshop, there struck upon his ears a piercing cry, and a crashing of
logs and rolling rock, and then again the dull roaring of the torrent far
below.

"But the woman did not die unavenged; for that winter a man, skating far
down the fiord, noticed a curious object embedded in the ice; and when,
stooping, he looked closer, he saw two corpses, one gripping the other by
the throat, and the bodies were the bodies of Hund and his young wife.

"Since then, they say, the woman of the saeter haunts Hund's house, and
if she sees a light within she taps upon the door, and no man may keep
her out.  Many, at different times, have tried to occupy the house, but
strange tales are told of them.  'Men do not live at Hund's saeter,' said
my old grey-haired friend, concluding his tale,--'they die there.'

"I have persuaded some of the braver of the villagers to bring what
provisions and other necessaries we require up to a plateau about a mile
from the house and leave them there.  That is the most I have been able
to do.  It comes somewhat as a shock to one to find men and women--fairly
educated and intelligent as many of them are--slaves to fears that one
would expect a child to laugh at.  But there is no reasoning with
superstition."

_Extract from the same letter_, _but from a part seemingly written a day
or two later_:

   "At home I should have forgotten such a tale an hour after I had heard
   it, but these mountain fastnesses seem strangely fit to be the last
   stronghold of the supernatural.  The woman haunts me already.  At
   night instead of working, I find myself listening for her tapping at
   the door; and yesterday an incident occurred that makes me fear for my
   own common sense.  I had gone out for a long walk alone, and the
   twilight was thickening into darkness as I neared home.  Suddenly
   looking up from my reverie, I saw, standing on a knoll the other side
   of the ravine, the figure of a woman.  She held a cloak about her
   head, and I could not see her face.  I took off my cap, and called out
   a good-night to her, but she never moved or spoke.  Then--God knows
   why, for my brain was full of other thoughts at the time--a clammy
   chill crept over me, and my tongue grew dry and parched.  I stood
   rooted to the spot, staring at her across the yawning gorge that
   divided us; and slowly she moved away, and passed into the gloom, and
   I continued my way.  I have said nothing to Muriel, and shall not.  The
   effect the story has had upon myself warns me not to do so."

_From a letter dated eleven days later_:

   "She has come.  I have known she would, since that evening I saw her
   on the mountain; and last night she came, and we have sat and looked
   into each other's eyes.  You will say, of course, that I am mad--that
   I have not recovered from my fever--that I have been working too
   hard--that I have heard a foolish tale, and that it has filled my
   overstrung brain with foolish fancies: I have told myself all that.
   But the thing came, nevertheless--a creature of flesh and blood? a
   creature of air? a creature of my own imagination?--what matter? it
   was real to me.

   "It came last night, as I sat working, alone.  Each night I have
   waited for it, listened for it--longed for it, I know now.  I heard
   the passing of its feet upon the bridge, the tapping of its hand upon
   the door, three times--tap, tap, tap.  I felt my loins grow cold, and
   a pricking pain about my head; and I gripped my chair with both hands,
   and waited, and again there came the tapping--tap, tap, tap.  I rose
   and slipped the bolt of the door leading to the other room, and again
   I waited, and again there came the tapping--tap, tap, tap.  Then I
   opened the heavy outer door, and the wind rushed past me, scattering
   my papers, and the woman entered in, and I closed the door behind her.
   She threw her hood back from her head, and unwound a kerchief from
   about her neck, and laid it on the table.  Then she crossed and sat
   before the fire, and I noticed her bare feet were damp with the night
   dew.

   "I stood over against her and gazed at her, and she smiled at me--a
   strange, wicked smile, but I could have laid my soul at her feet.  She
   never spoke or moved, and neither did I feel the need of spoken words,
   for I understood the meaning of those upon the Mount when they said,
   'Let us make here tabernacles: it is good for us to be here.'

   "How long a time passed thus I do not know, but suddenly the woman
   held her hand up, listening, and there came a faint sound from the
   other room.  Then swiftly she drew her hood about her face and passed
   out, closing the door softly behind her; and I drew back the bolt of
   the inner door and waited, and hearing nothing more, sat down, and
   must have fallen asleep in my chair.

   "I awoke, and instantly there flashed through my mind the thought of
   the kerchief the woman had left behind her, and I started from my
   chair to hide it.  But the table was already laid for breakfast, and
   my wife sat with her elbows on the table and her head between her
   hands, watching me with a look in her eyes that was new to me.

   "She kissed me, though her lips were cold; and I argued to myself that
   the whole thing must have been a dream.  But later in the day, passing
   the open door when her back was towards me, I saw her take the
   kerchief from a locked chest and look at it.

   "I have told myself it must have been a kerchief of her own, and that
   all the rest has been my imagination; that, if not, then my strange
   visitant was no spirit, but a woman; and that, if human thing knows
   human thing, it was no creature of flesh and blood that sat beside me
   last night.  Besides, what woman would she be?  The nearest saeter is
   a three-hours' climb to a strong man, and the paths are dangerous even
   in daylight: what woman would have found them in the night?  What
   woman would have chilled the air around her, and have made the blood
   flow cold through all my veins?  Yet if she come again I will speak to
   her.  I will stretch out my hand and see whether she be mortal thing
   or only air."

_The fifth letter_:

   "MY DEAR JOYCE,--Whether your eyes will ever see these letters is
   doubtful.  From this place I shall never send them.  They would read
   to you as the ravings of a madman.  If ever I return to England I may
   one day show them to you, but when I do it will be when I, with you,
   can laugh over them.  At present I write them merely to hide
   away,--putting the words down on paper saves my screaming them aloud.

   "She comes each night now, taking the same seat beside the embers, and
   fixing upon me those eyes, with the hell-light in them, that burn into
   my brain; and at rare times she smiles, and all my being passes out of
   me, and is hers.  I make no attempt to work.  I sit listening for her
   footsteps on the creaking bridge, for the rustling of her feet upon
   the grass, for the tapping of her hand upon the door.  No word is
   uttered between us.  Each day I say: 'When she comes to-night I will
   speak to her.  I will stretch out my hand and touch her.'  Yet when
   she enters, all thought and will goes out from me.

   "Last night, as I stood gazing at her, my soul filled with her
   wondrous beauty as a lake with moonlight, her lips parted, and she
   started from her chair; and, turning, I thought I saw a white face
   pressed against the window, but as I looked it vanished.  Then she
   drew her cloak about her, and passed out.  I slid back the bolt I
   always draw now, and stole into the other room, and, taking down the
   lantern, held it above the bed.  But Muriel's eyes were closed as if
   in sleep."

_Extract from the sixth letter_:

   "It is not the night I fear, but the day.  I hate the sight of this
   woman with whom I live, whom I call 'wife.'  I shrink from the blow of
   her cold lips, the curse of her stony eyes.  She has seen, she has
   learnt; I feel it, I know it.  Yet she winds her arms around my neck,
   and calls me sweetheart, and smoothes my hair with her soft, false
   hands.  We speak mocking words of love to one another, but I know her
   cruel eyes are ever following me.  She is plotting her revenge, and I
   hate her, I hate her, I hate her!"

_Part of the seventh letter_:

   "This morning I went down to the fiord.  I told her I should not be
   back until the evening.  She stood by the door watching me until we
   were mere specks to one another, and a promontory of the mountain shut
   me from view.  Then, turning aside from the track, I made my way,
   running and stumbling over the jagged ground, round to the other side
   of the mountain, and began to climb again.  It was slow, weary work.
   Often I had to go miles out of my road to avoid a ravine, and twice I
   reached a high point only to have to descend again.  But at length I
   crossed the ridge, and crept down to a spot from where, concealed, I
   could spy upon my own house.  She--my wife--stood by the flimsy
   bridge.  A short hatchet, such as butchers use, was in her hand.  She
   leant against a pine trunk, with her arm behind her, as one stands
   whose back aches with long stooping in some cramped position; and even
   at that distance I could see the cruel smile about her lips.

   "Then I recrossed the ridge, and crawled down again, and, waiting
   until evening, walked slowly up the path.  As I came in view of the
   house she saw me, and waved her handkerchief to me, and in answer I
   waved my hat, and shouted curses at her that the wind whirled away
   into the torrent.  She met me with a kiss, and I breathed no hint to
   her that I had seen.  Let her devil's work remain undisturbed.  Let it
   prove to me what manner of thing this is that haunts me.  If it be a
   spirit, then the bridge wilt bear it safely; if it be woman--

   "But I dismiss the thought.  If it be human thing, why does it sit
   gazing at me, never speaking? why does my tongue refuse to question
   it? why does all power forsake me in its presence, so that I stand as
   in a dream?  Yet if it be spirit, why do I hear the passing of her
   feet? and why does the night-rain glisten on her hair?

   "I force myself back into my chair.  It is far into the night, and I
   am alone, waiting, listening.  If it be spirit, she will come to me;
   and if it be woman, I shall hear her cry above the storm--unless it be
   a demon mocking me.

   "I have heard the cry.  It rose, piercing and shrill, above the storm,
   above the riving and rending of the bridge, above the downward
   crashing of the logs and loosened stones.  I hear it as I listen now.
   It is cleaving its way upward from the depths below.  It is wailing
   through the room as I sit writing.

   "I have crawled upon my belly to the utmost edge of the still standing
   pier, until I could feel with my hand the jagged splinters left by the
   fallen planks, and have looked down.  But the chasm was full to the
   brim with darkness.  I shouted, but the wind shook my voice into
   mocking laughter.  I sit here, feebly striking at the madness that is
   creeping nearer and nearer to me.  I tell myself the whole thing is
   but the fever in my brain.  The bridge was rotten.  The storm was
   strong.  The cry is but a single one among the many voices of the
   mountain.  Yet still I listen; and it rises, clear and shrill, above
   the moaning of the pines, above the sobbing of the waters.  It beats
   like blows upon my skull, and I know that she will never come again."

_Extract from the last letter_:

   "I shall address an envelope to you, and leave it among these letters.
   Then, should I never come back, some chance wanderer may one day find
   and post them to you, and you will know.

   "My books and writings remain untouched.  We sit together of a
   night--this woman I call 'wife' and I--she holding in her hands some
   knitted thing that never grows longer by a single stitch, and I with a
   volume before me that is ever open at the same page.  And day and
   night we watch each other stealthily, moving to and fro about the
   silent house; and at times, looking round swiftly, I catch the smile
   upon her lips before she has time to smooth it away.

   "We speak like strangers about this and that, making talk to hide our
   thoughts.  We make a pretence of busying ourselves about whatever will
   help us to keep apart from one another.

   "At night, sitting here between the shadows and the dull glow of the
   smouldering twigs, I sometimes think I hear the tapping I have learnt
   to listen for, and I start from my seat, and softly open the door and
   look out.  But only the Night stands there.  Then I close-to the
   latch, and she--the living woman--asks me in her purring voice what
   sound I heard, hiding a smile as she stoops low over her work; and I
   answer lightly, and, moving towards her, put my arm about her, feeling
   her softness and her suppleness, and wondering, supposing I held her
   close to me with one arm while pressing her from me with the other,
   how long before I should hear the cracking of her bones.

   "For here, amid these savage solitudes, I also am grown savage.  The
   old primeval passions of love and hate stir within me, and they are
   fierce and cruel and strong, beyond what you men of the later ages
   could understand.  The culture of the centuries has fallen from me as
   a flimsy garment whirled away by the mountain wind; the old savage
   instincts of the race lie bare.  One day I shall twine my fingers
   about her full white throat, and her eyes will slowly come towards me,
   and her lips will part, and the red tongue creep out; and backwards,
   step by step, I shall push her before me, gazing the while upon her
   bloodless face, and it will be my turn to smile.  Backwards through
   the open door, backwards along the garden path between the juniper
   bushes, backwards till her heels are overhanging the ravine, and she
   grips life with nothing but her little toes, I shall force her, step
   by step, before me.  Then I shall lean forward, closer, closer, till I
   kiss her purpling lips, and down, down, down, past the startled sea-
   birds, past the white spray of the foss, past the downward peeping
   pines, down, down, down, we will go together, till we find the thing
   that lies sleeping beneath the waters of the fiord."

With these words ended the last letter, unsigned.  At the first streak of
dawn we left the house, and, after much wandering, found our way back to
the valley.  But of our guide we heard no news.  Whether he remained
still upon the mountain, or whether by some false step he had perished
upon that night, we never learnt.




VARIETY PATTER.


My first appearance at a Music Hall was in the year one thousand eight
hundred and s---.  Well, I would rather not mention the exact date.  I
was fourteen at the time.  It was during the Christmas holidays, and my
aunt had given me five shillings to go and see Phelps--I think it was
Phelps--in _Coriolanus_--I think it was _Coriolanus_.  Anyhow, it was to
see a high-class and improving entertainment, I know.

I suggested that I should induce young Skegson, who lived in our road, to
go with me.  Skegson is a barrister now, and could not tell you the
difference between a knave of clubs and a club of knaves.  A few years
hence he will, if he works hard, be innocent enough for a judge.  But at
the period of which I speak he was a red-haired boy of worldly tastes,
notwithstanding which I loved him as a brother.  My dear mother wished to
see him before consenting to the arrangement, so as to be able to form
her own opinion as to whether he was a fit and proper companion for me;
and, accordingly, he was invited to tea.  He came, and made a most
favourable impression upon both my mother and my aunt.  He had a way of
talking about the advantages of application to study in early life, and
the duties of youth towards those placed in authority over it, that won
for him much esteem in grown-up circles.  The spirit of the Bar had
descended upon Skegson at a very early period of his career.

My aunt, indeed, was so much pleased with him that she gave him two
shillings towards his own expenses ("sprung half a dollar" was how he
explained the transaction when we were outside), and commended me to his
especial care.

Skegson was very silent during the journey.  An idea was evidently
maturing in his mind.  At the Angel he stopped and said: "Look here, I'll
tell you what we'll do.  Don't let's go and see that rot.  Let's go to a
Music Hall."

I gasped for breath.  I had heard of Music Halls.  A stout lady had
denounced them across our dinner table on one occasion--fixing the while
a steely eye upon her husband, who sat opposite and seemed
uncomfortable--as low, horrid places, where people smoked and drank, and
wore short skirts, and had added an opinion that they ought to be put
down by the police--whether the skirts or the halls she did not explain.
I also recollected that our charwoman, whose son had lately left London
for a protracted stay in Devonshire, had, in conversation with my mother,
dated his downfall from the day when he first visited one of these
places; and likewise that Mrs. Philcox's nursemaid, upon her confessing
that she had spent an evening at one with her young man, had been called
a shameless hussy, and summarily dismissed as being no longer a fit
associate for the baby.

But the spirit of lawlessness was strong within me in those days, so that
I hearkened to the voice of Skegson, the tempter, and he lured my feet
from the paths that led to virtue and Sadler's Wells, and we wandered
into the broad and crowded ways that branch off from the Angel towards
Merry Islington.

Skegson insisted that we should do the thing in style, so we stopped at a
shop near the Agricultural Hall and purchased some big cigars.  A huge
card in the window claimed for these that they were "the most
satisfactory twopenny smokes in London."  I smoked two of them during the
evening, and never felt more satisfied--using the word in its true sense,
as implying that a person has had enough of a thing, and does not desire
any more of it, just then--in all my life.  Where we went, and what we
saw, my memory is not very clear upon.  We sat at a little marble table.
I know it was marble because it was so hard, and cool to the head.  From
out of the smoky mist a ponderous creature of strange, undefined shape
floated heavily towards us, and deposited a squat tumbler in front of me
containing a pale yellowish liquor, which subsequent investigation has
led me to believe must have been Scotch whisky.  It seemed to me then the
most nauseous stuff I had ever swallowed.  It is curious to look back and
notice how one's tastes change.

I reached home very late and very sick.  That was my first dissipation,
and, as a lesson, it has been of more practical use to me than all the
good books and sermons in the world could have been.  I can remember to
this day standing in the middle of the room in my night-shirt, trying to
catch my bed as it came round.

Next morning I confessed everything to my mother, and, for several months
afterwards, was a reformed character.  Indeed, the pendulum of my
conscience swung too far the other way, and I grew exaggeratedly
remorseful and unhealthily moral.

There was published in those days, for the edification of young people, a
singularly pessimistic periodical, entitled _The Children's Band of Hope
Review_.  It was a magazine much in favour among grown-up people, and a
bound copy of Vol. IX. had lately been won by my sister as a prize for
punctuality (I fancy she must have exhausted all the virtue she ever
possessed, in that direction, upon the winning of that prize.  At all
events, I have noticed no ostentatious display of the quality in her
later life.)  I had formerly expressed contempt for this book, but now,
in my regenerate state, I took a morbid pleasure in poring over its
denunciations of sin and sinners.  There was one picture in it that
appeared peculiarly applicable to myself.  It represented a gaudily
costumed young man, standing on the topmost of three steep steps, smoking
a large cigar.  Behind him was a very small church, and below, a bright
and not altogether uninviting looking hell.  The picture was headed "The
Three Steps to Ruin," and the three stairs were labelled respectively
"Smoking," "Drinking," "Gambling."  I had already travelled two-thirds of
the road!  Was I going all the way, or should I be able to retrace those
steps?  I used to lie awake at night and think about it till I grew half
crazy.  Alas! since then I have completed the descent, so where my future
will be spent I do not care to think.

Another picture in the book that troubled me was the frontispiece.  This
was a highly-coloured print, illustrating the broad and narrow ways.  The
narrow way led upward past a Sunday-school and a lion to a city in the
clouds.  This city was referred to in the accompanying letterpress as a
place of "Rest and Peace," but inasmuch as the town was represented in
the illustration as surrounded by a perfect mob of angels, each one
blowing a trumpet twice his own size, and obviously blowing it for all he
was worth, a certain confusion of ideas would seem to have crept into the
allegory.

The other path--the "broad way"--which ended in what at first glance
appeared to be a highly successful display of fireworks, started from the
door of a tavern, and led past a Music Hall, on the steps of which stood
a gentleman smoking a cigar.  All the wicked people in this book smoked
cigars--all except one young man who had killed his mother and died
raving mad.  He had gone astray on short pipes.

This made it uncomfortably clear to me which direction I had chosen, and
I was greatly alarmed, until, on examining the picture more closely, I
noticed, with much satisfaction, that about midway the two paths were
connected by a handy little bridge, by the use of which it seemed
feasible, starting on the one path and ending up on the other, to combine
the practical advantages of both roads.  From subsequent observation I
have come to the conclusion that a good many people have made a note of
that little bridge.

My own belief in the possibility of such convenient compromise must, I
fear, have led to an ethical relapse, for there recurs to my mind a
somewhat painful scene of a few months' later date, in which I am seeking
to convince a singularly unresponsive landed proprietor that my presence
in his orchard is solely and entirely due to my having unfortunately lost
my way.

It was not until I was nearly seventeen that the idea occurred to me to
visit a Music Hall again.  Then, having regard to my double capacity of
"Man About Town" and journalist (for I had written a letter to _The Era_,
complaining of the way pit doors were made to open, and it had been
inserted), I felt I had no longer any right to neglect acquaintanceship
with so important a feature in the life of the people.  Accordingly, one
Saturday night, I wended my way to the "Pav."; and there the first person
that I ran against was my uncle.  He laid a heavy hand upon my shoulder,
and asked me, in severe tones, what I was doing there.  I felt this to be
an awkward question, for it would have been useless trying to make him
understand my real motives (one's own relations are never sympathetic),
and I was somewhat nonplussed for an answer, until the reflection
occurred to me: What was _he_ doing there?  This riddle I, in my turn,
propounded to him, with the result that we entered into treaty, by the
terms of which it was agreed that no future reference should be made to
the meeting by either of us--especially not in the presence of my
aunt--and the compact was ratified according to the usual custom, my
uncle paying the necessary expenses.

In those days, we sat, some four or six of us, round a little table, on
which were placed our drinks.  Now we have to balance them upon a narrow
ledge; and ladies, as they pass, dip the ends of their cloaks into them,
and gentlemen stir them up for us with the ferrules of their umbrellas,
or else sweep them off into our laps with their coat tails, saying as
they do so, "Oh, I beg your pardon."

Also, in those days, there were "chairmen"--affable gentlemen, who would
drink anything at anybody's expense, and drink any quantity of it, and
never seem to get any fuller.  I was introduced to a Music Hall chairman
once, and when I said to him, "What is your drink?" he took up the "list
of beverages" that lay before him, and, opening it, waved his hand
lightly across its entire contents, from clarets, past champagnes and
spirits, down to liqueurs.  "That's my drink, my boy," said he.  There
was nothing narrow-minded or exclusive about his tastes.

It was the chairman's duty to introduce the artists.  "Ladies and
gentlemen," he would shout, in a voice that united the musical
characteristics of a foghorn and a steam saw, "Miss 'Enerietta
Montressor, the popular serio-comic, will now happear."  These
announcements were invariably received with great applause by the
chairman himself, and generally with chilling indifference by the rest of
the audience.

It was also the privilege of the chairman to maintain order, and
reprimand evil-doers.  This he usually did very effectively, employing
for the purpose language both fit and forcible.  One chairman that I
remember seemed, however, to be curiously deficient in the necessary
qualities for this part of his duty.  He was a mild and sleepy little
man, and, unfortunately, he had to preside over an exceptionally rowdy
audience at a small hall in the South-East district.  On the night that I
was present, there occurred a great disturbance.  "Joss Jessop, the
Monarch of Mirth," a gentleman evidently high in local request was, for
some reason or other, not forthcoming, and in his place the management
proposed to offer a female performer on the zithern, one Signorina
Ballatino.

The little chairman made the announcement in a nervous, deprecatory tone,
as if he were rather ashamed of it himself.  "Ladies and gentlemen," he
began,--the poor are staunch sticklers for etiquette: I overheard a small
child explaining to her mother one night in Three Colts Street,
Limehouse, that she could not get into the house because there was a
"lady" on the doorstep, drunk,--"Signorina Ballatino, the
world-renowned--"

Here a voice from the gallery requested to know what had become of "Old
Joss," and was greeted by loud cries of "'Ear, 'ear."

The chairman, ignoring the interruption, continued:

"--the world-renowned performer on the zither--"

"On the whoter?" came in tones of plaintive inquiry from the back of the
hall.

"_Hon_ the zither," retorted the chairman, waxing mildly indignant; he
meant zithern, but he called it a zither.  "A hinstrument well-known to
anybody as 'as 'ad any learning."

This sally was received with much favour, and a gentleman who claimed to
be acquainted with the family history of the interrupter begged the
chairman to excuse that ill-bred person on the ground that his mother
used to get drunk with the twopence a week and never sent him to school.

Cheered by this breath of popularity, our little president endeavoured to
complete his introduction of the Signorina.  He again repeated that she
was the world-renowned performer on the zithern; and, undeterred by the
audible remark of a lady in the pit to the effect that she'd "never 'eard
on 'er," added:

"She will now, ladies and gentlemen, with your kind permission, give you
examples of the--"

"Blow yer zither!" here cried out the gentleman who had started the
agitation; "we want Joss Jessop."

This was the signal for much cheering and shrill whistling, in the midst
of which a wag with a piping voice suggested as a reason for the
favourite's non-appearance that he had not been paid his last week's
salary.

A temporary lull occurred at this point; and the chairman, seizing the
opportunity to complete his oft-impeded speech, suddenly remarked, "songs
of the Sunny South"; and immediately sat down and began hammering upon
the table.

Then Signora Ballatino, clothed in the costume of the Sunny South, where
clothes are less essential than in these colder climes, skipped airily
forward, and was most ungallantly greeted with a storm of groans and
hisses.  Her beloved instrument was unfeelingly alluded to as a pie-dish,
and she was advised to take it back and get the penny on it.  The
chairman, addressed by his Christian name of "Jimmee," was told to lie
down and let her sing him to sleep.  Every time she attempted to start
playing, shouts were raised for Joss.

At length the chairman, overcoming his evident disinclination to take any
sort of hand whatever in the game, rose and gently hinted at the
desirability of silence.  The suggestion not meeting with any support, he
proceeded to adopt sterner measures.  He addressed himself personally to
the ringleader of the rioters, the man who had first championed the cause
of the absent Joss.  This person was a brawny individual, who, judging
from appearances, followed in his business hours the calling of a
coalheaver.  "Yes, sir," said the chairman, pointing a finger towards
him, where he sat in the front row of the gallery; "you, sir, in the
flannel shirt.  I can see you.  Will you allow this lady to give her
entertainment?"

"No," answered he of the coalheaving profession, in stentorian tones.

"Then, sir," said the little chairman, working himself up into a state
suggestive of Jove about to launch a thunderbolt--"then, sir, all I can
say is that you are no gentleman."

This was a little too much, or rather a good deal too little, for the
Signora Ballatino.  She had hitherto been standing in a meek attitude of
pathetic appeal, wearing a fixed smile of ineffable sweetness but she
evidently felt that she could go a bit farther than that herself, even if
she was a lady.  Calling the chairman "an old messer," and telling him
for Gawd's sake to shut up if that was all he could do for his living,
she came down to the front, and took the case into her own hands.

She did not waste time on the rest of the audience.  She went direct for
that coalheaver, and thereupon ensued a slanging match the memory of
which sends a trill of admiration through me even to this day.  It was a
battle worthy of the gods.  He was a heaver of coals, quick and ready
beyond his kind.  During many years sojourn East and South, in the course
of many wanderings from Billingsgate to Limehouse Hole, from Petticoat
Lane to Whitechapel Road; out of eel-pie shop and penny gaff; out of
tavern and street, and court and doss-house, he had gathered together
slang words and terms and phrases, and they came back to him now, and he
stood up against her manfully.

But as well might the lamb stand up against the eagle, when the shadow of
its wings falls across the green pastures, and the wind flies before its
dark oncoming.  At the end of two minutes he lay gasping, dazed, and
speechless.

Then she began.

She announced her intention of "wiping down the bloomin' 'all" with him,
and making it respectable; and, metaphorically speaking, that is what she
did.  Her tongue hit him between the eyes, and knocked him down and
trampled on him.  It curled round and round him like a whip, and then it
uncurled and wound the other way.  It seized him by the scruff of his
neck, and tossed him up into the air, and caught him as he descended, and
flung him to the ground, and rolled him on it.  It played around him like
forked lightning, and blinded him.  It danced and shrieked about him like
a host of whirling fiends, and he tried to remember a prayer, and could
not.  It touched him lightly on the sole of his foot and the crown of his
head, and his hair stood up straight, and his limbs grew stiff.  The
people sitting near him drew away, not feeling it safe to be near, and
left him alone, surrounded by space, and language.

It was the most artistic piece of work of its kind that I have ever
heard.  Every phrase she flung at him seemed to have been woven on
purpose to entangle him and to embrace in its choking folds his people
and his gods, to strangle with its threads his every hope, ambition, and
belief.  Each term she put upon him clung to him like a garment, and
fitted him without a crease.  The last name that she called him one felt
to be, until one heard the next, the one name that he ought to have been
christened by.

For five and three-quarter minutes by the clock she spoke, and never for
one instant did she pause or falter; and in the whole of that onslaught
there was only one weak spot.

That was when she offered to make a better man than he was out of a Guy
Fawkes and a lump of coal.  You felt that one lump of coal would not have
been sufficient.

At the end, she gathered herself together for one supreme effort, and
hurled at him an insult so bitter with scorn so sharp with insight into
his career and character, so heavy with prophetic curse, that strong men
drew and held their breath while it passed over them, and women hid their
faces and shivered.

Then she folded her arms, and stood silent; and the house, from floor to
ceiling, rose and cheered her until there was no more breath left in its
lungs.

In that one night she stepped from oblivion into success.  She is now a
famous "artiste."

But she does not call herself Signora Ballatino, and she does not play
upon the zithern.  Her name has a homelier sound, and her speciality is
the delineation of coster character.




SILHOUETTES.


I fear I must be of a somewhat gruesome turn of mind.  My sympathies are
always with the melancholy side of life and nature.  I love the chill
October days, when the brown leaves lie thick and sodden underneath your
feet, and a low sound as of stifled sobbing is heard in the damp
woods--the evenings in late autumn time, when the white mist creeps
across the fields, making it seem as though old Earth, feeling the night
air cold to its poor bones, were drawing ghostly bedclothes round its
withered limbs.  I like the twilight of the long grey street, sad with
the wailing cry of the distant muffin man.  One thinks of him, as,
strangely mitred, he glides by through the gloom, jangling his harsh
bell, as the High Priest of the pale spirit of Indigestion, summoning the
devout to come forth and worship.  I find a sweetness in the aching
dreariness of Sabbath afternoons in genteel suburbs--in the evil-laden
desolateness of waste places by the river, when the yellow fog is
stealing inland across the ooze and mud, and the black tide gurgles
softly round worm-eaten piles.

I love the bleak moor, when the thin long line of the winding road lies
white on the darkening heath, while overhead some belated bird, vexed
with itself for being out so late, scurries across the dusky sky,
screaming angrily.  I love the lonely, sullen lake, hidden away in
mountain solitudes.  I suppose it was my childhood's surroundings that
instilled in me this affection for sombre hues.  One of my earliest
recollections is of a dreary marshland by the sea.  By day, the water
stood there in wide, shallow pools.  But when one looked in the evening
they were pools of blood that lay there.

It was a wild, dismal stretch of coast.  One day, I found myself there
all alone--I forget how it came about--and, oh, how small I felt amid the
sky and the sea and the sandhills!  I ran, and ran, and ran, but I never
seemed to move; and then I cried, and screamed, louder and louder, and
the circling seagulls screamed back mockingly at me.  It was an "unken"
spot, as they say up North.

In the far back days of the building of the world, a long, high ridge of
stones had been reared up by the sea, dividing the swampy grassland from
the sand.  Some of these stones--"pebbles," so they called them round
about--were as big as a man, and many as big as a fair-sized house; and
when the sea was angry--and very prone he was to anger by that lonely
shore, and very quick to wrath; often have I known him sink to sleep with
a peaceful smile on his rippling waves, to wake in fierce fury before the
night was spent--he would snatch up giant handfuls of these pebbles and
fling and toss them here and there, till the noise of their rolling and
crashing could be heard by the watchers in the village afar off.

"Old Nick's playing at marbles to-night," they would say to one another,
pausing to listen.  And then the women would close tight their doors, and
try not to hear the sound.

Far out to sea, by where the muddy mouth of the river yawned wide, there
rose ever a thin white line of surf, and underneath those crested waves
there dwelt a very fearsome thing, called the Bar.  I grew to hate and be
afraid of this mysterious Bar, for I heard it spoken of always with bated
breath, and I knew that it was very cruel to fisher folk, and hurt them
so sometimes that they would cry whole days and nights together with the
pain, or would sit with white scared faces, rocking themselves to and
fro.

Once when I was playing among the sandhills, there came by a tall, grey
woman, bending beneath a load of driftwood.  She paused when nearly
opposite to me, and, facing seaward, fixed her eyes upon the breaking
surf above the Bar.  "Ah, how I hate the sight of your white teeth!" she
muttered; then turned and passed on.

Another morning, walking through the village, I heard a low wailing come
from one of the cottages, while a little farther on a group of women were
gathered in the roadway, talking.  "Ay," said one of them, "I thought the
Bar was looking hungry last night."

So, putting one and the other together, I concluded that the "Bar" must
be an ogre, such as a body reads of in books, who lived in a coral castle
deep below the river's mouth, and fed upon the fishermen as he caught
them going down to the sea or coming home.

From my bedroom window, on moonlight nights, I could watch the silvery
foam, marking the spot beneath where he lay hid; and I would stand on tip-
toe, peering out, until at length I would come to fancy I could see his
hideous form floating below the waters.  Then, as the little white-sailed
boats stole by him, tremblingly, I used to tremble too, lest he should
suddenly open his grim jaws and gulp them down; and when they had all
safely reached the dark, soft sea beyond, I would steal back to the
bedside, and pray to God to make the Bar good, so that he would give up
eating the poor fishermen.

Another incident connected with that coast lives in my mind.  It was the
morning after a great storm--great even for that stormy coast--and the
passion-worn waters were still heaving with the memory of a fury that was
dead.  Old Nick had scattered his marbles far and wide, and there were
rents and fissures in the pebbly wall such as the oldest fisherman had
never known before.  Some of the hugest stones lay tossed a hundred yards
away, and the waters had dug pits here and there along the ridge so deep
that a tall man might stand in some of them, and yet his head not reach
the level of the sand.

Round one of these holes a small crowd was pressing eagerly, while one
man, standing in the hollow, was lifting the few remaining stones off
something that lay there at the bottom.  I pushed my way between the
straggling legs of a big fisher lad, and peered over with the rest.  A
ray of sunlight streamed down into the pit, and the thing at the bottom
gleamed white.  Sprawling there among the black pebbles it looked like a
huge spider.  One by one the last stones were lifted away, and the thing
was left bare, and then the crowd looked at one another and shivered.

"Wonder how he got there," said a woman at length; "somebody must ha'
helped him."

"Some foreign chap, no doubt," said the man who had lifted off the
stones; "washed ashore and buried here by the sea."

"What, six foot below the water-mark, wi' all they stones atop of him?"
said another.

"That's no foreign chap," cried a grizzled old woman, pressing forward.
"What's that that's aside him?"

Some one jumped down and took it from the stone where it lay glistening,
and handed it up to her, and she clutched it in her skinny hand.  It was
a gold earring, such as fishermen sometimes wear.  But this was a
somewhat large one, and of rather unusual shape.

"That's young Abram Parsons, I tell 'ee, as lies down there," cried the
old creature, wildly.  "I ought to know.  I gave him the pair o' these
forty year ago."

It may be only an idea of mine, born of after brooding upon the scene.  I
am inclined to think it must be so, for I was only a child at the time,
and would hardly have noticed such a thing.  But it seems to my
remembrance that as the old crone ceased, another woman in the crowd
raised her eyes slowly, and fixed them on a withered, ancient man, who
leant upon a stick, and that for a moment, unnoticed by the rest, these
two stood looking strangely at each other.

From these sea-scented scenes, my memory travels to a weary land where
dead ashes lie, and there is blackness--blackness everywhere.  Black
rivers flow between black banks; black, stunted trees grow in black
fields; black withered flowers by black wayside.  Black roads lead from
blackness past blackness to blackness; and along them trudge black,
savage-looking men and women; and by them black, old-looking children
play grim, unchildish games.

When the sun shines on this black land, it glitters black and hard; and
when the rain falls a black mist rises towards heaven, like the hopeless
prayer of a hopeless soul.

By night it is less dreary, for then the sky gleams with a lurid light,
and out of the darkness the red flames leap, and high up in the air they
gambol and writhe--the demon spawn of that evil land, they seem.

Visitors who came to our house would tell strange tales of this black
land, and some of the stories I am inclined to think were true.  One man
said he saw a young bull-dog fly at a boy and pin him by the throat.  The
lad jumped about with much sprightliness, and tried to knock the dog
away.  Whereupon the boy's father rushed out of the house, hard by, and
caught his son and heir roughly by the shoulder.  "Keep still, thee young
---, can't 'ee!" shouted the man angrily; "let 'un taste blood."

Another time, I heard a lady tell how she had visited a cottage during a
strike, to find the baby, together with the other children, almost dying
for want of food.  "Dear, dear me!" she cried, taking the wee wizened
mite from the mother's arms, "but I sent you down a quart of milk,
yesterday.  Hasn't the child had it?"

"Theer weer a little coom, thank 'ee kindly, ma'am," the father took upon
himself to answer; "but thee see it weer only just enow for the poops."

We lived in a big lonely house on the edge of a wide common.  One night,
I remember, just as I was reluctantly preparing to climb into bed, there
came a wild ringing at the gate, followed by a hoarse, shrieking cry, and
then a frenzied shaking of the iron bars.

Then hurrying footsteps sounded through the house, and the swift opening
and closing of doors; and I slipped back hastily into my knickerbockers
and ran out.  The women folk were gathered on the stairs, while my father
stood in the hall, calling to them to be quiet.  And still the wild
ringing of the bell continued, and, above it, the hoarse, shrieking cry.

My father opened the door and went out, and we could hear him striding
down the gravel path, and we clung to one another and waited.

After what seemed an endless time, we heard the heavy gate unbarred, and
quickly clanged to, and footsteps returning on the gravel.  Then the door
opened again, and my father entered, and behind him a crouching figure
that felt its way with its hands as it crept along, as a blind man might.
The figure stood up when it reached the middle of the hall, and mopped
its eyes with a dirty rag that it carried in its hand; after which it
held the rag over the umbrella-stand and wrung it out, as washerwomen
wring out clothes, and the dark drippings fell into the tray with a dull,
heavy splut.

My father whispered something to my mother, and she went out towards the
back; and, in a little while, we heard the stamping of hoofs--the angry
plunge of a spur-startled horse--the rhythmic throb of the long, straight
gallop, dying away into the distance.

My mother returned and spoke some reassuring words to the servants.  My
father, having made fast the door and extinguished all but one or two of
the lights, had gone into a small room on the right of the hall; the
crouching figure, still mopping that moisture from its eyes, following
him.  We could hear them talking there in low tones, my father
questioning, the other voice thick and interspersed with short panting
grunts.

We on the stairs huddled closer together, and, in the darkness, I felt my
mother's arm steal round me and encompass me, so that I was not afraid.
Then we waited, while the silence round our frightened whispers thickened
and grew heavy till the weight of it seemed to hurt us.

At length, out of its depths, there crept to our ears a faint murmur.  It
gathered strength like the sound of the oncoming of a wave upon a stony
shore, until it broke in a Babel of vehement voices just outside.  After
a few moments, the hubbub ceased, and there came a furious ringing--then
angry shouts demanding admittance.

Some of the women began to cry.  My father came out into the hall,
closing the room door behind him, and ordered them to be quiet, so
sternly that they were stunned into silence.  The furious ringing was
repeated; and, this time, threats mingled among the hoarse shouts.  My
mother's arm tightened around me, and I could hear the beating of her
heart.

The voices outside the gate sank into a low confused mumbling.  Soon they
died away altogether, and the silence flowed back.

My father turned up the hall lamp, and stood listening.

Suddenly, from the back of the house, rose the noise of a great crashing,
followed by oaths and savage laughter.

My father rushed forward, but was borne back; and, in an instant, the
hall was full of grim, ferocious faces.  My father, trembling a little
(or else it was the shadow cast by the flickering lamp), and with lips
tight pressed, stood confronting them; while we women and children, too
scared to even cry, shrank back up the stairs.

What followed during the next few moments is, in my memory, only a
confused tumult, above which my father's high, clear tones rise every now
and again, entreating, arguing, commanding.  I see nothing distinctly
until one of the grimmest of the faces thrusts itself before the others,
and a voice which, like Aaron's rod, swallows up all its fellows, says in
deep, determined bass, "Coom, we've had enow chatter, master.  Thee mun
give 'un up, or thee mun get out o' th' way an' we'll search th' house
for oursel'."

Then a light flashed into my father's eyes that kindled something inside
me, so that the fear went out of me, and I struggled to free myself from
my mother's arm, for the desire stirred me to fling myself down upon the
grimy faces below, and beat and stamp upon them with my fists.  Springing
across the hall, he snatched from the wall where it hung an ancient club,
part of a trophy of old armour, and planting his back against the door
through which they would have to pass, he shouted, "Then be damned to you
all, he's in this room!  Come and fetch him out."

(I recollect that speech well.  I puzzled over it, even at that time,
excited though I was.  I had always been told that only low, wicked
people ever used the word "damn," and I tried to reconcile things, and
failed.)

The men drew back and muttered among themselves.  It was an ugly-looking
weapon, studded with iron spikes.  My father held it secured to his hand
by a chain, and there was an ugly look about him also, now, that gave his
face a strange likeness to the dark faces round him.

But my mother grew very white and cold, and underneath her breath she
kept crying, "Oh, will they never come--will they never come?" and a
cricket somewhere about the house began to chirp.

Then all at once, without a word, my mother flew down the stairs, and
passed like a flash of light through the crowd of dusky figures.  How she
did it I could never understand, for the two heavy bolts had both been
drawn, but the next moment the door stood wide open; and a hum of voices,
cheery with the anticipation of a period of perfect bliss, was borne in
upon the cool night air.

My mother was always very quick of hearing.

* * * * *

Again, I see a wild crowd of grim faces, and my father's, very pale,
amongst them.  But this time the faces are very many, and they come and
go like faces in a dream.  The ground beneath my feet is wet and sloppy,
and a black rain is falling.  There are women's faces in the crowd, wild
and haggard, and long skinny arms stretch out threateningly towards my
father, and shrill, frenzied voices call out curses on him.  Boys' faces
also pass me in the grey light, and on some of them there is an impish
grin.

I seem to be in everybody's way; and to get out of it, I crawl into a
dark, draughty corner and crouch there among cinders.  Around me, great
engines fiercely strain and pant like living things fighting beyond their
strength.  Their gaunt arms whirl madly above me, and the ground rocks
with their throbbing.  Dark figures flit to and fro, pausing from time to
time to wipe the black sweat from their faces.

The pale light fades, and the flame-lit night lies red upon the land.  The
flitting figures take strange shapes.  I hear the hissing of wheels, the
furious clanking of iron chains, the hoarse shouting of many voices, the
hurrying tread of many feet; and, through all, the wailing and weeping
and cursing that never seem to cease.  I drop into a restless sleep, and
dream that I have broken a chapel window, stone-throwing, and have died
and gone to hell.

At length, a cold hand is laid upon my shoulder, and I awake.  The wild
faces have vanished and all is silent now, and I wonder if the whole
thing has been a dream.  My father lifts me into the dog-cart, and we
drive home through the chill dawn.

My mother opens the door softly as we alight.  She does not speak, only
looks her question.  "It's all over, Maggie," answers my father very
quietly, as he takes off his coat and lays it across a chair; "we've got
to begin the world afresh."

My mother's arms steal up about his neck; and I, feeling heavy with a
trouble I do not understand, creep off to bed.




THE LEASE OF THE "CROSS KEYS."


This story is about a shop: many stories are.  One Sunday evening this
Bishop had to preach a sermon at St. Paul's Cathedral.  The occasion was
a very special and important one, and every God-fearing newspaper in the
kingdom sent its own special representative to report the proceedings.

Now, of the three reporters thus commissioned, one was a man of
appearance so eminently respectable that no one would have thought of
taking him for a journalist.  People used to put him down for a County
Councillor or an Archdeacon at the very least.  As a matter of fact,
however, he was a sinful man, with a passion for gin.  He lived at Bow,
and, on the Sabbath in question, he left his home at five o'clock in the
afternoon, and started to walk to the scene of his labours.  The road
from Bow to the City on a wet and chilly Sunday evening is a cheerless
one; who can blame him if on his way he stopped once or twice to comfort
himself with "two" of his favourite beverage?  On reaching St. Paul's he
found he had twenty minutes to spare--just time enough for one final
"nip."  Half way down a narrow court leading out of the Churchyard he
found a quiet little hostelry, and, entering the private bar, whispered
insinuatingly across the counter:

"Two of gin hot, if you please, my dear."

His voice had the self-satisfied meekness of the successful ecclesiastic,
his bearing suggested rectitude tempered by desire to avoid observation.
The barmaid, impressed by his manner and appearance, drew the attention
of the landlord to him.  The landlord covertly took stock of so much of
him as could be seen between his buttoned-up coat and his drawn-down hat,
and wondered how so bland and innocent-looking a gentleman came to know
of gin.

A landlord's duty, however, is not to wonder, but to serve.  The gin was
given to the man, and the man drank it.  He liked it.  It was good gin:
he was a connoisseur, and he knew.  Indeed, so good did it seem to him
that he felt it would be a waste of opportunity not to have another
twopen'orth.  Therefore he had a second "go"; maybe a third.  Then he
returned to the Cathedral, and sat himself down with his notebook on his
knee and waited.

As the service proceeded there stole over him that spirit of indifference
to all earthly surroundings that religion and drink are alone able to
bestow.  He heard the good Bishop's text and wrote it down.  Then he
heard the Bishop's "sixthly and lastly," and took that down, and looked
at his notebook and wondered in a peaceful way what had become of the
"firstly" to "fifthly" inclusive.  He sat there wondering until the
people round him began to get up and move away, whereupon it struck him
swiftly and suddenly that be had been asleep, and had thereby escaped the
main body of the discourse.

What on earth was he to do?  He was representing one of the leading
religious papers.  A full report of the sermon was wanted that very
night.  Seizing the robe of a passing wandsman, he tremulously inquired
if the Bishop had yet left the Cathedral.  The wandsman answered that he
had not, but that he was just on the point of doing so.

"I must see him before he goes!" exclaimed the reporter, excitedly.

"You can't," replied the wandsman.  The journalist grew frantic.

"Tell him," he cried, "a penitent sinner desires to speak with him about
the sermon he has just delivered.  To-morrow it will be too late."

The wandsman was touched; so was the Bishop.  He said he would see the
poor fellow.

As soon as the door was shut the man, with tears in his eyes, told the
Bishop the truth--leaving out the gin.  He said that he was a poor man,
and not in good health, that he had been up half the night before, and
had walked all the way from Bow that evening.  He dwelt on the disastrous
results to himself and his family should he fail to obtain a report of
the sermon.  The Bishop felt sorry for the man.  Also, he was anxious
that his sermon should be reported.

"Well, I trust it will be a warning to you against going to sleep in
church," he said, with an indulgent smile.  "Luckily, I have brought my
notes with me, and if you will promise to be very careful of them, and to
bring them back to me the first thing in the morning, I will lend them to
you."

With this, the Bishop opened and handed to the man a neat little black
leather bag, inside which lay a neat little roll of manuscript.

"Better take the bag to keep it in," added the Bishop.  "Be sure and let
me have them both back early to-morrow."

The reporter, when he examined the contents of the bag under a lamp in
the Cathedral vestibule, could hardly believe his good fortune.  The
careful Bishop's notes were so full and clear that for all practical
purposes they were equal to a report.  His work was already done.  He
felt so pleased with himself that he determined to treat himself to
another "two" of gin, and, with this intent, made his way across to the
little "public" before-mentioned.

"It's really excellent gin you sell here," he said to the barmaid when he
had finished; "I think, my dear, I'll have just one more."

At eleven the landlord gently but firmly insisted on his leaving, and he
went, assisted, as far as the end of the court, by the potboy.  After he
was gone, the landlord noticed a neat little black bag on the seat where
he had been lying.  Examining it closely, he discovered a brass plate
between the handles, and upon the brass plate were engraved the owner's
name and title.  Opening the bag, the landlord saw a neat little roll of
manuscript, and across a corner of the manuscript was written the
Bishop's name and address.

The landlord blew a long, low whistle, and stood with his round eyes wide
open gazing down at the open bag.  Then he put on his hat and coat, and
taking the bag, went out down the court, chuckling hugely as he walked.
He went straight to the house of the Resident Canon and rang the bell.

"Tell Mr. ---," he said to the servant, "that I must see him to-night.  I
wouldn't disturb him at this late hour if it wasn't something very
important."

The landlord was ushered up.  Closing the door softly behind him, he
coughed deferentially.

"Well, Mr. Peters" (I will call him "Peters"), said the Canon, "what is
it?"

"Well, sir," said Mr. Peters, slowly and deliberately, "it's about that
there lease o' mine.  I do hope you gentlemen will see your way to makin'
it twenty-one year instead o' fourteen."

"God bless the man!" cried the Canon, jumping up indignantly, "you don't
mean to say you've come to me at eleven o'clock on a Sunday night to talk
about your lease?"

"Well, not entirely, sir," answered Peters, unabashed; "there's another
little thing I wished to speak to you about, and that's this"--saying
which, he laid the Bishop's bag before the Canon and told his story.

The Canon looked at Mr. Peters, and Mr. Peters looked at the Canon.

"There must be some mistake," said the Canon.

"There's no mistake," said the landlord.  "I had my suspicions when I
first clapped eyes on him.  I seed he wasn't our usual sort, and I seed
how he tried to hide his face.  If he weren't the Bishop, then I don't
know a Bishop when I sees one, that's all.  Besides, there's his bag, and
there's his sermon."

Mr. Peters folded his arms and waited.  The Canon pondered.  Such things
had been known to happen before in Church history.  Why not again?

"Does any one know of this besides yourself?" asked the Canon.

"Not a livin' soul," replied Mr. Peters, "as yet."

"I think--I think, Mr. Peters," said the Canon, "that we may be able to
extend your lease to twenty-one years."

"Thank you kindly, sir," said the landlord, and departed.  Next morning
the Canon waited on the Bishop and laid the bag before him.

"Oh," said the Bishop cheerfully, "he's sent it back by you, has he?"

"He has, sir," replied the Canon; "and thankful I am that it was to me he
brought it.  It is right," continued the Canon, "that I should inform
your lordship that I am aware of the circumstances under which it left
your hands."

The Canon's eye was severe, and the Bishop laughed uneasily.

"I suppose it wasn't quite the thing for me to do," he answered
apologetically; "but there, all's well that ends well," and the Bishop
laughed.

This stung the Canon.  "Oh, sir," he exclaimed, with a burst of fervour,
"in Heaven's name--for the sake of our Church, let me entreat--let me
pray you never to let such a thing occur again."

The Bishop turned upon him angrily.

"Why, what a fuss you make about a little thing!" he cried; then, seeing
the look of agony upon the other's face, he paused.

"How did you get that bag?" he asked.

"The landlord of the Cross Keys brought it me," answered the Canon; "you
left it there last night."

The Bishop gave a gasp, and sat down heavily.  When he recovered his
breath, he told the Canon the real history of the case; and the Canon is
still trying to believe it.





I.   THE STORY.

It commenced, so I calculate, about the year 2000 B.C., or, to be more
precise--for figures are not the strong point of the old
chroniclers--when King Heremon ruled over Ireland and Harbundia was
Queen of the White Ladies of Brittany, the fairy Malvina being her
favourite attendant.  It is with Malvina that this story is chiefly
concerned.  Various quite pleasant happenings are recorded to her
credit.  The White Ladies belonged to the "good people," and, on the
whole, lived up to their reputation.  But in Malvina, side by side with
much that is commendable, there appears to have existed a most
reprehensible spirit of mischief, displaying itself in pranks that,
excusable, or at all events understandable, in, say, a pixy or a
pigwidgeon, strike one as altogether unworthy of a well-principled
White Lady, posing as the friend and benefactress of mankind.  For
merely refusing to dance with her--at midnight, by the shores of a
mountain lake; neither the time nor the place calculated to appeal to
an elderly gentleman, suffering possibly from rheumatism--she on one
occasion transformed an eminently respectable proprietor of tin mines
into a nightingale, necessitating a change of habits that to a business
man must have been singularly irritating.  On another occasion a quite
important queen, having had the misfortune to quarrel with Malvina over
some absurd point of etiquette in connection with a lizard, seems, on
waking the next morning, to have found herself changed into what one
judges, from the somewhat vague description afforded by the ancient
chroniclers, to have been a sort of vegetable marrow.

Such changes, according to the Professor, who is prepared to maintain
that evidence of an historical nature exists sufficient to prove that
the White Ladies formed at one time an actual living community, must be
taken in an allegorical sense.  Just as modern lunatics believe
themselves to be china vases or poll-parrots, and think and behave as
such, so it must have been easy, the Professor argues, for beings of
superior intelligence to have exerted hypnotic influence upon the
superstitious savages by whom they were surrounded, and who,
intellectually considered, could have been little more than children.

"Take Nebuchadnezzar."  I am still quoting the Professor.  "Nowadays we
should put him into a strait-waistcoat.  Had he lived in Northern
Europe instead of Southern Asia, legend would have told us how some
Kobold or Stromkarl had turned him into a composite amalgamation of a
serpent, a cat and a kangaroo."  Be that as it may, this passion for
change--in other people--seems to have grown upon Malvina until she
must have become little short of a public nuisance, and eventually it
landed her in trouble.

The incident is unique in the annals of the White Ladies, and the
chroniclers dwell upon it with evident satisfaction.  It came about
through the betrothal of King Heremon's only son, Prince Gerbot, to the
Princess Berchta of Normandy.  Malvina seems to have said nothing, but
to have bided her time.  The White Ladies of Brittany, it must be
remembered, were not fairies pure and simple.  Under certain conditions
they were capable of becoming women, and this fact, one takes it, must
have exerted a disturbing influence upon their relationships with
eligible male mortals.  Prince Gerbot may not have been altogether
blameless.  Young men in those sadly unenlightened days may not, in
their dealings with ladies, white or otherwise, have always been the
soul of discretion and propriety. One would like to think the best of
her.

But even the best is indefensible.  On the day appointed for the
wedding she seems to have surpassed herself.  Into what particular
shape or form she altered the wretched Prince Gerbot; or into what
shape or form she persuaded him that he had been altered, it really, so
far as the moral responsibility of Malvina is concerned, seems to be
immaterial; the chronicle does not state:  evidently something too
indelicate for a self-respecting chronicler to even hint at. As,
judging from other passages in the book, squeamishness does not seem to
have been the author's literary failing, the sensitive reader can feel
only grateful for the omission.  It would have been altogether too
harrowing.

It had, of course, from Malvina's point of view, the desired effect.
The Princess Berchta appears to have given one look and then to have
fallen fainting into the arms of her attendants.  The marriage was
postponed indefinitely, and Malvina, one sadly suspects, chortled. Her
triumph was short-lived.

Unfortunately for her, King Heremon had always been a patron of the
arts and science of his period.  Among his friends were to be reckoned
magicians, genii, the Nine Korrigans or Fays of Brittany--all sorts of
parties capable of exerting influence, and, as events proved, only too
willing.  Ambassadors waited upon Queen Harbundia; and Harbundia, even
had she wished, as on many previous occasions, to stand by her
favourite, had no alternative.  The fairy Malvina was called upon to
return to Prince Gerbot his proper body and all therein contained.

She flatly refused.  A self-willed, obstinate fairy, suffering from
swelled head.  And then there was that personal note.  Merely that he
should marry the Princess Berchta!  She would see King Heremon, and
Anniamus, in his silly old wizard's robe, and the Fays of Brittany, and
all the rest of them--!  A really nice White Lady may not have cared to
finish the sentence, even to herself.  One imagines the flash of the
fairy eye, the stamp of the fairy foot. What could they do to her, any
of them, with all their clacking of tongues and their wagging of heads?
She, an immortal fairy!  She would change Prince Gerbot back at a time
of her own choosing.  Let them attend to their own tricks and leave her
to mind hers.  One pictures long walks and talks between the distracted
Harbundia and her refractory favourite--appeals to reason, to
sentiment:  "For my sake."  "Don't you see?"  "After all, dear, and
even if he did."

It seems to have ended by Harbundia losing all patience.  One thing
there was she could do that Malvina seems either not to have known of
or not to have anticipated.  A solemn meeting of the White Ladies was
convened for the night of the midsummer moon.  The place of meeting is
described by the ancient chroniclers with more than their usual
exactitude.  It was on the land that the magician Kalyb had, ages ago,
raised up above all Brittany to form the grave of King Taramis.  The
"Sea of the Seven Islands" lay to the north.  One guesses it to be the
ridge formed by the Arree Mountains.  "The Lady of the Fountain"
appears to have been present, suggesting the deep green pool from which
the river D'Argent takes its source.  Roughly speaking, one would place
it halfway between the modern towns of Morlaix and Callac.
Pedestrians, even of the present day, speak of the still loneliness of
that high plateau, treeless, houseless, with no sign of human hand
there but that high, towering monolith round which the shrill winds
moan incessantly.  There, possibly on some broken fragment of those
great grey stones, Queen Harbundia sat in judgment.  And the judgment
was--and from it there was no appeal--that the fairy Malvina should be
cast out from among the community of the White Ladies of Brittany.
Over the face of the earth she should wander, alone and unforgiven.
Solemnly from the book of the roll-call of the White Ladies the name of
Malvina was struck out for ever.

The blow must have fallen upon Malvina as heavily as it was unexpected.
Without a word, without one backward look, she seems to have departed.
One pictures the white, frozen face, the wide-open, unseeing eyes, the
trembling, uncertain steps, the groping hands, the deathlike silence
clinging like grave-clothes round about her.

From that night the fairy Malvina disappears from the book of the
chroniclers of the White Ladies of Brittany, from legend and from
folklore whatsoever.  She does not appear again in history till the
year A.D. 1914.



II.  HOW IT CAME ABOUT.

It was on an evening towards the end of June, 1914, that Flight
Commander Raffleton, temporarily attached to the French Squadron then
harboured at Brest, received instructions by wireless to return at once
to the British Air Service Headquarters at Farnborough, in Hampshire.
The night, thanks to a glorious full moon, would afford all the light
he required, and young Raffleton determined to set out at once.  He
appears to have left the flying ground just outside the arsenal at
Brest about nine o'clock.  A little beyond Huelgoat he began to
experience trouble with the carburettor.  His idea at first was to push
on to Lannion, where he would be able to secure expert assistance; but
matters only getting worse, and noticing beneath him a convenient
stretch of level ground, he decided to descend and attend to it
himself.  He alighted without difficulty and proceeded to investigate.
The job took him, unaided, longer than he had anticipated.  It was a
warm, close night, with hardly a breath of wind, and when he had
finished he was feeling hot and tired.  He had drawn on his helmet and
was on the point of stepping into his seat, when the beauty of the
night suggested to him that it would be pleasant, before starting off
again, to stretch his legs and cool himself a little.  He lit a cigar
and looked round about him.

The plateau on which he had alighted was a table-land standing high
above the surrounding country.  It stretched around him, treeless,
houseless.  There was nothing to break the lines of the horizon but a
group of gaunt grey stones, the remains, so he told himself, of some
ancient menhir, common enough to the lonely desert lands of Brittany.
In general the stones lie overthrown and scattered, but this particular
specimen had by some strange chance remained undisturbed through all
the centuries.  Mildly interested, Flight Commander Raffleton strolled
leisurely towards it.  The moon was at its zenith.  How still the quiet
night must have been was impressed upon him by the fact that he
distinctly heard, and counted, the strokes of a church clock which must
have been at least six miles away.  He remembers looking at his watch
and noting that there was a slight difference between his own and the
church time.  He made it eight minutes past twelve.  With the dying
away of the last vibrations of the distant bell the silence and the
solitude of the place seemed to return and settle down upon it with
increased insistence.  While he was working it had not troubled him,
but beside the black shadows thrown by those hoary stones it had the
effect almost of a presence.  It was with a sense of relief that he
contemplated returning to his machine and starting up his engine. It
would whir and buzz and give back to him a comfortable feeling of life
and security.  He would walk round the stones just once and then be
off.  It was wonderful how they had defied old Time.  As they had been
placed there, quite possibly ten thousand years ago, so they still
stood, the altar of that vast, empty sky-roofed temple.  And while he
was gazing at them, his cigar between his lips, struggling with a
strange forgotten impulse that was tugging at his knees, there came
from the very heart of the great grey stones the measured rise and fall
of a soft, even breathing.

Young Raffleton frankly confesses that his first impulse was to cut and
run.  Only his soldier's training kept his feet firm on the heather.
Of course, the explanation was simple.  Some animal had made the place
its nest.  But then what animal was ever known to sleep so soundly as
not to be disturbed by human footsteps?  If wounded, and so unable to
escape, it would not be breathing with that quiet, soft regularity,
contrasting so strangely with the stillness and the silence all round.
Possibly an owl's nest.  Young owlets make that sort of noise--the
"snorers," so country people call them.  Young Raffleton threw away his
cigar and went down upon his knees to grope among the shadows, and,
doing so, he touched something warm and soft and yielding.

But it wasn't an owl.  He must have touched her very lightly, for even
then she did not wake.  She lay there with her head upon her arm.  And
now close to her, his eyes growing used to the shadows, he saw her
quite plainly, the wonder of the parted lips, the gleam of the white
limbs beneath their flimsy covering.

Of course, what he ought to have done was to have risen gently and
moved away.  Then he could have coughed.  And if that did not wake her
he might have touched her lightly, say, on the shoulder, and have
called to her, first softly, then a little louder, "Mademoiselle," or
"Mon enfant."  Even better, he might have stolen away on tiptoe and
left her there sleeping.

This idea does not seem to have occurred to him.  One makes the excuse
for him that he was but three-and-twenty, that, framed in the purple
moonlight, she seemed to him the most beautiful creature his eyes had
ever seen.  And then there was the brooding mystery of it all, that
atmosphere of far-off primeval times from which the roots of life still
draw their sap.  One takes it he forgot that he was Flight Commander
Raffleton, officer and gentleman; forgot the proper etiquette applying
to the case of ladies found sleeping upon lonely moors without a
chaperon.  Greater still, the possibility that he never thought of
anything at all, but, just impelled by a power beyond himself, bent
down and kissed her.

Not a platonic kiss upon the brow, not a brotherly kiss upon the cheek,
but a kiss full upon the parted lips, a kiss of worship and amazement,
such as that with which Adam in all probability awakened Eve.

Her eyes opened, and, just a little sleepily, she looked at him. There
could have been no doubt in her mind as to what had happened. His lips
were still pressing hers.  But she did not seem in the least surprised,
and most certainly not angry.  Raising herself to a sitting posture,
she smiled and held out her hand that he might help her up.  And, alone
in that vast temple, star-roofed and moon-illumined, beside that grim
grey altar of forgotten rites, hand in hand they stood and looked at
one another.

"I beg your pardon," said Commander Raffleton.  "I'm afraid I have
disturbed you."

He remembered afterwards that in his confusion he had spoken to her in
English.  But she answered him in French, a quaint, old-fashioned
French such as one rarely finds but in the pages of old missals.  He
would have had some difficulty in translating it literally, but the
meaning of it was, adapted to our modern idiom:

"Don't mention it.  I'm so glad you've come."

He gathered she had been expecting him.  He was not quite sure whether
he ought not to apologise for being apparently a little late.  True, he
had no recollection of any such appointment.  But then at that
particular moment Commander Raffleton may be said to have had no
consciousness of anything beyond just himself and the wondrous other
beside him.  Somewhere outside was moonlight and a world; but all that
seemed unimportant.  It was she who broke the silence.

"How did you get here?" she asked.

He did not mean to be enigmatical.  He was chiefly concerned with still
gazing at her.

"I flew here," he answered.  Her eyes opened wider at that, but with
interest, not doubt.

"Where are your wings?" she asked.  She was leaning sideways, trying to
get a view of his back.

He laughed.  It made her seem more human, that curiosity about his back.

"Over there," he answered.  She looked, and for the first time saw the
great shimmering sails gleaming like silver under the moonlight.

She moved towards it, and he followed, noticing without surprise that
the heather seemed to make no sign of yielding to the pressure of her
white feet.

She halted a little away from it, and he came and stood beside her.
Even to Commander Raffleton himself it looked as if the great wings
were quivering, like the outstretched pinions of a bird preening itself
before flight.

"Is it alive?" she asked.

"Not till I whisper to it," he answered.  He was losing a little of his
fear of her.  She turned to him.

"Shall we go?" she asked.

He stared at her.  She was quite serious, that was evident.  She was to
put her hand in his and go away with him.  It was all settled. That is
why he had come.  To her it did not matter where.  That was his affair.
But where he went she was to go.  That was quite clearly the programme
in her mind.

To his credit, let it be recorded, he did make an effort.  Against all
the forces of nature, against his twenty-three years and the red blood
pulsing in his veins, against the fumes of the midsummer moonlight
encompassing him and the voices of the stars, against the demons of
poetry and romance and mystery chanting their witches' music in his
ears, against the marvel and the glory of her as she stood beside him,
clothed in the purple of the night, Flight Commander Raffleton fought
the good fight for common sense.

Young persons who, scantily clad, go to sleep on the heather, five
miles from the nearest human habitation, are to be avoided by
well-brought-up young officers of His Majesty's Aerial Service.  The
incidence of their being uncannily beautiful and alluring should serve
as an additional note of warning.  The girl had had a row with her
mother and wanted to get away.  It was this infernal moonlight that was
chiefly responsible.  No wonder dogs bayed at it.  He almost fancied he
could hear one now.  Nice, respectable, wholesome-minded things, dogs.
No damned sentiment about them. What if he had kissed her!  One is not
bound for life to every woman one kisses.  Not the first time she had
been kissed, unless all the young men in Brittany were blind or white
blooded.  All this pretended innocence and simplicity!  It was just put
on.  If not, she must be a lunatic.  The proper thing to do was to say
good-bye with a laugh and a jest, start up his machine and be off to
England--dear old practical, merry England, where he could get
breakfast and a bath.

It wasn't a fair fight; one feels it.  Poor little prim Common Sense,
with her defiant, turned-up nose and her shrill giggle and her innate
vulgarity.  And against her the stillness of the night, and the music
of the ages, and the beating of his heart.

So it all fell down about his feet, a little crumbled dust that a
passing breath of wind seemed to scatter, leaving him helpless,
spellbound by the magic of her eyes.

"Who are you?" he asked her.

"Malvina," she answered him.  "I am a fairy."



III. HOW COUSIN CHRISTOPHER BECAME MIXED UP WITH IT.

It did just occur to him that maybe he had not made that descent quite
as successfully as he had thought he had; that maybe he had come down
on his head; that in consequence he had done with the experiences of
Flight Commander Raffleton and was now about to enter on a new and less
circumscribed existence.  If so, the beginning, to an adventuresome
young spirit, seemed promising.  It was Malvina's voice that recalled
him from this train of musing.

"Shall we go?" she repeated, and this time the note in her voice
suggested command rather than question.

Why not?  Whatever had happened to him, at whatever plane of existence
he was now arrived, the machine apparently had followed him.
Mechanically he started it up.  The familiar whir of the engine brought
back to him the possibility of his being alive in the ordinary
acceptation of the term.  It also suggested to him the practical
advisability of insisting that Malvina should put on his spare coat.
Malvina being five feet three, and the coat having been built for a man
of six feet one, the effect under ordinary circumstances would have
been comic.  What finally convinced Commander Raffleton that Malvina
really was a fairy was that, in that coat, with the collar standing up
some six inches above her head, she looked more like one than ever.

Neither of them spoke.  Somehow it did not seem to be needed.  He
helped her to climb into her seat and tucked the coat about her feet.
She answered by the same smile with which she had first stretched out
her hand to him.  It was just a smile of endless content, as if all her
troubles were now over.  Commander Raffleton sincerely hoped they were.
A momentary flash of intelligence suggested to him that his were just
beginning.

Commander Raffleton's subconscious self it must have been that took
charge of the machine.  He seems, keeping a few miles inland, to have
followed the line of the coast to a little south of the Hague
lighthouse.  Thereabouts he remembers descending for the purpose of
replenishing his tank.  Not having anticipated a passenger, he had
filled up before starting with a spare supply of petrol, an incident
that was fortunate.  Malvina appears to have been interested in
watching what she probably regarded as some novel breed of dragon being
nourished from tins extricated from under her feet, but to have
accepted this, together with all other details of the flight, as in the
natural scheme of things.  The monster refreshed, tugged, spurned the
ground, and rose again with a roar; and the creeping sea rushed down.

One has the notion that for Flight Commander Raffleton, as for the rest
of us, there lies in wait to test the heart of him the ugly and the
commonplace.  So large a portion of the years will be for him a
business of mean hopes and fears, of sordid struggle, of low cares and
vulgar fret.  But also one has the conviction that there will always
remain with him, to make life wonderful, the memory of that night when,
godlike, he rode upon the winds of heaven crowned with the glory of the
world's desire.  Now and again he turned his head to look at her, and
still, as ever, her eyes answered him with that strange deep content
that seemed to wrap them both around as with a garment of immortality.
One gathers dimly something of what he felt from the look that would
unconsciously come into his eyes when speaking of that enchanted
journey, from the sudden dumbness with which the commonplace words
would die away upon his lips.  Well for him that his lesser self kept
firm hold upon the wheel or maybe a few broken spars, tossing upon the
waves, would have been all that was left to tell of a promising young
aviator who, on a summer night of June, had thought he could reach the
stars.

Half-way across the dawn came flaming up over the Needles, and later
there stole from east to west a long, low line of mist-enshrouded land.
One by one headland and cliff, flashing with gold, rose out of the sea,
and the white-winged gulls flew out to meet them. Almost he expected
them to turn into spirits, circling round Malvina with cries of welcome.

Nearer and nearer they drew, while gradually the mist rose upward as
the moonlight grew fainter.  And all at once the sweep of the Chesil
Bank stood out before them, with Weymouth sheltering behind it.


It may have been the bathing-machines, or the gasometer beyond the
railway station, or the flag above the Royal Hotel.  The curtains of
the night fell suddenly away from him.  The workaday world came
knocking at the door.

He looked at his watch.  It was a little after four.  He had wired them
at the camp to expect him in the morning.  They would be looking out
for him.  By continuing his course he and Malvina could be there about
breakfast-time.  He could introduce her to the colonel:  "Allow me,
Colonel Goodyer, the fairy Malvina."  It was either that or dropping
Malvina somewhere between Weymouth and Farnborough.  He decided,
without much consideration, that this latter course would be
preferable.  But where?  What was he to do with her?  There was Aunt
Emily.  Hadn't she said something about wanting a French governess for
Georgina?  True, Malvina's French was a trifle old-fashioned in form,
but her accent was charming.  And as for salary---  There presented
itself the thought of Uncle Felix and the three elder boys.
Instinctively he felt that Malvina would not be Aunt Emily's idea.  His
father, had the dear old gentleman been alive, would have been a safe
refuge.  They had always understood one another, he and his father.
But his mother!  He was not at all sure.  He visualised the scene:  the
drawing-room at Chester Terrace.  His mother's soft, rustling entrance.
Her affectionate but well-bred greeting.  And then the disconcerting
silence with which she would await his explanation of Malvina.  The
fact that she was a fairy he would probably omit to mention.  Faced by
his mother's gold-rimmed pince-nez, he did not see himself insisting
upon that detail:  "A young lady I happened to find asleep on a moor in
Brittany.  And seeing it was a fine night, and there being just room in
the machine.  And she--I mean I--well, here we are."  There would
follow such a painful silence, and then the raising of the delicately
arched eyebrows:  "You mean, my dear lad, that you have allowed
this"--there would be a slight hesitation here--"this young person to
leave her home, her people, her friends and relations in Brittany, in
order to attach herself to you.  May I ask in what capacity?"

For that was precisely how it would look, and not only to his mother.
Suppose by a miracle it really represented the facts. Suppose that, in
spite of the overwhelming evidence in her favour--of the night and the
moon and the stars, and the feeling that had come to him from the
moment he had kissed her--suppose that, in spite of all this, it turned
out that she wasn't a fairy. Suppose that suggestion of vulgar Common
Sense, that she was just a little minx that had run away from home, had
really hit the mark. Suppose inquiries were already on foot.  A hundred
horse-power aeroplane does not go about unnoticed.  Wasn't there a law
about this sort of thing--something about "decoying" and "young girls"?
He hadn't "decoyed" her.  If anything, it was the other way about. But
would her consent be a valid defence?  How old was she?  That would be
the question.  In reality he supposed about a thousand years or so.
Possibly more.  Unfortunately, she didn't look it.  A coldly suspicious
magistrate would probably consider sixteen a much better guess.  Quite
possibly he was going to get into a devil of a mess over this business.
He cast a glance behind him.  Malvina responded with her changeless
smile of ineffable content.  For the first time it caused him a
distinct feeling of irritation.

They were almost over Weymouth by this time.  He could read plainly the
advertisement posters outside the cinema theatre facing the esplanade:
"Wilkins and the Mermaid.  Comic Drama."  There was a picture of the
lady combing her hair; also of Wilkins, a stoutish gentleman in striped
bathing costume.

That mad impulse that had come to him with the first breath of dawn, to
shake the dwindling world from his pinions, to plunge upward towards
the stars never to return--he wished to Heaven he had yielded to it.

And then suddenly there leapt to him the thought of Cousin Christopher.


Dear old Cousin Christopher, fifty-eight and a bachelor.  Why had it
not occurred to him before?  Out of the sky there appeared to Commander
Raffleton the vision of "Cousin Christopher" as a plump, rubicund angel
in a panama hat and a pepper-and-salt tweed suit holding out a
lifebelt.  Cousin Christopher would take to Malvina as some motherly
hen to an orphaned duckling.  A fairy discovered asleep beside one of
the ancient menhirs of Brittany.  His only fear would be that you might
want to take her away before he had written a paper about her.  He
would be down from Oxford at his cottage. Commander Raffleton could not
for the moment remember the name of the village.  It would come to him.
It was northwest of Newbury. You crossed Salisbury Plain and made
straight for Magdalen Tower. The Downs reached almost to the orchard
gate.  There was a level stretch of sward nearly half a mile long.  It
seemed to Commander Raffleton that Cousin Christopher had been created
and carefully preserved by Providence for this particular job.

He was no longer the moonstruck youth of the previous night, on whom
phantasy and imagination could play what pranks they chose.  That part
of him the keen, fresh morning air had driven back into its cell.  He
was Commander Raffleton, an eager and alert young engineer with all his
wits about him.  At this point that has to be remembered.  Descending
on a lonely reach of shore he proceeded to again disturb Malvina for
the purpose of extracting tins.  He expected his passenger would in
broad daylight prove to be a pretty, childish-looking girl, somewhat
dishevelled, with, maybe, a tinge of blue about the nose, the natural
result of a three-hours' flight at fifty miles an hour.  It was with a
startling return of his original sensations when first she had come to
life beneath his kiss that he halted a few feet away and stared at her.
The night was gone, and the silence.  She stood there facing the
sunlight, clad in a Burberry overcoat half a dozen sizes too large for
her.  Beyond her was a row of bathing-machines, and beyond that again a
gasometer.  A goods train half a mile away was noisily shunting trucks.

And yet the glamour was about her still; something indescribable but
quite palpable--something out of which she looked at you as from
another world.

He took her proffered hand, and she leapt out lightly.  She was not in
the least dishevelled.  It seemed as if the air must be her proper
element.  She looked about her, interested, but not curious. Her first
thought was for the machine.

"Poor thing!" she said.  "He must be tired."

That faint tremor of fear that had come to him when beneath the
menhir's shadow he had watched the opening of her eyes, returned to
him.  It was not an unpleasant sensation.  Rather it added a piquancy
to their relationship.  But it was distinctly real.  She watched the
feeding of the monster; and then he came again and stood beside her on
the yellow sands.

"England!" he explained with a wave of his hand.  One fancies she had
the impression that it belonged to him.  Graciously she repeated the
name.  And somehow, as it fell from her lips, it conjured up to
Commander Raffleton a land of wonder and romance.

"I have heard of it," she added.  "I think I shall like it."

He answered that he hoped she would.  He was deadly serious about it.
He possessed, generally speaking, a sense of humour; but for the moment
this must have deserted him.  He told her he was going to leave her in
the care of a wise and learned man called "Cousin Christopher"; his
description no doubt suggesting to Malvina a friendly magician.  He
himself would have to go away for a little while, but would return.

It did not seem to matter to Malvina, these minor details.  It was
evident--the idea in her mind--that he had been appointed to her.
Whether as master or servant it was less easy to conjecture: probably a
mixture of both, with preference towards the latter.

He mentioned again that he would not be away for longer than he could
help.  There was no necessity for this repetition.  She wasn't doubting
it.

Weymouth with its bathing machines and its gasometer faded away. King
Rufus was out a-hunting as they passed over the New Forest, and from
Salisbury Plain, as they looked down, the pixies waved their hands and
laughed.  Later, they heard the clang of the anvil, telling them they
were in the neighbourhood of Wayland Smith's cave; and so planed down
sweetly and without a jar just beyond Cousin Christopher's orchard gate.

A shepherd's boy was whistling somewhere upon the Downs, and in the
valley a ploughman had just harnessed his team; but the village was
hidden from them by the sweep of the hills, and no other being was in
sight.  He helped Malvina out, and leaving her seated on a fallen
branch beneath a walnut tree, proceeded cautiously towards the house.
He found a little maid in the garden.  She had run out of the house on
hearing the sound of his propeller and was staring up into the sky, so
that she never saw him until he put his hand upon her shoulder, and
then was fortunately too frightened to scream.  He gave her hasty
instructions.  She was to knock at the Professor's door and tell him
that his cousin, Commander Raffleton, was there, and would he come down
at once, by himself, into the orchard. Commander Raffleton would rather
not come in.  Would the Professor come down at once and speak to
Commander Raffleton in the orchard.

She went back into the house, repeating it all to herself, a little
scared.

"Good God!" said Cousin Christopher from beneath the bedclothes. "He
isn't hurt, is he?"

The little maid, through the jar of the door, thought not.  Anyhow, he
didn't look it.  But would the Professor kindly come at once? Commander
Raffleton was waiting for him--in the orchard.

So Cousin Christopher, in bedroom slippers, without socks, wearing a
mustard-coloured dressing-gown and a black skull cap upon his head--the
very picture of a friendly magician--trotted hastily downstairs and
through the garden, talking to himself about "foolhardy boys" and
"knowing it would happen"; and was much relieved to meet young Arthur
Raffleton coming towards him, evidently sound in wind and limb.  And
then began to wonder why the devil he had been frightened out of bed at
six o'clock in the morning if nothing was the matter.

But something clearly was.  Before speaking Arthur Raffleton looked
carefully about him in a manner suggestive of mystery, if not of crime;
and still without a word, taking Cousin Christopher by the arm, led the
way to the farther end of the orchard.  And there, on a fallen branch
beneath the walnut tree, Cousin Christopher saw apparently a khaki
coat, with nothing in it, which, as they approached it, rose up.

But it did not rise very high.  The back of the coat was towards them.
Its collar stood out against the sky line.  But there wasn't any head.
Standing upright, it turned round, and peeping out of its folds Cousin
Christopher saw a child's face.  And then looking closer saw that it
wasn't a child.  And then wasn't quite sure what it was; so that coming
to a sudden halt in front of it, Cousin Christopher stared at it with
round wide eyes, and then at Flight Commander Raffleton.

It was to Malvina that Flight Commander Raffleton addressed himself.

"This," he said, "is Professor Littlecherry, my Cousin Christopher,
about whom I told you."

It was obvious that Malvina regarded the Professor as a person of
importance.  Evidently her intention was to curtsy, an operation that,
hampered by those trailing yards of clinging khaki, might prove--so it
flashed upon the Professor--not only difficult but dangerous.

"Allow me," said the Professor.

His idea was to help Malvina out of Commander Raffleton's coat, and
Malvina was preparing to assist him.  Commander Raffleton was only just
in time.

"I don't think," said Commander Raffleton.  "If you don't mind I think
we'd better leave that for Mrs. Muldoon."

The Professor let go the coat.  Malvina appeared a shade disappointed.
One opines that not unreasonably she may have thought to make a better
impression without it.  But a smiling acquiescence in all arrangements
made for her welfare seems to have been one of her charms.

"Perhaps," suggested Commander Raffleton to Malvina while refastening a
few of the more important buttons, "if you wouldn't mind explaining
yourself to my Cousin Christopher just exactly who and what you
are--you'd do it so much better than I should."  (What Commander
Raffleton was saying to himself was:  "If I tell the dear old Johnny,
he'll think I'm pulling his leg.  It will sound altogether different
the way she will put it.")  "You're sure you don't mind?"

Malvina hadn't the slightest objection.  She accomplished her
curtsy--or rather it looked as if the coat were curtsying--quite
gracefully, and with a dignity one would not have expected from it.

"I am the fairy Malvina," she explained to the Professor.  "You may
have heard of me.  I was the favourite of Harbundia, Queen of the White
Ladies of Brittany.  But that was long ago."

The friendly magician was staring at her with a pair of round eyes that
in spite of their amazement looked kindly and understanding. They
probably encouraged Malvina to complete the confession of her sad brief
history.

"It was when King Heremon ruled over Ireland," she continued.  "I did a
very foolish and a wicked thing, and was punished for it by being cast
out from the companionship of my fellows.  Since then"--the coat made
the slightest of pathetic gestures--"I have wandered alone."

It ought to have sounded so ridiculous to them both; told on English
soil in the year One Thousand Nine Hundred and Fourteen to a smart
young officer of Engineers and an elderly Oxford Professor.  Across the
road the doctor's odd man was opening garage doors; a noisy milk cart
was clattering through the village a little late for the London train;
a faint odour of eggs and bacon came wafted through the garden, mingled
with the scent of lavender and pinks.  For Commander Raffleton, maybe,
there was excuse.  This story, so far as it has gone, has tried to make
that clear.  But the Professor!  He ought to have exploded in a burst
of Homeric laughter, or else to have shaken his head at her and warned
her where little girls go to who do this sort of thing.

Instead of which he stared from Commander Raffleton to Malvina, and
from Malvina back to Commander Raffleton with eyes so astonishingly
round that they might have been drawn with a compass.

"God bless my soul!" said the Professor.  "But this is most
extraordinary!"

"Was there a King Heremon of Ireland?" asked Commander Raffleton. The
Professor was a well-known authority on these matters.

"Of course there was a King Heremon of Ireland," answered the Professor
quite petulantly--as if the Commander had wanted to know if there had
ever been a Julius Caesar or a Napoleon.  "And so there was a Queen
Harbundia.  Malvina is always spoken of in connection with her."

"What did she do?" inquired Commander Raffleton.  They both of them
seemed to be oblivious of Malvina's presence.

"I forget for the moment," confessed the professor.  "I must look it
up.  Something, if I remember rightly, in connection with the daughter
of King Dancrat.  He founded the Norman dynasty.  William the Conqueror
and all that lot.  Good Lord!"

"Would you mind her staying with you for a time until I can make
arrangements," suggested Commander Raffleton.  "I'd be awfully obliged
if you would."

What the Professor's answer might have been had he been allowed to
exercise such stock of wits as he possessed, it is impossible to say.
Of course he was interested--excited, if you will.  Folklore, legend,
tradition; these had been his lifelong hobbies.  Apart from anything
else, here at least was a kindred spirit.  Seemed to know a thing or
two.  Where had she learned it?  Might not there be sources unknown to
the Professor?

But to take her in!  To establish her in the only spare bedroom.  To
introduce her--as what? to English village society.  To the new people
at the Manor House.  To the member of Parliament with his innocent
young wife who had taken the vicarage for the summer.  To Dawson, R.A.,
and the Calthorpes!

He might, had he thought it worth his while, have found some
respectable French family and boarded her out.  There was a man he had
known for years at Oxford, a cabinetmaker; the wife a most worthy
woman.  He could have gone over there from time to time, his notebook
in his pocket, and have interviewed her.

Left to himself, he might have behaved as a sane and rational citizen;
or he might not.  There are records favouring the latter possibility.
The thing is not certain.  But as regards this particular incident in
his career he must be held exonerated.  The decision was taken out of
his hands.

To Malvina, on first landing in England, Commander Raffleton had stated
his intention of leaving her temporarily in the care of the wise and
learned Christopher.  To Malvina, regarding the Commander as a gift
from the gods, that had settled the matter.  The wise and learned
Christopher, of course, knew of this coming.  In all probability it was
he--under the guidance of the gods--who had arranged the whole sequence
of events.  There remained only to tender him her gratitude.  She did
not wait for the Professor's reply.  The coat a little hindered her
but, on the other hand, added perhaps an appealing touch of its own.
Taking the wise and learned Christopher's hand in both her own, she
knelt and kissed it.

And in that quaint archaic French of hers, that long study of the
Chronicles of Froissart enabled the Professor to understand:

"I thank you," she said, "for your noble courtesy and hospitality."


In some mysterious way the whole affair had suddenly become imbued with
the dignity of an historical event.  The Professor had the sudden
impression--and indeed it never altogether left him so long as Malvina
remained--that he was a great and powerful personage.  A sister
potentate; incidentally--though, of course, in high politics such
points are immaterial--the most bewilderingly beautiful being he had
ever seen; had graciously consented to become his guest.  The
Professor, with a bow that might have been acquired at the court of
King Rene, expressed his sense of the honour done to him.  What else
could a self-respecting potentate do?  The incident was closed.

Flight Commander Raffleton seems to have done nothing in the direction
of re-opening it.  On the contrary, he appears to have used this
precise moment for explaining to the Professor how absolutely necessary
it was that he should depart for Farnborough without another moment's
loss of time.  Commander Raffleton added that he would "look them both
up again" the first afternoon he could get away; and was sure that if
the Professor would get Malvina to speak slowly, he would soon find her
French easy to understand.

It did occur to the Professor to ask Commander Raffleton where he had
found Malvina--that is, if he remembered.  Also what he was going to do
about her--that is, if he happened to know.  Commander Raffleton,
regretting his great need of haste, explained that he had found Malvina
asleep beside a menhir not far from Huelgoat, in Brittany, and was
afraid that he had woke her up.  For further particulars, would the
Professor kindly apply to Malvina?  For himself, he would never, he
felt sure, be able to thank the professor sufficiently.

In conclusion, and without giving further opportunity for discussion,
the Commander seems to have shaken his Cousin Christopher by the hand
with much enthusiasm; and then to have turned to Malvina.  She did not
move, but her eyes were fixed on him.  And he came to her slowly.  And
without a word he kissed her full upon the lips.

"That is twice you have kissed me," said Malvina--and a curious little
smile played round her mouth.  "The third time I shall become a woman."



IV.  HOW IT WAS KEPT FROM MRS. ARLINGTON.

What surprised the Professor himself, when he came to think of it, was
that, left alone with Malvina, and in spite of all the circumstances,
he felt neither embarrassment nor perplexity.  It was as if, so far as
they two were concerned, the whole thing was quite simple--almost
humorous.  It would be the other people who would have to worry.

The little serving maid was hovering about the garden.  She was
evidently curious and trying to get a peep.  Mrs. Muldoon's voice could
be heard calling to her from the kitchen.  There was this question of
clothes.

"You haven't brought anything with you?" asked the Professor.  "I mean,
in the way of a frock of any sort."

Malvina, with a smile, gave a little gesture.  It implied that all
there was of her and hers stood before him.

"We shall have to find you something," said the Professor. "Something
in which you can go about--"

The Professor had intended to say "our world," but hesitated, not
feeling positive at the moment to which he himself belonged; Malvina's
or Mrs. Muldoon's.  So he made it "the" world instead. Another gesture
conveyed to him that Malvina was entirely in his hands.

"What really have you got on?" asked the Professor.  "I mean
underneath.  Is it anything possible--for a day or two?"

Now Commander Raffleton, for some reason of his own not at all clear to
Malvina, had forbidden the taking off of the coat.  But had said
nothing about undoing it.  So by way of response Malvina undid it.

Upon which the Professor, to Malvina's surprise, acted precisely as
Commander Raffleton had done.  That is to say, he hastily re-closed the
coat, returning the buttons to their buttonholes.

The fear may have come to Malvina that she was doomed never to be rid
of Commander Raffleton's coat.

"I wonder," mused the Professor, "if anyone in the village--"  The
little serving maid flittering among the gooseberry bushes--she was
pretending to be gathering goose-berries--caught the Professor's eye.

"We will consult my chatelaine, Mrs. Muldoon," suggested the Professor.
"I think we shall be able to manage."

The Professor tendered Malvina his arm.  With her other hand she
gathered up the skirts of the Commander's coat.

"I think," said the Professor with a sudden inspiration as they passed
through the garden, "I think I shall explain to Mrs. Muldoon that you
have just come straight from a fancy-dress ball."

They found Mrs. Muldoon in the kitchen.  A less convincing story than
that by which the Professor sought to account to Mrs. Muldoon for the
how and the why of Malvina it would be impossible to imagine.  Mrs.
Muldoon out of sheer kindness appears to have cut him short.

"I'll not be asking ye any questions," said Mrs. Muldoon, "so there'll
be no need for ye to imperil your immortal soul.  If ye'll just give a
thought to your own appearance and leave the colleen to me and
Drusilla, we'll make her maybe a bit dacent."

The reference to his own appearance disconcerted the Professor.  He had
not anticipated, when hastening into his dressing gown and slippers and
not bothering about his socks, that he was on his way to meet the chief
lady-in-waiting of Queen Harbundia.  Demanding that shaving water
should be immediately sent up to him, he appears to have retired into
the bathroom.

It was while he was shaving that Mrs. Muldoon, knocking at the door,
demanded to speak to him.  From her tone the Professor came to the
conclusion that the house was on fire.  He opened the door, and Mrs.
Muldoon, seeing he was respectable, slipped in and closed it behind her.

"Where did ye find her?  How did she get here?" demanded Mrs. Muldoon.
Never before had the Professor seen Mrs. Muldoon other than a placid,
good-humoured body.  She was trembling from head to foot.

"I told you," explained the Professor.  "Young Arthur--"

"I'm not asking ye what ye told me," interrupted Mrs. Muldoon.  "I'm
asking ye for the truth, if ye know it."

The Professor put a chair for Mrs. Muldoon, and Mrs. Muldoon dropped
down upon it.

"What's the matter?" questioned the Professor.  "What's happened?"

Mrs. Muldoon glanced round her, and her voice was an hysterical whisper.

"It's no mortal woman ye've brought into the house," said Mrs. Muldoon.
"It's a fairy."

Whether up to that moment the Professor had really believed Malvina's
story, or whether lurking at the back of his mind there had all along
been an innate conviction that the thing was absurd, the Professor
himself is now unable to say.  To the front of the Professor lay
Oxford--political economy, the higher criticism, the rise and progress
of rationalism.  Behind him, fading away into the dim horizon of
humanity, lay an unmapped land where for forty years he had loved to
wander; a spirit-haunted land of buried mysteries, lost pathways,
leading unto hidden gates of knowledge.

And now upon the trembling balance descended Mrs. Muldoon plump.

"How do you know?" demanded the Professor.

"Shure, don't I know the mark?" replied Mrs. Muldoon almost
contemptuously.  "Wasn't my own sister's child stolen away the very day
of its birth and in its place--"

The little serving maid tapped at the door.

Mademoiselle was "finished."  What was to be done with her?

"Don't ask me," protested Mrs. Muldoon, still in a terrified whisper.
"I couldn't do it.  Not if all the saints were to go down upon their
knees and pray to me."

Common-sense argument would not have prevailed with Mrs. Muldoon. The
Professor felt that; added to which he had not any handy.  He directed,
through the door, that "Mademoiselle" should be shown into the
dining-room, and listened till Drusilla's footsteps had died away.

"Have you ever heard of the White Ladies?" whispered the Professor to
Mrs. Muldoon.

There was not much in the fairy line, one takes it, that Mrs. Muldoon
had not heard of and believed.  Was the Professor sure?

The Professor gave Mrs. Muldoon his word of honour as a gentleman. The
"White Ladies," as Mrs. Muldoon was of course aware, belonged to the
"good people."  Provided nobody offended her there was nothing to fear.

"Shure, it won't be meself that'll cross her," said Mrs. Muldoon.

"She won't be staying very long," added the Professor.  "We will just
be nice to her."

"She's got a kind face," admitted Mrs. Muldoon, "and a pleasant way
with her."  The good body's spirits were perceptibly rising.  The
favour of a "White Lady" might be worth cultivating.

"We must make a friend of her," urged the Professor, seizing his
opportunity.

"And mind," whispered the Professor as he opened the door for Mrs.
Muldoon to slip out, "not a word.  She doesn't want it known."

One is convinced that Mrs. Muldoon left the bathroom resolved that, so
far as she could help it, no breath of suspicion that Malvina was other
than what in Drusilla's holiday frock she would appear to be should
escape into the village.  It was quite a pleasant little frock of a
summery character, with short sleeves and loose about the neck, and
fitted Malvina, in every sense, much better than the most elaborate
confection would have done.  The boots were not so successful.  Malvina
solved the problem by leaving them behind her, together with the
stockings, whenever she went out.  That she knew this was wrong is
proved by the fact that invariably she tried to hide them.  They would
be found in the most unlikely places; hidden behind books in the
Professor's study, crammed into empty tea canisters in Mrs. Muldoon's
storeroom.  Mrs. Muldoon was not to be persuaded even to abstract them.
The canister with its contents would be placed in silence upon the
Professor's table.  Malvina on returning would be confronted by a pair
of stern, unsympathetic boots.  The corners of the fairy mouth would
droop in lines suggestive of penitence and contrition.

Had the Professor been firm she would have yielded.  But from the black
accusing boots the Professor could not keep his eyes from wandering to
the guilty white feet, and at once in his heart becoming "counsel for
the defence."  Must get a pair of sandals next time he went to Oxford.
Anyhow, something more dainty than those grim, uncompromising boots.

Besides, it was not often that Malvina ventured beyond the orchard. At
least not during the day time--perhaps one ought to say not during that
part of the day time when the village was astir.  For Malvina appears
to have been an early riser.  Somewhere about the middle of the night,
as any Christian body would have timed it, Mrs. Muldoon--waking and
sleeping during this period in a state of high nervous tension--would
hear the sound of a softly opened door; peeping from a raised corner of
the blind, would catch a glimpse of fluttering garments that seemed to
melt into the dawn; would hear coming fainter and fainter from the
uplands an unknown song, mingling with the answering voices of the
birds.

It was on the uplands between dawn and sunrise that Malvina made the
acquaintance of the Arlington twins.


They ought, of course, to have been in bed--all three of them, for the
matter of that.  The excuse for the twins was their Uncle George.  He
had been telling them all about the Uffington spectre and Wayland
Smith's cave, and had given them "Puck" as a birthday present.  They
were always given their birthday presents between them, because
otherwise they did not care for them.  They had retired to their
respective bedrooms at ten o'clock and taken it in turns to lie awake.
At the first streak of dawn Victoria, who had been watching by her
window, woke Victor, as arranged.  Victor was for giving it up and
going to sleep again, but Victoria reminding him of the "oath," they
dressed themselves quite simply, and let themselves down by the ivy.

They came across Malvina close to the tail of the White Horse.  They
knew she was a fairy the moment they saw her.  But they were not
frightened--at least not very much.  It was Victor who spoke first.
Taking off his hat and going down on one knee, he wished Malvina good
morning and hoped she was quite well.  Malvina, who seemed pleased to
see them, made answer, and here it was that Victoria took charge of the
affair.  The Arlington twins until they were nine had shared a French
nurse between them; and then Victor, going to school, had gradually
forgotten; while Victoria, remaining at home, had continued her
conversations with "madame."

"Oh!" said Victoria.  "Then you must be a French fairy."

Now the Professor had impressed upon Malvina that for reasons needless
to be explained--anyhow, he never had explained them--she was not to
mention that she was a fairy.  But he had not told her to deny it.
Indeed how could she?  The most that could be expected from her was
that she should maintain silence on the point.  So in answer to
Victoria she explained that her name was Malvina, and that she had
flown across from Brittany in company with "Sir Arthur," adding that
she had often heard of England and had wished to see it.

"How do you like it?" demanded Victoria.

Malvina confessed herself charmed with it.  Nowhere had she ever met so
many birds.  Malvina raised her hand and they all three stood in
silence, listening.  The sky was ablaze and the air seemed filled with
their music.  The twins were sure that there were millions of them.
They must have come from miles and miles and miles, to sing to Malvina.

Also the people. They were so good and kind and round.  Malvina for the
present was staying with--accepting the protection, was how she put it,
of the wise and learned Christopher.  The "habitation" could be seen
from where they stood, its chimneys peeping from among the trees.  The
twins exchanged a meaning glance.  Had they not all along suspected the
Professor!  His black skull cap, and his big hooked nose, and the
yellow-leaved, worm-eaten books--of magic:  all doubts were now
removed--that for hours he would sit poring over through owlish
gold-rimmed spectacles!

Victor's French was coming back to him.  He was anxious to know if
Malvina had ever met Sir Launcelot--"to talk to."

A little cloud gathered upon Malvina's face.  Yes, she had known them
all:  King Uthur and Igraine and Sir Ulfias of the Isles. Talked with
them, walked with them in the fair lands of France.  (It ought to have
been England, but Malvina shook her head.  Maybe they had travelled.)
It was she who had saved Sir Tristram from the wiles of Morgan le Fay.
"Though that, of course," explained Malvina, "was never known."

The twins were curious why it should have been "of course," but did not
like to interrupt again.  There were others before and after. Most of
them the twins had never heard of until they came to Charlemagne,
beyond which Malvina's reminiscences appeared to fade.

They had all of them been very courteous to her, and some of them
indeed quite charming.  But...

One gathers they had never been to Malvina more than mere
acquaintances, such as one passes the time with while waiting--and
longing.

"But you liked Sir Launcelot," urged Victor.  He was wishful that
Malvina should admire Sir Launcelot, feeling how much there was in
common between that early lamented knight and himself.  That little
affair with Sir Bedivere.  It was just how he would have behaved
himself.

Ah! yes, admitted Malvina.  She had "liked" him.  He was always so--so
"excellent."

"But he was not--none of them were my own people, my own dear
companions."  The little cloud had settled down again.

It was Bruno who recalled the three of them to the period of
contemporary history.

Polley the cowman's first duty in the morning was to let Bruno loose
for a run.  He arrived panting and breathless, and evidently offended
at not having been included in the escapade.  He could have given them
both away quite easily if he had not been the most forgiving of
black-and-tan collies.  As it was, he had been worrying himself crazy
for the last half-hour, feeling sure they had forgotten the time.
"Don't you know it's nearly six o'clock?  That in less than half an
hour Jane will be knocking at your doors with glasses of hot milk, and
will probably drop them and scream when she finds your beds empty and
the window wide open."  That is what he had intended should be his
first words, but on scenting Malvina they went from him entirely.  He
gave her one look and flopped down flat, wriggling towards her, whining
and wagging his tail at the same time.  Malvina acknowledged his homage
by laughing and patting his head with her foot, and that sent him into
the seventh heaven of delight.  They all four descended the hill
together and parted at the orchard gate.  The twins expressed a polite
but quite sincere hope that they would have the pleasure of seeing
Malvina again; but Malvina, seized maybe with sudden doubts as to
whether she had behaved with discretion, appears to have replied
evasively.  Ten minutes later she was lying asleep, the golden head
pillowed on the round white arm; as Mrs. Muldoon on her way down to the
kitchen saw for herself.  And the twins, fortunate enough to find a
side door open, slipped into the house unnoticed and scrambled back
into their beds.

It was quarter past nine when Mrs. Arlington came in herself and woke
them up.  She was short-tempered with them both and had evidently been
crying.  They had their breakfast in the kitchen.

During lunch hardly a word was spoken.  And there was no pudding. Mr.
Arlington, a stout, florid gentleman, had no time for pudding. The rest
might sit and enjoy it at their leisure, but not so Mr. Arlington.
Somebody had to see to things--that is, if they were not to be allowed
to go to rack and ruin.  If other people could not be relied upon to do
their duty, so that everything inside the house and out of it was
thrown upon one pair of shoulders, then it followed as a natural
consequence that that pair of shoulders could not spare the necessary
time to properly finish its meals.  This it was that was at the root of
the decay of English farming.  When farmers' wives, to say nothing of
sons and daughters old enough one might imagine to be anxious to do
something in repayment for the money and care lavished upon them, had
all put their shoulders to the wheel, then English farming had
prospered.  When, on the other hand, other people shirked their fair
share of labour and responsibility, leaving to one pair of hands...

It was the eldest Arlington girl's quite audible remark that pa could
have eaten two helpings of pudding while he had been talking, that
caused Mr. Arlington to lose the thread of his discourse.  To put it
quite bluntly, what Mr. Arlington meant to say was this:  He had never
wanted to be a farmer--at least not in the beginning. Other men in his
position, having acquired competency by years of self-sacrificing
labour, would have retired to a well-earned leisure.  Having yielded to
persuasion and taken on the job, he was going to see it through; and
everybody else was going to do their share or there would be trouble.

Mr. Arlington, swallowing the remains of his glass in a single gulp,
spoilt a dignified exit by violently hiccoughing, and Mrs. Arlington
rang the bell furiously for the parlourmaid to clear away.  The pudding
passed untouched from before the very eyes of the twins.  It was a
black-currant pudding with brown sugar.

That night Mrs. Arlington appears to have confided in the twins, partly
for her own relief and partly for their moral benefit.  If Mrs.
Arlington had enjoyed the blessing in disguise of a less indulgent
mother, all might have been well.  By nature Mrs. Arlington had been
endowed with an active and energetic temperament. "Miss
Can't-sit-still-a-minute," her nurse had always called her.
Unfortunately it had been allowed to sink into disuse; was now in all
probability beyond hope of recovery.  Their father was quite right.
When they had lived in Bayswater and the business was in Mincing Lane
it did not matter.  Now it was different.  A farmer's wife ought to be
up at six; she ought to see that everybody else was up at six; servants
looked after, kept up to the mark; children encouraged by their
mother's example.  Organisation.  That was what was wanted.  The day
mapped out; to every hour its appointed task. Then, instead of the
morning being gone before you could turn yourself round, and confusion
made worse confounded by your leaving off what you were doing and
trying to do six things at once that you couldn't remember whether you
had done or whether you hadn't...

Here Mrs. Arlington appears to have dissolved into tears.  Generally
speaking, she was a placid, smiling, most amiable lady, quite
delightful to have about the house provided all you demanded of her
were pleasant looks and a sunny disposition.  The twins appear to have
joined their tears to hers.  Tucked in and left to themselves, one
imagines the problem being discussed with grave seriousness, much
whispered conversation, then slept upon, the morning bringing with it
ideas.  The result being that the next evening, between high tea and
supper, Mrs. Muldoon, answering herself the knock at the door, found
twin figures standing hand in hand on the Professor's step.

They asked her if "the Fairy" was in.



V.  HOW IT WAS TOLD TO MRS. MARIGOLD.

There was no need of the proverbial feather.  Mrs. Muldoon made a grab
at the settle but missed it.  She caught at a chair, but that gave way.
It was the floor that finally stopped her.

"We're so sorry," apologised Victor.  "We thought you knew.  We ought
to have said Mademoiselle Malvina."

Mrs. Muldoon regained her feet, and without answering walked straight
into the study.

"They want to know," said Mrs. Muldoon, "if the Fairy's in."  The
Professor, with his back to the window, was reading.  The light in the
room was somewhat faint.

"Who wants to know?" demanded the Professor.

"The twins from the Manor House," explained Mrs. Muldoon.

"But what?--but who?" began the Professor.

"Shall I say 'not at home'?" suggested Mrs. Muldoon.  "Or hadn't you
better see them yourself."

"Show them in," directed the Professor.

They came in, looking a little scared and still holding one another by
the hand.  They wished the Professor good evening, and when he rose
they backed away from him.  The Professor shook hands with them, but
they did not let go, so that Victoria gave him her right hand and
Victor his left, and then at the Professor's invitation they sat
themselves down on the extreme edge of the sofa.

"I hope we do not disturb you," said Victor.  "We wanted to see
Mademoiselle Malvina."

"Why do you want to see Mademoiselle Malvina?" inquired the Professor.

"It is something very private," said Victor.

"We wanted to ask her a great favour," said Victoria.

"I'm sorry," said the Professor, "but she isn't in.  At least, I don't
think so."  (The Professor never was quite sure.  "She slips in and out
making no more noise than a wind-driven rose leaf," was Mrs. Muldoon's
explanation.)  "Hadn't you better tell me?  Leave me to put it to her."

They looked at one another.  It would never do to offend the wise and
learned Christopher.  Besides, a magician, it is to be assumed, has
more ways than one of learning what people are thinking.

"It is about mamma," explained Victoria.  "We wondered if Malvina would
mind changing her."

The Professor had been reading up Malvina.  It flashed across him that
this had always been her speciality:  Changing people.  How had the
Arlington twins discovered it?  And why did they want their mother
changed?  And what did they want her changed into?  It was shocking
when you come to think of it!  The Professor became suddenly so stern,
that if the twins could have seen his expression--which, owing to the
fading light, they couldn't--they would have been too frightened to
answer.

"Why do you want your mother changed?" demanded the Professor.  Even as
it was his voice alarmed them.

"It's for her own good," faltered Victoria.

"Of course we don't mean into anything," explained Victor.

"Only her inside," added Victoria.

"We thought that Malvina might be able to improve her," completed
Victor.

It was still very disgraceful.  What were we coming to when children
went about clamouring for their mothers to be "improved"!  The
atmosphere was charged with indignation.  The twins felt it.

"She wants to be," persisted Victoria.  "She wants to be energetic and
to get up early in the morning and do things."

"You see," added Victor, "she was never properly brought up."


The Professor maintains stoutly that his only intention was a joke. It
was not even as if anything objectionable had been suggested. The
Professor himself had on occasions been made the confidant of both.

"Best woman that ever lived, if only one could graft a little energy
upon her.  No sense of time.  Too easy-going.  No idea of keeping
people up to the mark."  So Mr. Arlington, over the nuts and wine.

"It's pure laziness.  Oh, yes, it is.  My friends say I'm so 'restful';
but that's the proper explanation of it--born laziness. And yet I try.
You have no idea, Professor Littlecherry, how much I try."  So Mrs.
Arlington, laughingly, while admiring the Professor's roses.

Besides, how absurd to believe that Malvina could possibly change
anybody!  Way back, when the human brain was yet in process of
evolution, such things may have been possible.  Hypnotic suggestion,
mesmeric influence, dormant brain cells quickened into activity by
magnetic vibration.  All that had been lost.  These were the days of
George the Fifth, not of King Heremon.  What the Professor was really
after was:  How would Malvina receive the proposal?  Of course she
would try to get out of it.  A dear little thing.  But could any sane
man, professor of mathematics...

Malvina was standing beside him.  No one had remarked her entrance. The
eyes of the twins had been glued upon the wise and learned Christopher.
The Professor, when he was thinking, never saw anything.  Still, it was
rather startling.

"We should never change what the good God has once fashioned," said
Malvina.  She spoke very gravely.  The childishness seemed to have
fallen from her.

"You didn't always think so," said the Professor.  It nettled the
Professor that all idea of this being a good joke had departed with the
sound of Malvina's voice.  She had that way with her.

She made a little gesture.  It conveyed to the Professor that his
remark had not been altogether in good taste.

"I speak as one who has learned," said Malvina.

"I beg your pardon," said the Professor.  "I ought not to have said
that."

Malvina accepted the Professor's apology with a bow.

"But this is something very different," continued the Professor. Quite
another interest had taken hold of the Professor.  It was easy enough
to summon Dame Commonsense to one's aid when Malvina was not present.
Before those strange eyes the good lady had a habit of sneaking away.
Suppose--of course the idea was ridiculous, but suppose--something did
happen!  As a psychological experiment was not one justified?  What was
the beginning of all science but applied curiosity?  Malvina might be
able--and willing--to explain how it was done.  That is, if anything
did happen, which, of course, it wouldn't, and so much the better.
This thing had got to be ended.

"It would be using a gift not for one's own purposes, but to help
others," urged the Professor.

"You see," urged Victor, "mamma really wants to be changed."

"And papa wants it too," urged Victoria.

"It seems to me, if I may so express it," added the Professor, "that
really it would be in the nature of making amends for--well, for--for
our youthful follies," concluded the Professor a little nervously.

Malvina's eyes were fixed on the Professor.  In the dim light of the
low-ceilinged room, those eyes seemed all of her that was visible.

"You wish it?" said Malvina.

It was not at all fair, as the Professor told himself afterwards, her
laying the responsibility on him.  If she really was the original
Malvina, lady-in-waiting to Queen Harbundia, then she was quite old
enough to have decided for herself.  From the Professor's calculations
she must now be about three thousand eight hundred. The Professor
himself was not yet sixty; in comparison a mere babe! But Malvina's
eyes were compelling.

"Well, it can't do any harm," said the Professor.  And Malvina seems to
have accepted that as her authority.

"Let her come to the Cross Stones at sundown," directed Malvina.


The Professor saw the twins to the door.  For some reason the Professor
could not have explained, they all three walked out on tiptoe.  Old Mr.
Brent, the postman, was passing, and the twins ran after him and each
took a hand.  Malvina was still standing where the Professor had left
her.  It was very absurd, but the Professor felt frightened.  He went
into the kitchen, where it was light and cheerful, and started Mrs.
Muldoon on Home Rule.  When he returned to the parlour Malvina was gone.

The twins did not talk that night, and decided next morning not to say
a word, but just to ask their mother to come for an evening walk with
them.  The fear was that she might demand reasons.  But, quite oddly,
she consented without question.  It seemed to the twins that it was
Mrs. Arlington herself who took the pathway leading past the cave, and
when they reached the Cross Stones she sat down and apparently had
forgotten their existence.  They stole away without her noticing them,
but did not quite know what to do with themselves.  They ran for half a
mile till they came to the wood; there they remained awhile, careful
not to venture within; and then they crept back.  They found their
mother sitting just as they had left her.  They thought she was asleep,
but her eyes were wide open. They were tremendously relieved, though
what they had feared they never knew.  They sat down, one on each side
of her, and each took a hand, but in spite of her eyes being open, it
was quite a time before she seemed conscious of their return.  She rose
and slowly looked about her, and as she did so the church clock struck
nine. She could not at first believe it was so late.  Convinced by
looking at her watch--there was just light enough for her to see
it--she became all at once more angry than the twins had ever known
her, and for the first time in their lives they both experienced the
sensation of having their ears boxed.  Nine o'clock was the proper time
for supper and they were half an hour from home, and it was all their
fault.  It did not take them half an hour.  It took them twenty
minutes, Mrs. Arlington striding ahead and the twins panting breathless
behind her.  Mr. Arlington had not yet returned.  He came in five
minutes afterwards, and Mrs. Arlington told him what she thought of
him.  It was the shortest supper within the twins' recollection.  They
found themselves in bed ten minutes in advance of the record.  They
could hear their mother's voice from the kitchen.  A jug of milk had
been overlooked and had gone sour.  She had given Jane a week's notice
before the clock struck ten.

It was from Mr. Arlington that the Professor heard the news.  Mr.
Arlington could not stop an instant, dinner being at twelve sharp and
it wanting but ten minutes to; but seems to have yielded to temptation.
The breakfast hour at the Manor Farm was now six a.m., had been so
since Thursday; the whole family fully dressed and Mrs. Arlington
presiding.  If the Professor did not believe it he could come round any
morning and see for himself.  The Professor appears to have taken Mr.
Arlington's word for it.  By six-thirty everybody at their job and Mrs.
Arlington at hers, consisting chiefly of seeing to it for the rest of
the day that everybody was.  Lights out at ten and everybody in bed;
most of them only too glad to be there. "Quite right; keeps us all up
to the mark," was Mr. Arlington's opinion (this was on Saturday).  Just
what was wanted.  Not perhaps for a permanency; and, of course, there
were drawbacks.  The strenuous life--seeing to it that everybody else
leads the strenuous life; it does not go with unmixed amiability.
Particularly in the beginning.  New-born zeal:  must expect it to
outrun discretion. Does not do to discourage it.  Modifications to be
suggested later. Taken all round, Mr. Arlington's view was that the
thing must be regarded almost as the answer to a prayer.  Mr.
Arlington's eyes on their way to higher levels, appear to have been
arrested by the church clock.  It decided Mr. Arlington to resume his
homeward way without further loss of time.  At the bend of the lane the
Professor, looking back, observed that Mr. Arlington had broken into a
trot.


This seems to have been the end of the Professor, regarded as a sane
and intelligent member of modern society.  He had not been sure at the
time, but it was now revealed to him that when he had urged Malvina to
test her strength, so to express it, on the unfortunate Mrs. Arlington,
it was with the conviction that the result would restore him to his
mental equilibrium.  That Malvina with a wave of her wand--or whatever
the hocus-pocus may have been--would be able to transform the hitherto
incorrigibly indolent and easy-going Mrs. Arlington into a sort of
feminine Lloyd George, had not really entered into his calculations.

Forgetting his lunch, he must have wandered aimlessly about, not
returning home until late in the afternoon.  During dinner he appears
to have been rather restless and nervous--"jumpy," according to the
evidence of the little serving maid.  Once he sprang out of his chair
as if shot when the little serving maid accidentally let fall a
table-spoon; and twice he upset the salt.  It was at mealtime that, as
a rule, the Professor found his attitude towards Malvina most
sceptical.  A fairy who could put away quite a respectable cut from the
joint, followed by two helpings of pie, does take a bit of believing
in.  To-night the Professor found no difficulty.  The White Ladies had
never been averse to accepting mortal hospitality. There must always
have been a certain adaptability.  Malvina, since that fateful night of
her banishment, had, one supposes, passed through varied experiences.
For present purposes she had assumed the form of a jeune fille of the
twentieth century (anno Domini). An appreciation of Mrs. Muldoon's
excellent cooking, together with a glass of light sound claret, would
naturally go with it.

One takes it that he could not for a moment get Mrs. Arlington out of
his mind.  More than once, stealing a covert glance across the table,
it seemed to him that Malvina was regarding him with a mocking smile.
Some impish spirit it must have been that had prompted him.  For
thousands of years Malvina had led--at all events so far as was
known--a reformed and blameless existence; had subdued and put behind
her that fatal passion of hers for change:  in other people.  What
madness to have revived it!  And no Queen Harbundia handy now to keep
her in check.  The Professor had a distinct sensation, while peeling a
pear, that he was being turned into a guinea-pig--a curious feeling of
shrinking about the legs.  So vivid was the impression, that
involuntarily the Professor jumped off his chair and ran to look at
himself in the mirror over the sideboard. He was not fully relieved
even then.  It may have been the mirror. It was very old; one of those
things with little gilt balls all round it; and it looked to the
Professor as if his nose was growing straight out of his face.
Malvina, trusting he had not been taken suddenly ill, asked if there
was anything she could do for him.  He seems to have earnestly begged
her not to think of it.

The Professor had taught Malvina cribbage, and usually of an evening
they played a hand or two.  But to-night the Professor was not in the
mood, and Malvina had contented herself with a book.  She was
particularly fond of the old chroniclers.  The  Professor had an entire
shelf of them, many in the original French.  Making believe to be
reading himself, he heard Malvina break into a cheerful laugh, and went
and looked over her shoulder.  She was reading the history of her own
encounter with the proprietor of tin mines, an elderly gentleman
disliking late hours, whom she had turned into a nightingale.  It
occurred to the Professor that prior to the Arlington case the
recalling of this incident would have brought to her shame and remorse.
Now she seemed to think it funny.

"A silly trick," commented the Professor.  He spoke quite heatedly. "No
one has any right to go about changing people.  Muddling up things they
don't understand.  No right whatever."

Malvina looked up.  She gave a little sigh.

"Not for one's own pleasure or revenge," she made answer.  Her tone was
filled with meekness.  It had a touch of self-reproach.  "That is very
wrong, of course.  But changing them for their own good--at least, not
changing, improving."

"Little hypocrite!" muttered the Professor to himself.  "She's got back
a taste for her old tricks, and Lord knows now where she'll stop."

The Professor spent the rest of the evening among his indexes in search
of the latest information regarding Queen Harbundia.


Meanwhile the Arlington affair had got about the village.  The twins in
all probability had been unable to keep their secret.  Jane, the
dismissed, had looked in to give Mrs. Muldoon her version of Thursday
night's scene in the Arlington kitchen, and Mrs. Muldoon, with a sense
of things impending, may unconsciously have dropped hints.

The Marigolds met the Arlingtons on Sunday, after morning service, and
heard all about it.  That is to say, they met Mr. Arlington and the
other children; Mrs. Arlington, with the two elder girls, having
already attended early communion at seven.  Mrs. Marigold was a pretty,
fluffy, engaging little woman, ten years younger than her husband.  She
could not have been altogether a fool, or she would not have known it.
Marigold, rising politician, ought, of course, to have married a woman
able to help him; but seems to have fallen in love with her a few miles
out of Brussels, over a convent wall. Mr. Arlington was not a regular
church-goer, but felt on this occasion that he owed it to his Maker.
He was still in love with his new wife.  But not blindly.  Later on a
guiding hand might be necessary.  But first let the new seed get firmly
rooted. Marigold's engagements necessitated his returning to town on
Sunday afternoon, and Mrs. Marigold walked part of the way with him to
the station.  On her way back across the fields she picked up the
Arlington twins.  Later, she seems to have called in at the cottage and
spoken to Mrs. Muldoon about Jane, who, she had heard, was in want of a
place.  A little before sunset she was seen by the Doctor climbing the
path to the Warren.  Malvina that evening was missing for dinner.  When
she returned she seemed pleased with herself.



VI.  AND HOW IT WAS FINISHED TOO SOON.

Some days later--it may have been the next week; the exact date appears
to have got mislaid--Marigold, M.P., looked in on the Professor.  They
talked about Tariff Reform, and then Marigold got up and made sure for
himself that the door was tight closed.

"You know my wife," he said.  "We've been married six years, and
there's never been a cloud between us except one.  Of course, she's not
brainy.  That is, at least..."

The Professor jumped out of his chair.

"If you take my advice," he said, "you'll leave her alone."  He spoke
with passion and conviction.

Marigold looked up.

"It's just what I wish to goodness I had done," he answered.  "I blame
myself entirely."

"So long as we see our own mistakes," said the Professor, "there is
hope for us all.  You go straight home, young man, and tell her you've
changed your mind.  Tell her you don't want her with brains. Tell her
you like her best without.  You get that into her head before anything
else happens."

"I've tried to," said Marigold.  "She says it's too late.  That the
light has come to her and she can't help it."

It was the Professor's turn to stare.  He had not heard anything of
Sunday's transactions.  He had been hoping against hope that the
Arlington affair would remain a locked secret between himself and the
twins, and had done his best to think about everything else.

"She's joined the Fabian Society," continued Marigold gloomily.
"They've put her in the nursery.  And the W.S.P.U.  If it gets about
before the next election I'll have to look out for another
constituency--that's all."

"How did you hear about her?" asked the Professor.

"I didn't hear about her," answered Marigold.  "If I had I mightn't
have gone up to town.  You think it right," he added, "to--to encourage
such people?"

"Who's encouraging her?" demanded the professor.  "If fools didn't go
about thinking they could improve every other fool but themselves, this
sort of thing wouldn't happen.  Arlington had an amiable,
sweet-tempered wife, and instead of thanking God and keeping quiet
about it, he worries her out of her life because she is not the
managing woman.  Well, now he's got the managing woman. I met him on
Wednesday with a bump on his forehead as big as an egg. Says he fell
over the mat.  It can't be done.  You can't have a person changed just
as far as you want them changed and there stop. You let 'em alone or
you change them altogether, and then they don't know themselves what
they're going to turn out.  A sensible man in your position would have
been only too thankful for a wife who didn't poke her nose into his
affairs, and with whom he could get away from his confounded politics.
You've been hinting to her about once a month, I expect, what a tragedy
it was that you hadn't married a woman with brains.  Well, now she's
found her brains and is using them.  Why shouldn't she belong to the
Fabian Society and the W.S.P.U?  Shows independence of character.  Best
thing for you to do is to join them yourself.  Then you'll be able to
work together."

"I'm sorry," said Marigold rising.  "I didn't know you agreed with her."

"Who said I agreed with her?" snapped the Professor.  "I'm in a very
awkward position."

"I suppose," said Marigold--he was hesitating with the door in his
hand--"it wouldn't be of any use my seeing her myself?"

"I believe," said the Professor, "that she is fond of the neighbourhood
of the Cross Stones towards sundown.  You can choose for yourself, but
if I were you I should think twice about it."

"I was wondering," said Marigold, "whether, if I put it to her as a
personal favour, she might not be willing to see Edith again and
persuade her that she was only joking?"

A light began to break upon the Professor.

"What do you think has happened?" he asked.

"Well," explained Marigold, "I take it that your young foreign friend
has met my wife and talked politics to her, and that what has happened
is the result.  She must be a young person of extraordinary ability;
but it would be only losing one convert, and I could make it up to her
in--in other ways."  He spoke with unconscious pathos. It rather
touched the Professor.

"It might mean," said the Professor--"that is, assuming that it can be
done at all--Mrs. Marigold's returning to her former self entirely,
taking no further interest in politics whatever."

"I should be so very grateful," answered Marigold.

The Professor had mislaid his spectacles, but thinks there was a tear
in Marigold's eye.

"I'll do what I can," said the Professor.  "Of course, you mustn't
count on it.  It may be easier to start a woman thinking than to stop
her, even for a--"  The Professor checked himself just in time. "I'll
talk to her," he said; and Marigold gripped his hand and departed.


It was about time he did.  The full extent of Malvina's activities
during those few midsummer weeks, till the return of Flight Commander
Raffleton, will never perhaps be fully revealed. According to the
Doctor, the whole business has been grossly exaggerated.  There are
those who talk as if half the village had been taken to pieces, altered
and improved and sent back home again in a mental state unrecognisable
by their own mothers.  Certain it is that Dawson, R.A., generally
described by everybody except his wife as "a lovable little man," and
whose only fault was an incurable habit of punning, both in season--if
such a period there be--and more often out, suddenly one morning
smashed a Dutch interior, fifteen inches by nine, over the astonished
head of Mrs. Dawson.  It clung round her neck, recalling biblical
pictures of the head of John the Baptist, and the frame-work had to be
sawn through before she could get it off.  As to the story about his
having been caught by Mrs. Dawson's aunt kissing the housemaid behind
the waterbutt, that, as the Doctor admits, is a bit of bad luck that
might have happened to anyone.  But whether there was really any
evidence connecting him with Dolly Calthorpe's unaccountable missing of
the last train home, is of course, a more serious matter.  Mrs. Dawson,
a handsome, high-spirited woman herself, may have found Dawson, as
originally fashioned, trying to the nerves; though even then the
question arises:  Why have married him?  But there is a difference, as
Mrs. Dawson has pointed out, between a husband who hasn't enough of the
natural man in him and a husband who has a deal too much.  It is
difficult to regulate these matters.

Altogether, and taking an outside estimate, the Doctor's opinion is
that there may have been half a dozen, who, with Malvina's assistance,
succeeded in hypnotising themselves into temporary insanity.  When
Malvina, a little disappointed, but yielding quite sweetly her own
judgment to that of the wise and learned Christopher, consented to
"restore" them, the explanation was that, having spent their burst of
ill-acquired energy, they fell back at the first suggestion to their
former selves.

Mrs. Arlington does not agree with the Doctor.  She had been trying to
reform herself for quite a long time and had miserably failed. There
was something about them--it might almost be described as an
aroma--that prompted her that evening to take the twins into her
confidence; a sort of intuition that in some way they could help her.
It remained with her all the next day; and when the twins returned in
the evening, in company with the postman, she knew instinctively that
they had been about her business.  It was this same intuitive desire
that drew her to the Downs.  She is confident she would have taken that
walk to the Cross Stones even if the twins had not proposed it.
Indeed, according to her own account, she was not aware that the twins
had accompanied her.  There was something about the stones; a sense as
of a presence.  She knew when she reached them that she had arrived at
the appointed place; and when there appeared to her--coming from where
she could not tell--a diminutive figure that seemed in some mysterious
way as if it were clothed merely in the fading light, she remembered
distinctly that she was neither surprised nor alarmed.  The diminutive
lady sat down beside her and took Mrs. Arlington's hands in both her
own.  She spoke in a strange language, but Mrs. Arlington at the time
understood it, though now the meaning of it had passed from her. Mrs.
Arlington felt as if her body were being taken away from her. She had a
sense of falling, a feeling that she must make some desperate effort to
rise again.  The strange little lady was helping her, assisting her to
make this supreme effort.  It was as if ages were passing.  She was
wrestling with unknown powers.  Suddenly she seemed to slip from them.
The little lady was holding her up. Clasping each other, they rose and
rose and rose.  Mrs. Arlington had a firm conviction that she must
always be struggling upward, or they would overtake her and drag her
down again.  When she awoke the little lady had gone, but that feeling
remained with her; that passionate acceptance of ceaseless struggle,
activity, contention, as now the end and aim of her existence.  At
first she did not recollect where she was.  A strange colourless light
was around her, and a strange singing as of myriads of birds.  And then
the clock struck nine and life came back to her with a rush.  But with
it still that conviction that she must seize hold of herself and
everybody else and get things done.  Its immediate expression, as
already has been mentioned, was experienced by the twins.

When, after a talk with the Professor, aided and abetted by Mr.
Arlington and the eldest Arlington girl, she consented to pay that
second visit to the stones, it was with very different sensations that
she climbed the grass-grown path.  The little lady had met her as
before, but the curious deep eyes looked sadly, and Mrs. Arlington had
the impression, generally speaking, that she was about to assist at her
own funeral.  Again the little lady took her by the hands, and again
she experienced that terror of falling.  But instead of ending with
contest and effort she seemed to pass into a sleep, and when she opened
her eyes she was again alone.  Feeling a little chilly and unreasonably
tired, she walked slowly home, and not being hungry, retired supperless
to bed.  Quite unable to explain why, she seems to have cried herself
to sleep.

One supposes that something of a similar nature may have occurred to
the others--with the exception of Mrs. Marigold.  It was the case of
Mrs. Marigold that, as the Doctor grudgingly admits, went far to weaken
his hypothesis.  Mrs. Marigold, having emerged, was spreading herself,
much to her own satisfaction.  She had discarded her wedding ring as a
relic of barbarism--of the days when women were mere goods and
chattels, and had made her first speech at a meeting in favour of
marriage reform.  Subterfuge, in her case, had to be resorted to.
Malvina had tearfully consented, and Marigold, M.P., was to bring Mrs.
Marigold to the Cross Stones that same evening and there leave her,
explaining to her that Malvina had expressed a wish to see her
again--"just for a chat."


All might have ended well if only Commander Raffleton had not appeared
framed in the parlour door just as Malvina was starting. His Cousin
Christopher had written to the Commander.  Indeed, after the Arlington
affair, quite pressingly, and once or twice had thought he heard the
sound of Flight Commander Raffleton's propeller, but on each occasion
had been disappointed.  "Affairs of State," Cousin Christopher had
explained to Malvina, who, familiar one takes it with the calls upon
knights and warriors through all the ages, had approved.

He stood there with his helmet in his hand.

"Only arrived this afternoon from France,"  he explained.  "Haven't a
moment to spare."

But he had just time to go straight to Malvina.  He laughed as he took
her in his arms and kissed her full upon the lips.

When last he had kissed her--it had been in the orchard; the Professor
had been witness to it--Malvina had remained quite passive, only that
curious little smile about her lips.  But now an odd thing happened.  A
quivering seemed to pass through all her body, so that it swayed and
trembled.  The Professor feared she was going to fall; and, maybe to
save herself, she put up her arms about Commander Raffleton's neck, and
with a strange low cry--it sounded to the Professor like the cry one
sometimes hears at night from some little dying creature of the
woods--she clung to him sobbing.


It must have been a while later when the chiming of the clock recalled
to the Professor the appointment with Mrs. Marigold.

"You will only just have time," he said, gently seeking to release her.
"I'll promise to keep him till you come back."  And as Malvina did not
seem to understand, he reminded her.

But still she made no movement, save for a little gesture of the hands
as if she were seeking to lay hold of something unseen.  And then she
dropped her arms and looked from one of them to the other. The
Professor did not think of it at the time, but remembered afterwards;
that strange aloofness of hers, as if she were looking at you from
another world.  One no longer felt it.

"I am so sorry," she said.  "It is too late.  I am only a woman."

And Mrs. Marigold is still thinking.



THE PROLOGUE.

And here follows the Prologue.  It ought, of course, to have been
written first, but nobody knew of it until quite the end entirely. It
was told to Commander Raffleton by a French comrade, who in days of
peace had been a painter, mingling with others of his kind, especially
such as found their inspiration in the wide horizons and legend-haunted
dells of old-world Brittany.  Afterwards the Commander told it to the
Professor, and the Professor's only stipulation was that it should not
be told to the Doctor, at least for a time.  For the Doctor would see
in it only confirmation for his own narrow sense-bound theories, while
to the Professor it confirmed beyond a doubt the absolute truth of this
story.


It commenced in the year Eighteen hundred and ninety-eight (anno
Domini), on a particularly unpleasant evening in late February--"a
stormy winter's night," one would describe it, were one writing mere
romance.  It came to the lonely cottage of Madame Lavigne on the edge
of the moor that surrounds the sunken village of Aven-a-Christ. Madame
Lavigne, who was knitting stockings--for she lived by knitting
stockings--heard, as she thought, a passing of feet, and what seemed
like a tap at the door.  She dismissed the idea, for who would be
passing at such an hour, and where there was no road?  But a few
minutes later the tapping came again, and Madame Lavigne, taking her
candle in her hand, went to see who was there.  The instant she
released the latch a gust of wind blew out the candle, and Madame
Lavigne could see no one.  She called, but there was no answer.  She
was about to close the door again when she heard a faint sound.  It was
not exactly a cry.  It was as if someone she could not see, in the
tiniest of voices, had said something she could not understand.

Madame Lavigne crossed herself and muttered a prayer, and then she
heard it again.  It seemed to come from close at her feet, and feeling
with her hands--for she thought it might be a stray cat--she found
quite a large parcel, It was warm and soft, though, of course, a bit
wet, and Madame Lavigne brought it in, and having closed the door and
re-lit her candle, laid it on the table.  And then she saw it was the
tiniest of babies.

It must always be a difficult situation.  Madame Lavigne did what most
people would have done in the case.  She unrolled the wrappings, and
taking the little thing on her lap, sat down in front of the dull peat
fire and considered.  It seemed wonderfully contented, and Madame
Lavigne thought the best thing to do would be to undress it and put it
to bed, and then go on with her knitting. She would consult Father Jean
in the morning and take his advice. She had never seen such fine
clothes.  She took them off one by one, lovingly feeling their texture,
and when she finally removed the last little shift and the little white
thing lay exposed, Madame Lavigne sprang up with a cry and all but
dropped it into the fire. For she saw by the mark that every Breton
peasant knows that it was not a child but a fairy.

Her proper course, as she well knew, was to have opened the door and
flung it out into the darkness.  Most women of the village would have
done so, and spent the rest of the night on their knees.  But someone
must have chosen with foresight.  There came to Madame Lavigne the
memory of her good man and her three tall sons, taken from her one by
one by the jealous sea, and, come what might of it, she could not do
it.  The little thing understood, that was clear, for it smiled quite
knowingly and stretched out its little hands, touching Madame Lavigne's
brown withered skin, and stirring forgotten beatings of her heart.

Father Jean--one takes him to have been a tolerant, gently wise old
gentleman--could see no harm.  That is, if Madame Lavigne could afford
the luxury.  Maybe it was a good fairy.  Would bring her luck.  And
certain it is that the cackling of Madame's hens was heard more often
than before, and the weeds seemed fewer in the little patch of garden
that Madame Lavigne had rescued from the moor.

Of course, the news spread.  One gathers that Madame Lavigne rather
gave herself airs.  But the neighbours shook their heads,  and the
child grew up lonely and avoided.  Fortunately, the cottage was far
from other houses, and there was always the great moor with its deep
hiding-places.  Father Jean was her sole playmate.  He would take her
with him on his long tramps through his scattered district, leaving her
screened among the furze and bracken near to the solitary farmsteads
where he made his visitations.

He had learnt it was useless:  all attempt of Mother Church to scold
out of this sea and moor-girt flock their pagan superstitions.  He
would leave it to time.  Later, perhaps opportunity might occur to
place the child in some convent, where she would learn to forget, and
grow into a good Catholic.  Meanwhile, one had to take pity on the
little lonely creature.  Not entirely for her own sake maybe; a dear
affectionate little soul strangely wise; so she seemed to Father Jean.
Under the shade of trees or sharing warm shelter with the soft-eyed
cows, he would teach her from his small stock of knowledge.  Every now
and then she would startle him with an intuition, a comment strangely
unchildlike.  It was as if she had known all about it, long ago.
Father Jean would steal a swift glance at her from under his shaggy
eyebrows and fall into a silence.  It was curious also how the wild
things of the field and wood seemed unafraid of her.  At times,
returning to where  he had left her hidden, he would pause, wondering
to whom she was talking, and then as he drew nearer would hear the
stealing away of little feet, the startled flutter of wings.  She had
elfish ways, of which it seemed impossible to cure her.  Often the good
man, returning from some late visit of mercy with his lantern and his
stout oak cudgel, would  pause and listen to a wandering voice.  It was
never near enough for him to hear the  words, and the voice was strange
to him, though he knew it could be no one else.  Madame Lavigne would
shrug her shoulders.  How could she help it?  It was not for her to
cross the "child," even supposing bolts and bars likely to be of any
use.  Father Jean gave it up in despair.  Neither was it for him either
to be too often forbidding and lecturing.  Maybe the cunning tender
ways had wove their web about the childless old gentleman's heart,
making him also somewhat afraid.  Perhaps other distractions! For
Madame Lavigne would never allow her to do anything but the lightest of
work.  He would teach her to read.  So quickly she learnt that it
seemed to Father Jean she must be making believe not to have known it
already.  But he had his reward in watching the joy with which she
would devour, for preference, the quaint printed volumes of romance and
history that he would bring home to her from his rare journeyings to
the distant town.


It was when she was about thirteen that the ladies and gentlemen came
from Paris.  Of course they were not real ladies and gentlemen. Only a
little company of artists seeking new fields.  They had "done" the
coast and the timbered houses of the narrow streets, and one of them
had suggested exploring the solitary, unknown inlands. They came across
her seated on an old grey stone reading from an ancient-looking book,
and she had risen and curtsied to them.  She was never afraid.  It was
she who excited fear.  Often she would look after the children flying
from her, feeling a little sad.  But, of course, it could not be
helped.  She was a fairy.  She would have done them no harm, but this
they could not be expected to understand.  It was a delightful change;
meeting human beings who neither screamed nor hastily recited their
paternosters, but who, instead, returned one's smile.  They asked her
where she lived, and she showed them.  They were staying at
Aven-a-Christ; and one of the ladies was brave enough even to kiss her.
Laughing and talking they all walked down the hill together.  They
found Madame Lavigne working in her garden.  Madame Lavigne washed her
hands of all responsibility.  It was for Suzanne to decide.  It seemed
they wanted to make a picture of her, sitting on the grey stone where
they had found her.  It was surely only kind to let them; so next
morning she was there again waiting for them.  They gave her a
five-franc piece.  Madame Lavigne was doubtful of handling it, but
Father Jean vouched for it as being good Republican money; and as the
days went by Madame Lavigne's black stocking grew heavier and heavier
as she hung it again each night in the chimney.

It was the lady who had first kissed her that discovered who she was.
They had all of them felt sure from the beginning that she was a fairy,
and that "Suzanne" could not be her real name.  They found it in the
"Heptameron of Friar Bonnet.  In which is recorded the numerous
adventures of the valiant and puissant King Ryence of Bretagne," which
one of them had picked up on the Quai aux Fleurs and brought with him.
It told all about the White Ladies, and therein she was described.
There could be no mistaking her; the fair body that was like to a
willow swayed by the wind.  The white feet that could pass, leaving the
dew unshaken from the grass.  The eyes blue and deep as mountain lakes.
The golden locks of which the sun was jealous.

It was all quite clear.  She was Malvina, once favourite to Harbundia,
Queen of the White Ladies of Brittany.  For reasons--further allusion
to which politeness forbade--she had been a wanderer, no one knowing
what had become of her.  And now the whim had taken her to reappear as
a little Breton peasant girl, near to the scene of her past glories.
They knelt before her, offering her homage, and all the ladies kissed
her.  The gentlemen of the party thought their turn would follow.  But
it never did.  It was not their own shyness that stood in their way:
one must do them that justice.  It was as if some youthful queen,
exiled and unknown amongst strangers, had been suddenly recognised by a
little band of her faithful subjects, passing by chance that way.  So
that, instead of frolic and laughter, as had been intended, they
remained standing with bared heads; and no one liked to be the first to
speak.

She put them at their ease--or tried to--with a gracious gesture. But
enjoined upon them all her wish for secrecy.  And so dismissed they
seem to have returned to the village a marvellously sober little party,
experiencing all the sensations of honest folk admitted to their first
glimpse of high society.

They came again next year--at least a few of them--bringing with them a
dress more worthy of Malvina's wearing.  It was as near as Paris could
achieve to the true and original costume as described by the good Friar
Bonnet, the which had been woven in a single night by the wizard spider
Karai out of moonlight.  Malvina accepted it with gracious thanks, and
was evidently pleased to find herself again in fit and proper clothes.
It was hidden away for rare occasions where only Malvina knew.  But the
lady who had first kissed her, and whose speciality was fairies,
craving permission, Malvina consented to wear it while sitting for her
portrait.  The picture one may still see in the Palais des Beaux Arts
at Nantes (the Bretonne Room).  It represents her standing straight as
an arrow, a lone little figure in the centre of a treeless moor.  The
painting of the robe is said to be very wonderful.  "Malvina of
Brittany" is the inscription, the date being Nineteen Hundred and
Thirteen.


The next year Malvina was no longer there.  Madame Lavigne, folding
knotted hands, had muttered her last paternoster.  Pere Jean had urged
the convent.  But for the first time, with him, she had been frankly
obstinate.  Some fancy seemed to have got into the child's head.
Something that she evidently connected with the vast treeless moor
rising southward to where the ancient menhir of King Taramis crowned
its summit.  The good man yielded, as usual.  For the present there
were Madame Lavigne's small savings.  Suzanne's wants were but few.
The rare shopping necessary Father Jean could see to himself.  With the
coming of winter he would broach the subject again, and then be quite
firm.  Just these were the summer nights when Suzanne loved to roam;
and as for danger! there was not a lad for ten leagues round who would
not have run a mile to avoid passing, even in daylight, that cottage
standing where the moor dips down to the sealands.

But one surmises that even a fairy may feel lonesome.  Especially a
banished fairy, hanging as it were between earth and air, knowing
mortal maidens kissed and courted, while one's own companions kept away
from one in hiding.  Maybe the fancy came to her that, after all these
years, they might forgive her.  Still, it was their meeting place, so
legend ran, especially of midsummer nights.  Rare it was now for human
eye to catch a glimpse of the shimmering robes, but high on the
treeless moor to the music of the Lady of the Fountain, one might still
hear, were one brave enough to venture, the rhythm of their dancing
feet.  If she sought them, softly calling, might they not reveal
themselves to her, make room for her once again in the whirling circle?
One has the idea that the moonlight frock may have added to her hopes.
Philosophy admits that feeling oneself well dressed gives confidence.

If all of them had not disappeared--been kissed three times upon the
lips by mortal man and so become a woman?  It seems to have been a
possibility for which your White Lady had to be prepared.  That is, if
she chose to suffer it.  If not, it was unfortunate for the too daring
mortal.  But if he gained favour in her eyes!  That he was brave, his
wooing proved.  If, added thereto, he were comely, with kind strong
ways, and eyes that drew you?  History proves that such dreams must
have come even to White Ladies.  Maybe more especially on midsummer
nights when the moon is at its full.  It was on such a night that Sir
Gerylon had woke Malvina's sister Sighile with a kiss.  A true White
Lady must always dare to face her fate.


It seems to have befallen Malvina.  Some told Father Jean how he had
arrived in a chariot drawn by winged horses, the thunder of his passing
waking many in the sleeping villages beneath.  And others how he had
come in the form of a great bird.  Father Jean had heard strange sounds
himself, and certain it was that Suzanne had disappeared.

Father Jean heard another version a few weeks later, told him by an
English officer of Engineers who had ridden from the nearest station on
a bicycle and who arrived hot and ravenously thirsty.  And Father Jean,
under promise of seeing Suzanne on the first opportunity, believed it.
But to most of his flock it sounded an impossible rigmarole, told for
the purpose of disguising the truth.


So ends my story--or rather the story I have pieced together from
information of a contradictory nature received.  Whatever you make of
it; whether with the Doctor you explain it away; or whether with
Professor Littlecherry, LL.D., F.R.S., you believe the world not
altogether explored and mapped, the fact remains that Malvina of
Brittany has passed away.  To the younger Mrs. Raffleton, listening on
the Sussex Downs to dull, distant sounds that make her heart beat, and
very nervous of telegraph boys, has come already some of the
disadvantages attendant on her new rank of womanhood.  And yet one
gathers, looking down into those strange deep eyes, that she would not
change anything about her, even if now she could.




THE STREET OF THE BLANK WALL.

I had turned off from the Edgware Road into a street leading west, the
atmosphere of which had appealed to me.  It was a place of quiet houses
standing behind little gardens.  They had the usual names printed on
the stuccoed gateposts.  The fading twilight was just sufficient to
enable one to read them.  There was a Laburnum Villa, and The Cedars,
and a Cairngorm, rising to the height of three storeys, with a curious
little turret that branched out at the top, and was crowned with a
conical roof, so that it looked as if wearing a witch's hat.
Especially when two small windows just below the eaves sprang suddenly
into light, and gave one the feeling of a pair of wicked eyes suddenly
flashed upon one.

The street curved to the right, ending in an open space through which
passed a canal beneath a low arched bridge.  There were still the same
quiet houses behind their small gardens, and I watched for a while the
lamplighter picking out the shape of the canal, that widened just above
the bridge into a lake with an island in the middle.  After that I must
have wandered in a circle, for later on I found myself back in the same
spot, though I do not suppose I had passed a dozen people on my way;
and then I set to work to find my way back to Paddington.

I thought I had taken the road by which I had come, but the half light
must have deceived me.  Not that it mattered.  They had a lurking
mystery about them, these silent streets with their suggestion of
hushed movement behind drawn curtains, of whispered voices behind the
flimsy walls.  Occasionally there would escape the sound of laughter,
suddenly stifled as it seemed, and once the sudden cry of a child.

It was in a short street of semi-detached villas facing a high blank
wall that, as I passed, I saw a blind move half-way up, revealing a
woman's face.  A gas lamp, the only one the street possessed, was
nearly opposite.  I thought at first it was the face of a girl, and
then, as I looked again, it might have been the face of an old woman.
One could not distinguish the colouring.  In any case, the cold, blue
gaslight would have made it seem pallid.

The remarkable feature was the eyes.  It might have been, of course,
that they alone caught the light and held it, rendering them uncannily
large and brilliant.  Or it might have been that the rest of the face
was small and delicate, out of all proportion to them. She may have
seen me, for the blind was drawn down again, and I passed on.

There was no particular reason why, but the incident lingered with me.
The sudden raising of the blind, as of the curtain of some small
theatre, the barely furnished room coming dimly into view, and the
woman standing there, close to the footlights, as to my fancy it
seemed.  And then the sudden ringing down of the curtain before the
play had begun.  I turned at the corner of the street.  The blind had
been drawn up again, and I saw again the slight, girlish figure
silhouetted against the side panes of the bow window.

At the same moment a man knocked up against me.  It was not his fault.
I had stopped abruptly, not giving him time to avoid me.  We both
apologised, blaming the darkness.  It may have been my fancy, but I had
the feeling that, instead of going on his way, he had turned and was
following me.  I waited till the next corner, and then swung round on
my heel.  But there was no sign of him, and after a while I found
myself back in the Edgware Road.

Once or twice, in idle mood, I sought the street again, but without
success; and the thing would, I expect, have faded from my memory, but
that one evening, on my way home from Paddington, I came across the
woman in the Harrow Road.  There was no mistaking her.  She almost
touched me as she came out of a fishmonger's shop, and unconsciously,
at the beginning, I found myself following her.  This time I noticed
the turnings, and five minutes' walking brought us to the street.  Half
a dozen times I must have been within a hundred yards of it.  I
lingered at the corner.  She had not noticed me, and just as she
reached the house a man came out of the shadows beyond the lamp-post
and joined her.

I was due at a bachelor gathering that evening, and after dinner, the
affair being fresh in my mind, I talked about it.  I am not sure, but I
think it was in connection with a discussion on Maeterlinck.  It was
that sudden lifting of the blind that had caught hold of me.  As if,
blundering into an empty theatre, I had caught a glimpse of some drama
being played in secret.  We passed to other topics, and when I was
leaving a fellow guest asked me which way I was going.  I told him,
and, it being a fine night, he proposed that we should walk together.
And in the quiet of Harley Street he confessed that his desire had not
been entirely the pleasure of my company.

"It is rather curious," he said, "but today there suddenly came to my
remembrance a case that for nearly eleven years I have never given a
thought to.  And now, on top of it, comes your description of that
woman's face.  I am wondering if it can be the same."

"It was the eyes," I said, "that struck me as so remarkable."

"It was the eyes that I chiefly remember her by," he replied. "Would
you know the street again?"

We walked a little while in silence.

"It may seem, perhaps, odd to you," I answered, "but it would trouble
me, the idea of any harm coming to her through me.  What was the case?"

"You can feel quite safe on that point," he assured me.  "I was her
counsel--that is, if it is the same woman.  How was she dressed?"

I could not see the reason for his question.  He could hardly expect
her to be wearing the clothes of eleven years ago.

"I don't think I noticed," I answered.  "Some sort of a blouse, I
suppose."  And then I recollected.  "Ah, yes, there was something
uncommon," I added.  "An unusually broad band of velvet, it looked
like, round her neck."

"I thought so," he said.  "Yes.  It must be the same."

We had reached Marylebone Road, where our ways parted.

"I will look you up to-morrow afternoon, if I may," he said.  "We might
take a stroll round together."

He called on me about half-past five, and we reached the street just as
the one solitary gas-lamp had been lighted.  I pointed out the house to
him, and he crossed over and looked at the number.

"Quite right," he said, on returning.  "I made inquiries this morning.
She was released six weeks ago on ticket-of-leave."

He took my arm.

"Not much use hanging about," he said.  "The blind won't go up
to-night.  Rather a clever idea, selecting a house just opposite a
lamp-post."

He had an engagement that evening; but later on he told me the
story--that is, so far as he then knew it.

                    *          *          *

It was in the early days of the garden suburb movement.  One of the
first sites chosen was off the Finchley Road.  The place was in the
building, and one of the streets--Laleham Gardens--had only some half a
dozen houses in it, all unoccupied save one.  It was a lonely, loose
end of the suburb, terminating suddenly in open fields.  From the
unfinished end of the road the ground sloped down somewhat steeply to a
pond, and beyond that began a small wood.  The one house occupied had
been bought by a young married couple named Hepworth.

The husband was a good-looking, pleasant young fellow.  Being
clean-shaven, his exact age was difficult to judge.  The wife, it was
quite evident, was little more than a girl.  About the man there was a
suggestion of weakness.  At least, that was the impression left on the
mind of the house-agent.  To-day he would decide, and to-morrow he
changed his mind.  Jetson, the agent, had almost given up hope of
bringing off a deal.  In the end it was Mrs. Hepworth who, taking the
matter into her own hands, fixed upon the house in Laleham Gardens.
Young Hepworth found fault with it on the ground of its isolation.  He
himself was often away for days at a time, travelling on business, and
was afraid she would be nervous.  He had been very persistent on this
point; but in whispered conversations she had persuaded him out of his
objection.  It was one of those pretty, fussy little houses; and it
seemed to have taken her fancy. Added to which, according to her
argument, it was just within their means, which none of the others
were.  Young Hepworth may have given the usual references, but if so
they were never taken up.  The house was sold on the company's usual
terms.  The deposit was paid by a cheque, which was duly cleared, and
the house itself was security for the rest.  The company's solicitor,
with Hepworth's consent, acted for both parties.

It was early in June when the Hepworths moved in.  They furnished only
one bedroom; and kept no servant, a charwoman coming in every morning
and going away about six in the evening.  Jetson was their nearest
neighbour.  His wife and daughters called on them, and confess to have
taken a liking to them both.  Indeed, between one of the Jetson girls,
the youngest, and Mrs. Hepworth there seems to have sprung up a close
friendship.  Young Hepworth, the husband, was always charming, and
evidently took great pains to make himself agreeable.  But with regard
to him they had the feeling that he was never altogether at his ease.
They described him--though that, of course, was after the event--as
having left upon them the impression of a haunted man.

There was one occasion in particular.  It was about ten o'clock. The
Jetsons had been spending the evening with the Hepworths, and were just
on the point of leaving, when there came a sudden, clear knock at the
door.  It turned out to be Jetson's foreman, who had to leave by an
early train in the morning, and had found that he needed some further
instructions.  But the terror in Hepworth's face was unmistakable.  He
had turned a look towards his wife that was almost of despair; and it
had seemed to the Jetsons--or, talking it over afterwards, they may
have suggested the idea to each other--that there came a flash of
contempt into her eyes, though it yielded the next instant to an
expression of pity.  She had risen, and already moved some steps
towards the door, when young Hepworth had stopped her, and gone out
himself.  But the curious thing was that, according to the foreman's
account, Hepworth never opened the front door, but came upon him
stealthily from behind.  He must have slipped out by the back and crept
round the house.

The incident had puzzled the Jetsons, especially that involuntary flash
of contempt that had come into Mrs. Hepworth's eyes.  She had always
appeared to adore her husband, and of the two, if possible, to be the
one most in love with the other.  They had no friends or acquaintances
except the Jetsons.  No one else among their neighbours had taken the
trouble to call on them, and no stranger to the suburb had, so far as
was known, ever been seen in Laleham Gardens.

Until one evening a little before Christmas.

Jetson was on his way home from his office in the Finchley Road. There
had been a mist hanging about all day, and with nightfall it had
settled down into a whitish fog.  Soon after leaving the Finchley Road,
Jetson noticed in front of him a man wearing a long, yellow mackintosh,
and some sort of soft felt hat.  He gave Jetson the idea of being a
sailor; it may have been merely the stiff, serviceable mackintosh.  At
the corner of Laleham Gardens the man turned, and glanced up at the
name upon the lamp-post, so that Jetson had a full view of him.
Evidently it was the street for which he was looking.  Jetson, somewhat
curious, the Hepworths' house being still the only one occupied, paused
at the corner, and watched.  The Hepworths' house was, of course, the
only one in the road that showed any light.  The man, when he came to
the gate, struck a match for the purpose of reading the number.
Satisfied it was the house he wanted, he pushed open the gate and went
up the path.

But, instead of using the bell or knocker, Jetson was surprised to hear
him give three raps on the door with his stick.  There was no answer,
and Jetson, whose interest was now thoroughly aroused, crossed to the
other corner, from where he could command a better view.  Twice the man
repeated his three raps on the door, each time a little louder, and the
third time the door was opened.  Jetson could not tell by whom, for
whoever it was kept behind it.

He could just see one wall of the passage, with a pair of old naval
cutlasses crossed above the picture of a three-masted schooner that he
knew hung there.  The door was opened just sufficient, and the man
slipped in, and the door was closed behind him.  Jetson had turned to
continue his way, when the fancy seized him to give one glance back.
The house was in complete darkness, though a moment before Jetson was
positive there had been a light in the ground floor window.

It all sounded very important afterwards, but at the time there was
nothing to suggest to Jetson anything very much out of the common.
Because for six months no friend or relation had called to see them,
that was no reason why one never should.  In the fog, a stranger may
have thought it simpler to knock at the door with his stick than to
fumble in search of a bell.  The Hepworths lived chiefly in the room at
the back.  The light in the drawing-room may have been switched off for
economy's sake.  Jetson recounted the incident on reaching home, not as
anything remarkable, but just as one mentions an item of gossip.  The
only one who appears to have attached any meaning to the affair was
Jetson's youngest daughter, then a girl of eighteen. She asked one or
two questions about the man, and, during the evening, slipped out by
herself and ran round to the Hepworths.  She found the house empty.  At
all events, she could obtain no answer, and the place, back and front,
seemed to her to be uncannily silent.

Jetson called the next morning, something of his daughter's uneasiness
having communicated itself to him.  Mrs. Hepworth herself opened the
door to him.  In his evidence at the trial, Jetson admitted that her
appearance had startled him.  She seems to have anticipated his
questions by at once explaining that she had had news of an unpleasant
nature, and had been worrying over it all night.  Her husband had been
called away suddenly to America, where it would be necessary for her to
join him as soon as possible.  She would come round to Jetson's office
later in the day to make arrangements about getting rid of the house
and furniture.

The story seemed to reasonably account for the stranger's visit, and
Jetson, expressing his sympathy and promising all help in his power,
continued his way to the office.  She called in the afternoon and
handed him over the keys, retaining one for herself.  She wished the
furniture to be sold by auction, and he was to accept almost any offer
for the house.  She would try and see him again before sailing; if not,
she would write him with her address.  She was perfectly cool and
collected.  She had called on his wife and daughters in the afternoon,
and had wished them good-bye.

Outside Jetson's office she hailed a cab, and returned in it to Laleham
Gardens to collect her boxes.  The next time Jetson saw her she was in
the dock, charged with being an accomplice in the murder of her husband.

                    *          *          *

The body had been discovered in a pond some hundred yards from the
unfinished end of Laleham Gardens.  A house was in course of erection
on a neighbouring plot, and a workman, in dipping up a pail of water,
had dropped in his watch.  He and his mate, worrying round with a rake,
had drawn up pieces of torn clothing, and this, of course, had led to
the pond being properly dragged.  Otherwise the discovery might never
have been made.

The body, heavily weighted with a number of flat-irons fastened to it
by a chain and padlock, had sunk deep into the soft mud, and might have
remained there till it rotted.  A valuable gold repeater, that Jetson
remembered young Hepworth having told him had been a presentation to
his father, was in its usual pocket, and a cameo ring that Hepworth had
always worn on his third finger was likewise fished up from the mud.
Evidently the murder belonged to the category of crimes passionel.  The
theory of the prosecution was that it had been committed by a man who,
before her marriage, had been Mrs. Hepworth's lover.

The evidence, contrasted with the almost spiritually beautiful face of
the woman in the dock, came as a surprise to everyone in court.
Originally connected with an English circus troupe touring in Holland,
she appears, about seventeen, to have been engaged as a "song and dance
artiste" at a particularly shady cafe chantant in Rotterdam, frequented
chiefly by sailors.  From there a man, an English sailor known as
Charlie Martin, took her away, and for some months she had lived with
him at a small estaminet the other side of the river.  Later, they left
Rotterdam and came to London, where they took lodgings in Poplar, near
to the docks.

It was from this address in Poplar that, some ten months before the
murder, she had married young Hepworth.  What had become of Martin was
not known.  The natural assumption was that, his money being exhausted,
he had returned to his calling, though his name, for some reason, could
not be found in any ship's list.

That he was one and the same with the man that Jetson had watched till
the door of the Hepworths' house had closed upon him there could be no
doubt.  Jetson described him as a thick-set, handsome-looking man, with
a reddish beard and moustache.  Earlier in the day he had been seen at
Hampstead, where he had dined at a small coffee-shop in the High
Street.  The girl who had waited on him had also been struck by the
bold, piercing eyes and the curly red beard.  It had been an off-time,
between two and three, when he had dined there, and the girl admitted
that she had found him a "pleasant-spoken gentleman," and "inclined to
be merry."  He had told her that he had arrived in England only three
days ago, and that he hoped that evening to see his sweetheart.  He had
accompanied the words with a laugh, and the girl thought--though, of
course, this may have been after-suggestion--that an ugly look followed
the laugh.

One imagines that it was this man's return that had been the fear
constantly haunting young Hepworth.  The three raps on the door, it was
urged by the prosecution, was a pre-arranged or pre-understood signal,
and the door had been opened by the woman.  Whether the husband was in
the house, or whether they waited for him, could not be said.  He had
been killed by a bullet entering through the back of the neck; the man
had evidently come prepared.

Ten days had elapsed between the murder and the finding of the body,
and the man was never traced.  A postman had met him coming from the
neighbourhood of Laleham Gardens at about half-past nine.  In the fog,
they had all but bumped into one another, and the man had immediately
turned away his face.

About the soft felt hat there was nothing to excite attention, but the
long, stiff, yellow mackintosh was quite unusual.  The postman had
caught only a momentary glimpse of the face, but was certain it was
clean shaven.  This made a sensation in court for the moment, but only
until the calling of the next witness.  The charwoman usually employed
by the Hepworths had not been admitted to the house on the morning of
Mrs. Hepworth's departure.  Mrs. Hepworth had met her at the door and
paid her a week's money in lieu of notice, explaining to her that she
would not be wanted any more.  Jetson, thinking he might possibly do
better by letting the house furnished, had sent for this woman, and
instructed her to give the place a thorough cleaning.  Sweeping the
carpet in the dining-room with a dustpan and brush, she had discovered
a number of short red hairs. The man, before leaving the house, had
shaved himself.

That he had still retained the long, yellow mackintosh may have been
with the idea of starting a false clue.  Having served its purpose, it
could be discarded.  The beard would not have been so easy.  What
roundabout way he may have taken one cannot say, but it must have been
some time during the night or early morning that he reached young
Hepworth's office in Fenchurch Street.  Mrs. Hepworth had evidently
provided him with the key.

There he seems to have hidden the hat and mackintosh and to have taken
in exchange some clothes belonging to the murdered man. Hepworth's
clerk, Ellenby, an elderly man--of the type that one generally
describes as of gentlemanly appearance--was accustomed to his master
being away unexpectedly on business, which was that of a ships'
furnisher.  He always kept an overcoat and a bag ready packed in the
office.  Missing them, Ellenby had assumed that his master had been
called away by an early train.  He would have been worried after a few
days, but that he had received a telegram--as he then supposed from his
master--explaining that young Hepworth had gone to Ireland and would be
away for some days.  It was nothing unusual for Hepworth to be absent,
superintending the furnishing of a ship, for a fortnight at a time, and
nothing had transpired in the office necessitating special
instructions.  The telegram had been handed in at Charing Cross, but
the time chosen had been a busy period of the day, and no one had any
recollection of the sender.  Hepworth's clerk unhesitatingly identified
the body as that of his employer, for whom it was evident that he had
entertained a feeling of affection.  About Mrs. Hepworth he said as
little as he could. While she was awaiting her trial it had been
necessary for him to see her once or twice with reference to the
business.  Previous to this, he knew nothing about her.

The woman's own attitude throughout the trial had been quite
unexplainable.  Beyond agreeing to a formal plea of "Not guilty," she
had made no attempt to defend herself.  What little assistance her
solicitors had obtained had been given them, not by the woman herself,
but by Hepworth's clerk, more for the sake of his dead master than out
of any sympathy towards the wife.  She herself appeared utterly
indifferent.  Only once had she been betrayed into a momentary emotion.
It was when her solicitors were urging her almost angrily to give them
some particulars upon a point they thought might be helpful to her case.

"He's dead!" she had cried out almost with a note of exultation. "Dead!
Dead!  What else matters?"

The next moment she had apologised for her outburst.

"Nothing can do any good," she had said.  "Let the thing take its
course."

It was the astounding callousness of the woman that told against her
both with the judge and the jury.  That shaving in the dining-room, the
murdered man's body not yet cold!  It must have been done with
Hepworth's safety-razor.  She must have brought it down to him, found
him a looking-glass, brought him soap and water and a towel, afterwards
removing all traces.  Except those few red hairs that had clung,
unnoticed, to the carpet.  That nest of flat-irons used to weight the
body!  It must have been she who had thought of them. The idea would
never have occurred to a man.  The chain and padlock with which to
fasten them.  She only could have known that such things were in the
house.  It must have been she who had planned the exchange of clothes
in Hepworth's office, giving him the key.  She it must have been who
had thought of the pond, holding open the door while the man had
staggered out under his ghastly burden; waited, keeping watch,
listening to hear the splash.

Evidently it had been her intention to go off with the murderer--to
live with him!  That story about America.  If all had gone well, it
would have accounted for everything.  After leaving Laleham Gardens she
had taken lodgings in a small house in Kentish Town under the name of
Howard, giving herself out to be a chorus singer, her husband being an
actor on tour.  To make the thing plausible, she had obtained
employment in one of the pantomimes.  Not for a moment had she lost her
head.  No one had ever called at her lodgings, and there had come no
letters for her.  Every hour of her day could be accounted for.  Their
plans must have been worked out over the corpse of her murdered
husband.  She was found guilty of being an "accessory after the fact,"
and sentenced to fifteen years' penal servitude.

That brought the story up to eleven years ago.  After the trial,
interested in spite of himself, my friend had ferreted out some further
particulars.  Inquiries at Liverpool had procured him the information
that Hepworth's father, a shipowner in a small way, had been well known
and highly respected.  He was retired from business when he died, some
three years previous to the date of the murder. His wife had survived
him by only a few months.  Besides Michael, the murdered son, there
were two other children--an elder brother, who was thought to have gone
abroad to one of the colonies, and a sister who had married a French
naval officer.  Either they had not heard of the case or had not wished
to have their names dragged into it.  Young Michael had started life as
an architect, and was supposed to have been doing well, but after the
death of his parents had disappeared from the neighbourhood, and, until
the trial, none of his acquaintances up North ever knew what had become
of him.

But a further item of knowledge that my friend's inquiries had elicited
had somewhat puzzled him.  Hepworth's clerk, Ellenby, had been the
confidential clerk of Hepworth's father!  He had entered the service of
the firm as a boy; and when Hepworth senior retired, Ellenby--with the
old gentleman's assistance--had started in business for himself as a
ships' furnisher!  Nothing of all this came out at the trial.  Ellenby
had not been cross-examined.  There was no need for it.  But it seemed
odd, under all the circumstances, that he had not volunteered the
information.  It may, of course, have been for the sake of the brother
and sister.  Hepworth is a common enough name in the North.  He may
have hoped to keep the family out of connection with the case.

As regards the woman, my friend could learn nothing further beyond the
fact that, in her contract with the music-hall agent in Rotterdam, she
had described herself as the daughter of an English musician, and had
stated that both her parents were dead.  She may have engaged herself
without knowing the character of the hall, and the man, Charlie Martin,
with his handsome face and pleasing sailor ways, and at least an
Englishman, may have seemed to her a welcome escape.

She may have been passionately fond of him, and young Hepworth--crazy
about her, for she was beautiful enough to turn any man's head--may in
Martin's absence have lied to her, told her he was dead--lord knows
what!--to induce her to marry him.  The murder may have seemed to her a
sort of grim justice.

But even so, her cold-blooded callousness was surely abnormal!  She had
married him, lived with him for nearly a year.  To the Jetsons she had
given the impression of being a woman deeply in love with her husband.
It could not have been mere acting kept up day after day.

"There was something else."  We were discussing the case in my friend's
chambers.  His brief of eleven years ago was open before him.  He was
pacing up and down with his hands in his pockets, thinking as he
talked.  "Something that never came out.  There was a curious feeling
she gave me in that moment when sentence was pronounced upon her.  It
was as if, instead of being condemned, she had triumphed.  Acting!  If
she had acted during the trial, pretended remorse, even pity, I could
have got her off with five years.  She seemed to be unable to disguise
the absolute physical relief she felt at the thought that he was dead,
that his hand would never again touch her.  There must have been
something that had suddenly been revealed to her, something that had
turned her love to hate.

"There must be something fine about the man, too."  That was another
suggestion that came to him as he stood staring out of the window
across the river.  "She's paid and has got her receipt, but he is still
'wanted.'  He is risking his neck every evening he watches for the
raising of that blind."

His thought took another turn.

"Yet how could he have let her go through those ten years of living
death while he walked the streets scot free?  Some time during the
trial--the evidence piling up against her day by day--why didn't he
come forward, if only to stand beside her?  Get himself hanged, if only
out of mere decency?"

He sat down, took the brief up in his hand without looking at it.

"Or was that the reward that she claimed?  That he should wait, keeping
alive the one hope that would make the suffering possible to her?
Yes," he continued, musing, "I can see a man who cared for a woman
taking that as his punishment."

Now that his interest in the case had been revived he seemed unable to
keep it out of his mind.  Since our joint visit I had once or twice
passed through the street by myself, and on the last occasion had again
seen the raising of the blind.  It obsessed him--the desire to meet the
man face to face.  A handsome, bold, masterful man, he conceived him.
But there must be something more for such a woman to have sold her
soul--almost, one might say--for the sake of him.

There was just one chance of succeeding.  Each time he had come from
the direction of the Edgware Road.  By keeping well out of sight at the
other end of the street, and watching till he entered it, one might
time oneself to come upon him just under the lamp.  He would hardly be
likely to turn and go back; that would be to give himself away.  He
would probably content himself with pretending to be like ourselves,
merely hurrying through, and in his turn watching till we had
disappeared.

Fortune seemed inclined to favour us.  About the usual time the blind
was gently raised, and very soon afterwards there came round the corner
the figure of a man.  We entered the street ourselves a few seconds
later, and it seemed likely that, as we had planned, we should come
face to face with him under the gaslight.  He walked towards us,
stooping and with bent head.  We expected him to pass the house by.  To
our surprise he stopped when he came to it, and pushed open the gate.
In another moment we should have lost all chance of seeing anything
more of him except his bent back.  With a couple of strides my friend
was behind him.  He laid his hand on the man's shoulder and forced him
to turn round.  It was an old, wrinkled face with gentle, rather watery
eyes.

We were both so taken aback that for a moment we could say nothing. My
friend stammered out an apology about having mistaken the house, and
rejoined me.  At the corner we burst out laughing almost
simultaneously.  And then my friend suddenly stopped and stared at me.

"Hepworth's old clerk!" he said.  "Ellenby!"

                    *          *          *

It seemed to him monstrous.  The man had been more than a clerk. The
family had treated him as a friend.  Hepworth's father had set him up
in business.  For the murdered lad he had had a sincere attachment; he
had left that conviction on all of them.  What was the meaning of it?

A directory was on the mantelpiece.  It was the next afternoon.  I had
called upon him in his chambers.  It was just an idea that came to me.
I crossed over and opened it, and there was his name, "Ellenby and Co.,
Ships' Furnishers," in a court off the Minories.

Was he helping her for the sake of his dead master--trying to get her
away from the man.  But why?  The woman had stood by and watched the
lad murdered.  How could he bear even to look on her again?

Unless there had been that something that had not come out--something
he had learnt later--that excused even that monstrous callousness of
hers.

Yet what could there be?  It had all been so planned, so cold-blooded.
That shaving in the dining-room!  It was that seemed most to stick in
his throat.  She must have brought him down a looking-glass; there was
not one in the room.  Why couldn't he have gone upstairs into the
bathroom, where Hepworth always shaved himself, where he would have
found everything to his hand?

He had been moving about the room, talking disjointedly as he paced,
and suddenly he stopped and looked at me.

"Why in the dining-room?" he demanded of me.

He was jingling some keys in his pocket.  It was a habit of his when
cross-examining, and I felt as if somehow I knew; and, without
thinking--so it seemed to me--I answered him.

"Perhaps," I said, "it was easier to bring a razor down than to carry a
dead man up."

He leant with his arms across the table, his eyes glittering with
excitement.

"Can't you see it?" he said.  "That little back parlour with its fussy
ornaments.  The three of them standing round the table, Hepworth's
hands nervously clutching a chair.  The reproaches, the taunts, the
threats.  Young Hepworth--he struck everyone as a weak man, a man
physically afraid--white, stammering, not knowing which way to look.
The woman's eyes turning from one to the other.  That flash of contempt
again--she could not help it--followed, worse still, by pity.  If only
he could have answered back, held his own! If only he had not been
afraid!  And then that fatal turning away with a sneering laugh one
imagines, the bold, dominating eyes no longer there to cower him.

"That must have been the moment.  The bullet, if you remember, entered
through the back of the man's neck.  Hepworth must always have been
picturing to himself this meeting--tenants of garden suburbs do not
carry loaded revolvers as a habit--dwelling upon it till he had worked
himself up into a frenzy of hate and fear.  Weak men always fly to
extremes.  If there was no other way, he would kill him.

"Can't you hear the silence?  After the reverberations had died away!
And then they are both down on their knees, patting him, feeling for
his heart.  The man must have gone down like a felled ox; there were no
traces of blood on the carpet.  The house is far from any neighbour;
the shot in all probability has not been heard. If only they can get
rid of the body!  The pond--not a hundred yards away!"

He reached for the brief, still lying among his papers; hurriedly
turned the scored pages.

"What easier?  A house being built on the very next plot. Wheelbarrows
to be had for the taking.  A line of planks reaching down to the edge.
Depth of water where the body was discovered four feet six inches.
Nothing to do but just tip up the barrow.

"Think a minute.  Must weigh him down, lest he rise to accuse us;
weight him heavily, so that he will sink lower and lower into the soft
mud, lie there till he rots.

"Think again.  Think it out to the end.  Suppose, in spite of all our
precautions, he does rise?  Suppose the chain slips?  The workmen going
to and fro for water--suppose they do discover him?

"He is lying on his back, remember.  They would have turned him over to
feel for his heart.  Have closed his eyes, most probably, not liking
their stare.

"It would be the woman who first thought of it.  She has seen them both
lying with closed eyes beside her.  It may have always been in her
mind, the likeness between them.  With Hepworth's watch in his pocket,
Hepworth's ring on his finger!  If only it was not for the beard--that
fierce, curling, red beard!

"They creep to the window and peer out.  Fog still thick as soup. Not a
soul, not a sound.  Plenty of time.

"Then to get away, to hide till one is sure.  Put on the mackintosh. A
man in a yellow mackintosh may have been seen to enter; let him be seen
to go away.  In some dark corner or some empty railway carriage take it
off and roll it up.  Then make for the office.  Wait there for Ellenby.
True as steel, Ellenby; good business man.  Be guided by Ellenby."

He flung the brief from him with a laugh.

"Why, there's not a missing link!" he cried.  "And to think that not a
fool among us ever thought of it!"

"Everything fitting into its place," I suggested, "except young
Hepworth.  Can you see him, from your description of him, sitting down
and coolly elaborating plans for escape, the corpse of the murdered man
stretched beside him on the hearthrug?"

"No," he answered.  "But I can see her doing it, a woman who for week
after week kept silence while we raged and stormed at her, a woman who
for three hours sat like a statue while old Cutbush painted her to a
crowded court as a modern Jezebel, who rose up from her seat when that
sentence of fifteen years' penal servitude was pronounced upon her with
a look of triumph in her eyes, and walked out of court as if she had
been a girl going to meet her lover.

"I'll wager," he added, "it was she who did the shaving.  Hepworth
would have cut him, even with a safety-razor."

"It must have been the other one, Martin," I said, "that she loathed.
That almost exultation at the thought that he was dead," I reminded him.

"Yes," he mused.  "She made no attempt to disguise it.  Curious there
having been that likeness between them."  He looked at his watch.  "Do
you care to come with me?" he said.

"Where are you going?" I asked him.

"We may just catch him," he answered.  "Ellenby and Co."

                    *          *          *

The office was on the top floor of an old-fashioned house in a
cul-de-sac off the Minories.  Mr. Ellenby was out, so the lanky
office-boy informed us, but would be sure to return before evening; and
we sat and waited by the meagre fire till, as the dusk was falling, we
heard his footsteps on the creaking stairs.

He halted a moment in the doorway, recognising us apparently without
surprise; and then, with a hope that we had not been kept waiting long,
he led the way into an inner room.

"I do not suppose you remember me," said my friend, as soon as the door
was closed.  "I fancy that, until last night, you never saw me without
my wig and gown.  It makes a difference.  I was Mrs. Hepworth's senior
counsel."

It was unmistakable, the look of relief that came into the old, dim
eyes.  Evidently the incident of the previous evening had suggested to
him an enemy.

"You were very good," he murmured.  "Mrs. Hepworth was overwrought at
the time, but she was very grateful, I know, for all your efforts."

I thought I detected a faint smile on my friend's lips.

"I must apologise for my rudeness to you of last night," he continued.
"I expected, when I took the liberty of turning you round, that I was
going to find myself face to face with a much younger man."

"I took you to be a detective," answered Ellenby, in his soft, gentle
voice.  "You will forgive me, I'm sure.  I am rather short-sighted.  Of
course, I can only conjecture, but if you will take my word, I can
assure you that Mrs. Hepworth has never seen or heard from the man
Charlie Martin since the date of"--he hesitated a moment--"of the
murder."

"It would have been difficult," agreed my friend, "seeing that Charlie
Martin lies buried in Highgate Cemetery."

Old as he was, he sprang from his chair, white and trembling.

"What have you come here for?" he demanded.

"I took more than a professional interest in the case," answered my
friend.  "Ten years ago I was younger than I am now.  It may have been
her youth--her extreme beauty.  I think Mrs. Hepworth, in allowing her
husband to visit her--here where her address is known to the police,
and watch at any moment may be set upon her--is placing him in a
position of grave danger.  If you care to lay before me any facts that
will allow me to judge of the case, I am prepared to put my experience,
and, if need be, my assistance, at her service."

His self-possession had returned to him.

"If you will excuse me," he said, "I will tell the boy that he can go."

We heard him, a moment later, turn the key in the outer door; and when
he came back and had made up the fire, he told us the beginning of the
story.

The name of the man buried in Highgate Cemetery was Hepworth, after
all.  Not Michael, but Alex, the elder brother.

From boyhood he had been violent, brutal, unscrupulous.  Judging from
Ellenby's story, it was difficult to accept him as a product of modern
civilisation.  Rather he would seem to have been a throwback to some
savage, buccaneering ancestor.  To expect him to work, while he could
live in vicious idleness at somebody else's expense, was found to be
hopeless.  His debts were paid for about the third or fourth time, and
he was shipped off to the Colonies.  Unfortunately, there were no means
of keeping him there.  So soon as the money provided him had been
squandered, he returned, demanding more by menaces and threats.
Meeting with unexpected firmness, he seems to have regarded theft and
forgery as the only alternative left to him. To save him from
punishment and the family name from disgrace, his parents' savings were
sacrificed.  It was grief and shame that, according to Ellenby, killed
them both within a few months of one another.

Deprived by this blow of what he no doubt had come to consider his
natural means of support, and his sister, fortunately for herself,
being well out of his reach, he next fixed upon his brother Michael as
his stay-by.  Michael, weak, timid, and not perhaps without some
remains of boyish affection for a strong, handsome, elder brother,
foolishly yielded.  The demands, of course, increased, until, in the
end, it came almost as a relief when the man's vicious life led to his
getting mixed up with a crime of a particularly odious nature. He was
anxious now for his own sake to get away, and Michael, with little
enough to spare for himself, provided him with the means, on the solemn
understanding that he would never return.

But the worry and misery of it all had left young Michael a broken man.
Unable to concentrate his mind any longer upon his profession, his
craving was to get away from all his old associations--to make a fresh
start in life.  It was Ellenby who suggested London and the ship
furnishing business, where Michael's small remaining capital would be
of service.  The name of Hepworth would be valuable in shipping
circles, and Ellenby, arguing this consideration, but chiefly with the
hope of giving young Michael more interest in the business, had
insisted that the firm should be Hepworth and Co.

They had not been started a year before the man returned, as usual
demanding more money.  Michael, acting under Ellenby's guidance,
refused in terms that convinced his brother that the game of bullying
was up.  He waited a while, and then wrote pathetically that he was ill
and starving.  If only for the sake of his young wife, would not
Michael come and see them?

This was the first they had heard of his marriage.  There was just a
faint hope that it might have effected a change, and Michael, against
Ellenby's advice, decided to go.  In a miserable lodging-house in the
East End he found the young wife, but not his brother, who did not
return till he was on the point of leaving.  In the interval the girl
seems to have confided her story to Michael.

She had been a singer, engaged at a music-hall in Rotterdam.  There
Alex Hepworth, calling himself Charlie Martin, had met her and made
love to her.  When he chose, he could be agreeable enough, and no doubt
her youth and beauty had given to his protestations, for the time
being, a genuine ring of admiration and desire.  It was to escape from
her surroundings, more than anything else, that she had consented.  She
was little more than a child, and anything seemed preferable to the
nightly horror to which her life exposed her.

He had never married her.  At least, that was her belief at the time.
During his first drunken bout he had flung it in her face that the form
they had gone through was mere bunkum.  Unfortunately for her, this was
a lie.  He had always been coolly calculating.  It was probably with
the idea of a safe investment that he had seen to it that the ceremony
had been strictly legal.

Her life with him, so soon as the first novelty of her had worn off,
had been unspeakable.  The band that she wore round her neck was to
hide where, in a fit of savagery, because she had refused to earn money
for him on the streets, he had tried to cut her throat.  Now that she
had got back to England she intended to leave him.  If he followed and
killed her she did not care.

It was for her sake that young Hepworth eventually offered to help his
brother again, on the condition that he would go away by himself.  To
this the other agreed.  He seems to have given a short display of
remorse.  There must have been a grin on his face as he turned away.
His cunning eyes had foreseen what was likely to happen.  The idea of
blackmail was no doubt in his mind from the beginning.  With the charge
of bigamy as a weapon in his hand, he might rely for the rest of his
life upon a steady and increasing income.

Michael saw his brother off as a second-class passenger on a ship bound
for the Cape.  Of course, there was little chance of his keeping his
word, but there was always the chance of his getting himself knocked on
the head in some brawl.  Anyhow, he would be out of the way for a
season, and the girl, Lola, would be left.  A month later he married
her, and four months after that received a letter from his brother
containing messages to Mrs. Martin, "from her loving husband, Charlie,"
who hoped before long to have the pleasure of seeing her again.

Inquiries through the English Consul in Rotterdam proved that the
threat was no mere bluff.  The marriage had been legal and binding.

What happened on the night of the murder, was very much as my friend
had reconstructed it.  Ellenby, reaching the office at his usual time
the next morning, had found Hepworth waiting for him.  There he had
remained in hiding until one morning, with dyed hair and a slight
moustache, he had ventured forth.

Had the man's death been brought about by any other means, Ellenby
would have counselled his coming forward and facing his trial, as he
himself was anxious to do; but, viewed in conjunction with the relief
the man's death must have been to both of them, that loaded revolver
was too suggestive of premeditation.  The isolation of the house, that
conveniently near pond, would look as if thought of beforehand.  Even
if pleading extreme provocation, Michael escaped the rope, a long term
of penal servitude would be inevitable.

Nor was it certain that even then the woman would go free.  The
murdered man would still, by a strange freak, be her husband; the
murderer--in the eye of the law--her lover.

Her passionate will had prevailed.  Young Hepworth had sailed for
America.  There he had no difficulty in obtaining employment--of
course, under another name--in an architects office; and later had set
up for himself.  Since the night of the murder they had not seen each
other till some three weeks ago.

                    *          *          *

I never saw the woman again.  My friend, I believe, called on her.
Hepworth had already returned to America, and my friend had succeeded
in obtaining for her some sort of a police permit that practically left
her free.

Sometimes of an evening I find myself passing through the street. And
always I have the feeling of having blundered into an empty
theatre--where the play is ended.




HIS EVENING OUT.

The evidence of the park-keeper, David Bristow, of Gilder Street,
Camden Town, is as follows:

I was on duty in St. James's Park on Thursday evening, my sphere
extending from the Mall to the northern shore of the ornamental water
east of the suspension bridge.  At five-and-twenty to seven I took up a
position between the peninsula and the bridge to await my colleague.
He ought to have relieved me at half-past six, but did not arrive until
a few minutes before seven, owing, so he explained, to the breaking
down of his motor-'bus--which may have been true or may not, as the
saying is.

I had just come to a halt, when my attention was arrested by a lady. I
am unable to explain why the presence of a lady in St. James's Park
should have seemed in any way worthy of notice except that, for certain
reasons, she reminded me of my first wife.  I observed that she
hesitated between one of the public seats and two vacant chairs
standing by themselves a little farther to the east.  Eventually she
selected one of the chairs, and, having cleaned it with an evening
paper--the birds in this portion of the Park being extremely
prolific--sat down upon it.  There was plenty of room upon the public
seat close to it, except for some children who were playing touch; and
in consequence of this I judged her to be a person of means.

I walked to a point from where I could command the southern approaches
to the bridge, my colleague arriving sometimes by way of Birdcage Walk
and sometimes by way of the Horse Guards Parade.  Not seeing any signs
of him in the direction of the bridge, I turned back.  A little way
past the chair where the lady was sitting I met Mr. Parable.  I know
Mr. Parable quite well by sight.  He was wearing the usual grey suit
and soft felt hat with which the pictures in the newspapers have made
us all familiar.  I judged that Mr. Parable had come from the Houses of
Parliament, and the next morning my suspicions were confirmed by
reading that he had been present at a tea-party given on the terrace by
Mr. Will Crooks.  Mr. Parable conveyed to me the suggestion of a man
absorbed in thought, and not quite aware of what he was doing; but in
this, of course, I may have been mistaken.  He paused for a moment to
look over the railings at the pelican.  Mr. Parable said something to
the pelican which I was not near enough to overhear; and then, still
apparently in a state of abstraction, crossed the path and seated
himself on the chair next to that occupied by the young lady.

From the tree against which I was standing I was able to watch the
subsequent proceedings unobserved.  The lady looked at Mr. Parable and
then turned away and smiled to herself.  It was a peculiar smile, and,
again in some way I am unable to explain, reminded me of my first wife.
It was not till the pelican put down his other leg and walked away that
Mr. Parable, turning his gaze westward, became aware of the lady's
presence.

From information that has subsequently come to my knowledge, I am
prepared to believe that Mr. Parable, from the beginning, really
thought the lady was a friend of his.  What the lady thought is a
matter for conjecture; I can only speak to the facts.  Mr. Parable
looked at the lady once or twice.  Indeed, one might say with truth
that he kept on doing it.  The lady, it must be admitted, behaved for a
while with extreme propriety; but after a time, as I felt must happen,
their eyes met, and then it was I heard her say:

"Good evening, Mr. Parable."

She accompanied the words with the same peculiar smile to which I have
already alluded.  The exact words of Mr. Parable's reply I cannot
remember.  But it was to the effect that he had thought from the first
that he had known her but had not been quite sure.  It was at this
point that, thinking I saw my colleague approaching, I went to meet
him.  I found I was mistaken, and slowly retraced my steps. I passed
Mr. Parable and the lady.  They were talking together with what I
should describe as animation.  I went as far as the southern extremity
of the suspension bridge, and must have waited there quite ten minutes
before returning eastward.  It was while I was passing behind them on
the grass, partially screened by the rhododendrons, that I heard Mr.
Parable say to the lady:

"Why shouldn't we have it together?"

To which the lady replied:

"But what about Miss Clebb?"

I could not overhear what followed, owing to their sinking their
voices.  It seemed to be an argument.  It ended with the young lady
laughing and then rising.  Mr. Parable also rose, and they walked off
together.  As they passed me I heard the lady say:

"I wonder if there's any place in London where you're not likely to be
recognised."

Mr. Parable, who gave me the idea of being in a state of growing
excitement, replied quite loudly:

"Oh, let 'em!"

I was following behind them when the lady suddenly stopped.

"I know!" she said.  "The Popular Cafe."


The park-keeper said he was convinced he would know the lady again,
having taken particular notice of her.  She had brown eyes and was
wearing a black hat supplemented with poppies.

                    *          *          *

Arthur Horton, waiter at the Popular Cafe, states as follows:

I know Mr. John Parable by sight.  Have often heard him speak at public
meetings.  Am a bit of a Socialist myself.  Remember his dining at the
Popular Cafe on the evening of Thursday.  Didn't recognise him
immediately on his entrance for two reasons.  One was his hat, and the
other was his girl.  I took it from him and hung it up.  I mean, of
course, the hat.  It was a brand-new bowler, a trifle ikey about the
brim.  Have always associated him with a soft grey felt.  But never
with girls.  Females, yes, to any extent.  But this was the real
article.  You know what I mean--the sort of girl that you turn round to
look after.  It was she who selected the table in the corner behind the
door.  Been there before, I should say.

I should, in the ordinary course of business, have addressed Mr.
Parable by name, such being our instructions in the case of customers
known to us.  But, putting the hat and the girl together, I decided not
to.  Mr. Parable was all for our three-and-six-penny table d'hote; he
evidently not wanting to think.  But the lady wouldn't hear of it.

"Remember Miss Clebb," she reminded him.

Of course, at the time I did not know what was meant.  She ordered thin
soup, a grilled sole, and cutlets au gratin.  It certainly couldn't
have been the dinner.  With regard to the champagne, he would have his
own way.  I picked him out a dry '94, that you might have weaned a baby
on.  I suppose it was the whole thing combined.

It was after the sole that I heard Mr. Parable laugh.  I could hardly
credit my ears, but half-way through the cutlets he did it again.

There are two kinds of women.  There is the woman who, the more she
eats and drinks, the stodgier she gets, and the woman who lights up
after it.  I suggested a peche Melba between them, and when I returned
with it, Mr. Parable was sitting with his elbows on the table gazing
across at her with an expression that I can only describe as quite
human.  It was when I brought the coffee that he turned to me and asked:

"What's doing? Nothing stuffy," he added.  "Is there an Exhibition
anywhere--something in the open air?"

"You are forgetting Miss Clebb," the lady reminded him.

"For two pins," said Mr. Parable, "I would get up at the meeting and
tell Miss Clebb what I really think about her."

I suggested the Earl's Court Exhibition, little thinking at the time
what it was going to lead to; but the lady at first wouldn't hear of
it, and the party at the next table calling for their bill (they had
asked for it once or twice before, when I came to think of it), I had
to go across to them.

When I got back the argument had just concluded, and the lady was
holding up her finger.

"On condition that we leave at half-past nine, and that you go straight
to Caxton Hall," she said.

"We'll see about it," said Mr. Parable, and offered me half a crown.

Tips being against the rules, I couldn't take it.  Besides, one of the
jumpers had his eye on me.  I explained to him, jocosely, that I was
doing it for a bet.  He was surprised when I handed him his hat, but,
the lady whispering to him, he remembered himself in time.

As they went out together I heard Mr. Parable say to the lady:

"It's funny what a shocking memory I have for names."

To which the lady replied:

"You'll think it funnier still to-morrow." And then she laughed.


Mr. Horton thought he would know the lady again.  He puts down her age
at about twenty-six, describing her--to use his own piquant
expression--as "a bit of all right."  She had brown eyes and a taking
way with her.

                    *          *          *

Miss Ida Jenks, in charge of the Eastern Cigarette Kiosk at the Earl's
Court Exhibition, gives the following particulars:

From where I generally stand I can easily command a view of the
interior of the Victoria Hall; that is, of course, to say when the
doors are open, as on a warm night is usually the case.

On the evening of Thursday, the twenty-seventh, it was fairly well
occupied, but not to any great extent.  One couple attracted my
attention by reason of the gentleman's erratic steering.  Had he been
my partner I should have suggested a polka, the tango not being the
sort of dance that can be picked up in an evening.  What I mean to say
is, that he struck me as being more willing than experienced. Some of
the bumps she got would have made me cross; but we all have our
fancies, and, so far as I could judge, they both appeared to be
enjoying themselves.  It was after the "Hitchy Koo" that they came
outside.

The seat to the left of the door is popular by reason of its being
partly screened by bushes, but by leaning forward a little it is quite
possible for me to see what goes on there.  They were the first couple
out, having had a bad collision near the bandstand, so easily secured
it.  The gentleman was laughing.

There was something about him from the first that made me think I knew
him, and when he took off his hat to wipe his head it came to me all of
a sudden, he being the exact image of his effigy at Madame Tussaud's,
which, by a curious coincidence, I happened to have visited with a
friend that very afternoon.  The lady was what some people would call
good-looking, and others mightn't.

I was watching them, naturally a little interested.  Mr. Parable, in
helping the lady to adjust her cloak, drew her--it may have been by
accident--towards him; and then it was that a florid gentleman with a
short pipe in his mouth stepped forward and addressed the lady. He
raised his hat and, remarking "Good evening," added that he hoped she
was "having a pleasant time."  His tone, I should explain, was
sarcastic.

The young woman, whatever else may be said of her, struck me as
behaving quite correctly.  Replying to his salutation with a cold and
distant bow, she rose, and, turning to Mr. Parable, observed that she
thought it was perhaps time for them to be going.

The gentleman, who had taken his pipe from his mouth, said--again in a
sarcastic tone--that he thought so too, and offered the lady his arm.

"I don't think we need trouble you," said Mr. Parable, and stepped
between them.

To describe what followed I, being a lady, am hampered for words.  I
remember seeing Mr. Parable's hat go up into the air, and then the next
moment the florid gentleman's head was lying on my counter smothered in
cigarettes.  I naturally screamed for the police, but the crowd was
dead against me; and it was only after what I believe in technical
language would be termed "the fourth round" that they appeared upon the
scene.

The last I saw of Mr. Parable he was shaking a young constable who had
lost his helmet, while three other policemen had hold of him from
behind.  The florid gentleman's hat I found on the floor of my kiosk
and returned to him; but after a useless attempt to get it on his head,
he disappeared with it in his hand.  The lady was nowhere to be seen.


Miss Jenks thinks she would know her again.  She was wearing a hat
trimmed with black chiffon and a spray of poppies, and was slightly
freckled.

                    *          *          *

Superintendent S. Wade, in answer to questions put to him by our
representative, vouchsafed the following replies:

Yes.  I was in charge at the Vine Street Police Station on the night of
Thursday, the twenty-seventh.

No.  I have no recollection of a charge of any description being
preferred against any gentleman of the name of Parable.

Yes.  A gentleman was brought in about ten o'clock charged with
brawling at the Earl's Court Exhibition and assaulting a constable in
the discharge of his duty.

The gentleman gave the name of Mr. Archibald Quincey, Harcourt
Buildings, Temple.

No.  The gentleman made no application respecting bail, electing to
pass the night in the cells.  A certain amount of discretion is
permitted to us, and we made him as comfortable as possible.

Yes.  A lady.

No.  About a gentleman who had got himself into trouble at the Earl's
Court Exhibition.  She mentioned no name.

I showed her the charge sheet.  She thanked me and went away.

That I cannot say.  I can only tell you that at nine-fifteen on Friday
morning bail was tendered, and, after inquiries, accepted in the person
of Julius Addison Tupp, of the Sunnybrook Steam Laundry, Twickenham.

That is no business of ours.

The accused who, I had seen to it, had had a cup of tea and a little
toast at seven-thirty, left in company with Mr. Tupp soon after ten.


Superintendent Wade admitted he had known cases where accused parties,
to avoid unpleasantness, had stated their names to be other than their
own, but declined to discuss the matter further.

Superintendent Wade, while expressing his regret that he had no more
time to bestow upon our representative, thought it highly probable that
he would know the lady again if he saw her.

Without professing to be a judge of such matters, Superintendent Wade
thinks she might be described as a highly intelligent young woman, and
of exceptionally prepossessing appearance.

                    *          *          *

From Mr. Julius Tupp, of the Sunnybrook Steam Laundry, Twickenham, upon
whom our representative next called, we have been unable to obtain much
assistance, Mr. Tupp replying to all questions put to him by the one
formula, "Not talking."

Fortunately, our representative, on his way out through the drying
ground, was able to obtain a brief interview with Mrs. Tupp.

Mrs. Tupp remembers admitting a young lady to the house on the morning
of Friday, the twenty-eighth, when she opened the door to take in the
milk.  The lady, Mrs. Tupp remembers, spoke in a husky voice, the
result, as the young lady explained with a pleasant laugh, of having
passed the night wandering about Ham Common, she having been
misdirected the previous evening by a fool of a railway porter, and not
wishing to disturb the neighbourhood by waking people up at two o'clock
in the morning, which, in Mrs. Tupp's opinion, was sensible of her.

Mrs. Tupp describes the young lady as of agreeable manners, but
looking, naturally, a bit washed out.  The lady asked for Mr. Tupp,
explaining that a friend of his was in trouble, which did not in the
least surprise Mrs. Tupp, she herself not holding with Socialists and
such like.  Mr. Tupp, on being informed, dressed hastily and went
downstairs, and he and the young lady left the house together. Mr.
Tupp, on being questioned as to the name of his friend, had called up
that it was no one Mrs. Tupp would know, a Mr. Quince--it may have been
Quincey.

Mrs. Tupp is aware that Mr. Parable is also a Socialist, and is
acquainted with the saying about thieves hanging together.  But has
worked for Mr. Parable for years and has always found him a most
satisfactory client; and, Mr. Tupp appearing at this point, our
representative thanked Mrs. Tupp for her information and took his
departure.

                    *          *          *

Mr. Horatius Condor, Junior, who consented to partake of luncheon in
company with our representative at the Holborn Restaurant, was at first
disinclined to be of much assistance, but eventually supplied our
representative with the following information:

My relationship to Mr. Archibald Quincey, Harcourt Buildings, Temple,
is perhaps a little difficult to define.

How he himself regards me I am never quite sure.  There will be days
together when we will be quite friendly like, and at other times he
will be that offhanded and peremptory you might think I was his
blooming office boy.

On Friday morning, the twenty-eighth, I didn't get to Harcourt
Buildings at the usual time, knowing that Mr. Quincey would not be
there himself, he having arranged to interview Mr. Parable for the
Daily Chronicle at ten o'clock.  I allowed him half an hour, to be
quite safe, and he came in at a quarter past eleven.

He took no notice of me.  For about ten minutes--it may have been
less--he walked up and down the room, cursing and swearing and kicking
the furniture about.  He landed an occasional walnut table in the
middle of my shins, upon which I took the opportunity of wishing him
"Good morning," and he sort of woke up, as you might say.

"How did the interview go off?" I says.  "Got anything interesting?"

"Yes," he says; "quite interesting.  Oh, yes, decidedly interesting."

He was holding himself in, if you understand, speaking with horrible
slowness and deliberation.

"D'you know where he was last night?" he asks me.

"Yes," I says; "Caxton Hall, wasn't it?--meeting to demand the release
of Miss Clebb."

He leans across the table till his face was within a few inches of mine.

"Guess again," he says.

I wasn't doing any guessing.  He had hurt me with the walnut table, and
I was feeling a bit short-tempered.

"Oh! don't make a game of it," I says.  "It's too early in the morning."

"At the Earl's Court Exhibition," he says; "dancing the tango with a
lady that he picked up in St. James's Park."

"Well," I says, "why not?  He don't often get much fun."  I thought it
best to treat it lightly.

He takes no notice of my observation.

"A rival comes upon the scene," he continues--"a fatheaded ass,
according to my information--and they have a stand-up fight.  He gets
run in and spends the night in a Vine Street police cell."

I suppose I was grinning without knowing it.

"Funny, ain't it?" he says.

"Well," I says, "it has its humorous side, hasn't it?  What'll he get?"

"I am not worrying about what HE is going to get," he answers back. "I
am worrying about what _I_ am going to get."

I thought he had gone dotty.

"What's it got to do with you?" I says.

"If old Wotherspoon is in a good humour," he continues, "and the
constable's head has gone down a bit between now and Wednesday, I may
get off with forty shillings and a public reprimand.

"On the other hand," he goes on--he was working himself into a sort of
fit--"if the constable's head goes on swelling, and old Wotherspoon's
liver gets worse, I've got to be prepared for a month without the
option.  That is, if I am fool enough--"

He had left both the doors open, which in the daytime we generally do,
our chambers being at the top.  Miss Dorton--that's Mr. Parable's
secretary--barges into the room.  She didn't seem to notice me.  She
staggers to a chair and bursts into tears.

"He's gone," she says; "he's taken cook with him and gone."

"Gone!" says the guv'nor.  "Where's he gone?"

"To Fingest," she says through her sobs--"to the cottage.  Miss
Bulstrode came in just after you had left," she says.  "He wants to get
away from everyone and have a few days' quiet.  And then he is coming
back, and he is going to do it himself."

"Do what?" says the guv'nor, irritable like.

"Fourteen days," she wails.  "It'll kill him."

"But the case doesn't come on till Wednesday," says the guv'nor. "How
do you know it's going to be fourteen days?"

"Miss Bulstrode," she says, "she's seen the magistrate.  He says he
always gives fourteen days in cases of unprovoked assault."

"But it wasn't unprovoked," says the guv'nor.  "The other man began it
by knocking off his hat.  It was self-defence."

"She put that to him," she says, "and he agreed that that would alter
his view of the case.  But, you see," she continues, "we can't find the
other man.  He isn't likely to come forward of his own accord."

"The girl must know," says the guv'nor--"this girl he picks up in St.
James's Park, and goes dancing with.  The man must have been some
friend of hers."

"But we can't find her either," she says.  "He doesn't even know her
name--he can't remember it."

"You will do it, won't you?" she says.

"Do what?" says the guv'nor again.

"The fourteen days," she says.

"But I thought you said he was going to do it himself?" he says.

"But he mustn't," she says.  "Miss Bulstrode is coming round to see
you.  Think of it!  Think of the headlines in the papers," she says.
"Think of the Fabian Society.  Think of the Suffrage cause.  We mustn't
let him."

"What about me?" says the guv'nor.  "Doesn't anybody care for me?"

"You don't matter," she says.  "Besides," she says, "with your
influence you'll be able to keep it out of the papers.  If it comes out
that it was Mr. Parable, nothing on earth will be able to."

The guv'nor was almost as much excited by this time as she was.

"I'll see the Fabian Society and the Women's Vote and the Home for Lost
Cats at Battersea, and all the rest of the blessed bag of tricks--"

I'd been thinking to myself, and had just worked it out.

"What's he want to take his cook down with him for?" I says.

"To cook for him," says the guv'nor.  "What d'you generally want a cook
for?"

"Rats!" I says.  "Does he usually take his cook with him?"

"No," answered Miss Dorton.  "Now I come to think of it, he has always
hitherto put up with Mrs. Meadows."

"You will find the lady down at Fingest," I says, "sitting opposite him
and enjoying a recherche dinner for two."

The guv'nor slaps me on the back, and lifts Miss Dorton out of her
chair.

"You get on back," he says, "and telephone to Miss Bulstrode.  I'll be
round at half-past twelve."

Miss Dorton went out in a dazed sort of condition, and the guv'nor
gives me a sovereign, and tells me I can have the rest of the day to
myself.


Mr. Condor, Junior, considers that what happened subsequently goes to
prove that he was right more than it proves that he was wrong.

Mr. Condor, Junior, also promised to send us a photograph of himself
for reproduction, but, unfortunately, up to the time of going to press
it had not arrived.

                    *          *          *

From Mrs. Meadows, widow of the late Corporal John Meadows, V.C.,
Turberville, Bucks, the following further particulars were obtained by
our local representative:

I have done for Mr. Parable now for some years past, my cottage being
only a mile off, which makes it easy for me to look after him.

Mr. Parable likes the place to be always ready so that he can drop in
when he chooses, he sometimes giving me warning and sometimes not.  It
was about the end of last month--on a Friday, if I remember
rightly--that he suddenly turned up.

As a rule, he walks from Henley station, but on this occasion he
arrived in a fly, he having a young woman with him, and she having a
bag--his cook, as he explained to me.  As a rule, I do everything for
Mr. Parable, sleeping in the cottage when he is there; but to tell the
truth, I was glad to see her.  I never was much of a cook myself, as my
poor dead husband has remarked on more than one occasion, and I don't
pretend to be.  Mr. Parable added, apologetic like, that he had been
suffering lately from indigestion.

"I am only too pleased to see her," I says.  "There are the two beds in
my room, and we shan't quarrel."  She was quite a sensible young woman,
as I had judged from the first look at her, though suffering at the
time from a cold.  She hires a bicycle from Emma Tidd, who only uses it
on a Sunday, and, taking a market basket, off she starts for Henley,
Mr. Parable saying he would go with her to show her the way.

They were gone a goodish time, which, seeing it's eight miles, didn't
so much surprise me; and when they got back we all three had dinner
together, Mr. Parable arguing that it made for what he called "labour
saving."  Afterwards I cleared away, leaving them talking together; and
later on they had a walk round the garden, it being a moonlight night,
but a bit too cold for my fancy.

In the morning I had a chat with her before he was down.  She seemed a
bit worried.

"I hope people won't get talking," she says.  "He would insist on my
coming."

"Well," I says, "surely a gent can bring his cook along with him to
cook for him.  And as for people talking, what I always say is, one may
just as well give them something to talk about and save them the
trouble of making it up."

"If only I was a plain, middle-aged woman," she says, "it would be all
right."

"Perhaps you will be, all in good time," I says, but, of course, I
could see what she was driving at.  A nice, clean, pleasant-faced young
woman she was, and not of the ordinary class.  "Meanwhile," I says, "if
you don't mind taking a bit of motherly advice, you might remember that
your place is the kitchen, and his the parlour.  He's a dear good man,
I know, but human nature is human nature, and it's no good pretending
it isn't."

She and I had our breakfast together before he was up, so that when he
came down he had to have his alone, but afterwards she comes into the
kitchen and closes the door.

"He wants to show me the way to High Wycombe," she says.  "He will have
it there are better shops at Wycombe.  What ought I to do?"

My experience is that advising folks to do what they don't want to do
isn't the way to do it.

"What d'you think yourself?" I asked her.

"I feel like going with him," she says, "and making the most of every
mile."

And then she began to cry.

"What's the harm!" she says.  "I have heard him from a dozen platforms
ridiculing class distinctions.  Besides," she says, "my people have
been farmers for generations.  What was Miss Bulstrode's father but a
grocer?  He ran a hundred shops instead of one.  What difference does
that make?"

"When did it all begin?" I says.  "When did he first take notice of you
like?"

"The day before yesterday," she answers.  "He had never seen me
before," she says.  "I was just 'Cook'--something in a cap and apron
that he passed occasionally on the stairs.  On Thursday he saw me in my
best clothes, and fell in love with me.  He doesn't know it himself,
poor dear, not yet, but that's what he's done."

Well, I couldn't contradict her, not after the way I had seen him
looking at her across the table.

"What are your feelings towards him," I says, "to be quite honest? He's
rather a good catch for a young person in your position."

"That's my trouble," she says.  "I can't help thinking of that.  And
then to be 'Mrs. John Parable'!  That's enough to turn a woman's head."

"He'd be a bit difficult to live with," I says.

"Geniuses always are," she says; "it's easy enough if you just think of
them as children.  He'd be a bit fractious at times, that's all.
Underneath, he's just the kindest, dearest--"

"Oh, you take your basket and go to High Wycombe," I says.  "He might
do worse."

I wasn't expecting them back soon, and they didn't come back soon. In
the afternoon a motor stops at the gate, and out of it steps Miss
Bulstrode, Miss Dorton--that's the young lady that writes for him--and
Mr. Quincey.  I told them I couldn't say when he'd be back, and they
said it didn't matter, they just happening to be passing.

"Did anybody call on him yesterday?" asks Miss Bulstrode, careless
like--"a lady?"

"No," I says; "you are the first as yet."

"He's brought his cook down with him, hasn't he?" says Mr. Quincey.

"Yes," I says, "and a very good cook too," which was the truth.

"I'd like just to speak a few words with her," says Miss Bulstrode.

"Sorry, m'am," I says, "but she's out at present; she's gone to
Wycombe."

"Gone to Wycombe!" they all says together.

"To market," I says.  "It's a little farther, but, of course, it stands
to reason the shops there are better."

They looked at one another.

"That settles it," says Mr. Quincey.  "Delicacies worthy to be set
before her not available nearer than Wycombe, but must be had. There's
going to be a pleasant little dinner here to-night."

"The hussy!" says Miss Bulstrode, under her breath.

They whispered together for a moment, then they turns to me.

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Meadows," says Mr. Quincey.  "You needn't say we
called.  He wanted to be alone, and it might vex him."

I said I wouldn't, and I didn't.  They climbed back into the motor and
went off.

Before dinner I had call to go into the woodshed.  I heard a scuttling
as I opened the door.  If I am not mistaken, Miss Dorton was hiding in
the corner where we keep the coke.  I didn't see any good in making a
fuss, so I left her there.  When I got back to the kitchen, cook asked
me if we'd got any parsley.

"You'll find a bit in the front," I says, "to the left of the gate,"
and she went out.  She came back looking scared.

"Anybody keep goats round here?" she asked me.

"Not that I know of, nearer than Ibstone Common," I says.

"I could have sworn I saw a goat's face looking at me out of the
gooseberry bushes while I was picking the parsley," she says.  "It had
a beard."

"It's the half light," I says.  "One can imagine anything."

"I do hope I'm not getting nervy," she says.

I thought I'd have another look round, and made the excuse that I
wanted a pail of water.  I was stooping over the well, which is just
under the mulberry tree, when something fell close to me and lodged
upon the bricks.  It was a hairpin.  I fixed the cover carefully upon
the well in case of accident, and when I got in I went round myself and
was careful to see that all the curtains were drawn.

Just before we three sat down to dinner again I took cook aside.

"I shouldn't go for any stroll in the garden to-night," I says. "People
from the village may be about, and we don't want them gossiping."  And
she thanked me.

Next night they were there again.  I thought I wouldn't spoil the
dinner, but mention it afterwards.  I saw to it again that the curtains
were drawn, and slipped the catch of both the doors.  And just as well
that I did.

I had always heard that Mr. Parable was an amusing speaker, but on
previous visits had not myself noticed it.  But this time he seemed ten
years younger than I had ever known him before; and during dinner,
while we were talking and laughing quite merry like, I had the feeling
more than once that people were meandering about outside.  I had just
finished clearing away, and cook was making the coffee, when there came
a knock at the door.

"Who's that?" says Mr. Parable.  "I am not at home to anyone."

"I'll see," I says.  And on my way I slipped into the kitchen.

"Coffee for one, cook," I says, and she understood.  Her cap and apron
were hanging behind the door.  I flung them across to her, and she
caught them; and then I opened the front door.

They pushed past me without speaking, and went straight into the
parlour.  And they didn't waste many words on him either.

"Where is she?" asked Miss Bulstrode.

"Where's who?" says Mr. Parable.

"Don't lie about it," said Miss Bulstrode, making no effort to control
herself.  "The hussy you've been dining with?"

"Do you mean Mrs. Meadows?" says Mr. Parable.

I thought she was going to shake him.

"Where have you hidden her?" she says.

It was at that moment cook entered with the coffee.

If they had taken the trouble to look at her they might have had an
idea.  The tray was trembling in her hands, and in her haste and
excitement she had put on her cap the wrong way round.  But she kept
control of her voice, and asked if she should bring some more coffee.

"Ah, yes! You'd all like some coffee, wouldn't you?" says Mr. Parable.
Miss Bulstrode did not reply, but Mr. Quincey said he was cold and
would like it.  It was a nasty night, with a thin rain.

"Thank you, sir," says cook, and we went out together.

Cottages are only cottages, and if people in the parlour persist in
talking loudly, people in the kitchen can't very well help overhearing.

There was a good deal of talk about "fourteen days," which Mr. Parable
said he was going to do himself, and which Miss Dorton said he mustn't,
because, if he did, it would be a victory for the enemies of humanity.
Mr. Parable said something about "humanity," which I didn't rightly
hear, but, whatever it was, it started Miss Dorton crying; and Miss
Bulstrode called Mr. Parable a "blind Samson," who had had his hair cut
by a designing minx who had been hired to do it.

It was all French to me, but cook was drinking in every word, and when
she returned from taking them in their coffee she made no bones about
it, but took up her place at the door with her ear to the keyhole.

It was Mr. Quincey who got them all quiet, and then he began to explain
things.  It seemed that if they could only find a certain gentleman and
persuade him to come forward and acknowledge that he began a row, that
then all would be well.  Mr. Quincey would be fined forty shillings,
and Mr. Parable's name would never appear. Failing that, Mr. Parable,
according to Mr. Quincey, could do his fourteen days himself.

"I've told you once," says Mr. Parable, "and I tell you again, that I
don't know the man's name, and can't give it you."

"We are not asking you to," says Mr. Quincey.  "You give us the name of
your tango partner, and we'll do the rest."

I could see cook's face; I had got a bit interested myself, and we were
both close to the door.  She hardly seemed to be breathing.

"I am sorry," says Mr. Parable, speaking very deliberate-like, "but I
am not going to have her name dragged into this business."

"It wouldn't be," says Mr. Quincey.  "All we want to get out of her is
the name and address of the gentleman who was so anxious to see her
home."

"Who was he?" says Miss Bulstrode.  "Her husband?"

"No," says Mr. Parable; "he wasn't."

"Then who was he?" says Miss Bulstrode.  "He must have been something
to her--fiance?"

"I am going to do the fourteen days myself," says Mr. Parable.  "I
shall come out all the fresher after a fortnight's complete rest and
change."

Cook leaves the door with a smile on her face that made her look quite
beautiful, and, taking some paper from the dresser drawer, began to
write a letter.

They went on talking in the other room for another ten minutes, and
then Mr. Parable lets them out himself, and goes a little way with
them.  When he came back we could hear him walking up and down the
other room.

She had written and stamped the envelope; it was lying on the table.

"'Joseph Onions, Esq.,'" I says, reading the address.  "'Auctioneer and
House Agent, Broadway, Hammersmith.' Is that the young man?"

"That is the young man," she says, folding her letter and putting it in
the envelope.

"And was he your fiance?" I asked.

"No," she says.  "But he will be if he does what I'm telling him to do."

"And what about Mr. Parable?" I says.

"A little joke that will amuse him later on," she says, slipping a
cloak on her shoulders.  "How once he nearly married his cook."

"I shan't be a minute," she says.  And, with the letter in her hand,
she slips out.


Mrs. Meadows, we understand, has expressed indignation at our
publication of this interview, she being under the impression that she
was simply having a friendly gossip with a neighbour.  Our
representative, however, is sure he explained to Mrs. Meadows that his
visit was official; and, in any case, our duty to the public must be
held to exonerate us from all blame in the matter.

                    *          *          *

Mr. Joseph Onions, of the Broadway, Hammersmith, auctioneer and house
agent, expressed himself to our representative as most surprised at the
turn that events had subsequently taken.  The letter that Mr. Onions
received from Miss Comfort Price was explicit and definite.  It was to
the effect that if he would call upon a certain Mr. Quincey, of
Harcourt Buildings, Temple, and acknowledge that it was he who began
the row at the Earl's Court Exhibition on the evening of the
twenty-seventh, that then the engagement between himself and Miss
Price, hitherto unacknowledged by the lady, might be regarded as a fact.

Mr. Onions, who describes himself as essentially a business man,
decided before complying with Miss Price's request to take a few
preliminary steps.  As the result of judiciously conducted inquiries,
first at the Vine Street Police Station, and secondly at Twickenham,
Mr. Onions arrived later in the day at Mr. Quincey's chambers, with, to
use his own expression, all the cards in his hand.  It was Mr. Quincey
who, professing himself unable to comply with Mr. Onion's suggestion,
arranged the interview with Miss Bulstrode.  And it was Miss Bulstrode
herself who, on condition that Mr. Onions added to the undertaking the
further condition that he would marry Miss Price before the end of the
month, offered to make it two hundred.  It was in their joint
interest--Mr. Onions regarding himself and Miss Price as now one--that
Mr. Onions suggested her making it three, using such arguments as,
under the circumstances, naturally occurred to him--as, for example,
the damage caused to the lady's reputation by the whole proceedings,
culminating in a night spent by the lady, according to her own account,
on Ham Common.  That the price demanded was reasonable Mr. Onions
considers as proved by Miss Bulstrode's eventual acceptance of his
terms.  That, having got out of him all that he wanted, Mr. Quincey
should have "considered it his duty" to communicate the entire details
of the transaction to Miss Price, through the medium of Mr. Andrews,
thinking it "as well she should know the character of the man she
proposed to marry," Mr. Onions considers a gross breach of etiquette as
between gentlemen; and having regard to Miss Price's after behaviour,
Mr. Onions can only say that she is not the girl he took her for.

Mr. Aaron Andrews, on whom our representative called, was desirous at
first of not being drawn into the matter; but on our representative
explaining to him that our only desire was to contradict false rumours
likely to be harmful to Mr. Parable's reputation, Mr. Andrews saw the
necessity of putting our representative in possession of the truth.


She came back on Tuesday afternoon, explained Mr. Andrews, and I had a
talk with her.

"It is all right, Mr. Andrews," she told me; "they've been in
communication with my young man, and Miss Bulstrode has seen the
magistrate privately.  The case will be dismissed with a fine of forty
shillings, and Mr. Quincey has arranged to keep it out of the papers."

"Well, all's well that ends well," I answered; "but it might have been
better, my girl, if you had mentioned that young man of yours a bit
earlier."

"I did not know it was of any importance," she explained.  "Mr. Parable
told me nothing.  If it hadn't been for chance, I should never have
known what was happening."

I had always liked the young woman.  Mr. Quincey had suggested my
waiting till after Wednesday.  But there seemed to me no particular
object in delay.

"Are you fond of him?" I asked her.

"Yes," she answered.  "I am fonder than--"  And then she stopped
herself suddenly and flared scarlet.  "Who are you talking about?" she
demanded.

"This young man of yours," I said.  "Mr.--What's his name--Onions?"

"Oh, that?" she answered.  "Oh, yes; he's all right."

"And if he wasn't?" I said, and she looked at me hard.

"I told him," she said, "that if he would do what I asked him to do,
I'd marry him.  And he seems to have done it."

"There are ways of doing everything," I said; and, seeing it wasn't
going to break her heart, I told her just the plain facts.  She
listened without a word, and when I had finished she put her arms round
my neck and kissed me.  I am old enough to be her grandfather, but
twenty years ago it might have upset me.

"I think I shall be able to save Miss Bulstrode that three hundred
pounds," she laughed, and ran upstairs and changed her things.  When
later I looked into the kitchen she was humming.

Mr. John came up by the car, and I could see he was in one of his moods.

"Pack me some things for a walking tour," he said.  "Don't forget the
knapsack.  I am going to Scotland by the eight-thirty."

"Will you be away long?" I asked him.

"It depends upon how long it takes me," he answered.  "When I come back
I am going to be married."

"Who is the lady?" I asked, though, of course, I knew.

"Miss Bulstrode," he said.

"Well," I said, "she--"

"That will do," he said; "I have had all that from the three of them
for the last two days.  She is a Socialist, and a Suffragist, and all
the rest of it, and my ideal helpmate.  She is well off, and that will
enable me to devote all my time to putting the world to rights without
bothering about anything else.  Our home will be the nursery of
advanced ideas.  We shall share together the joys and delights of the
public platform.  What more can any man want?"

"You will want your dinner early," I said, "if you are going by the
eight-thirty.  I had better tell cook--"

He interrupted me again.

"You can tell cook to go to the devil," he said.

I naturally stared at him.

"She is going to marry a beastly little rotter of a rent collector that
she doesn't care a damn for," he went on.

I could not understand why he seemed so mad about it.

"I don't see, in any case, what it's got to do with you," I said, "but,
as a matter of fact, she isn't."

"Isn't what?" he said, stopping short and turning on me.

"Isn't going to marry him," I answered.

"Why not?" he demanded.

"Better ask her," I suggested.

I didn't know at the time that it was a silly thing to say, and I am
not sure that I should not have said it if I had.  When he is in one of
his moods I always seem to get into one of mine.  I have looked after
Mr. John ever since he was a baby, so that we do not either of us treat
the other quite as perhaps we ought to.

"Tell cook I want her," he said.

"She is just in the middle--" I began.

"I don't care where she is," he said.  He seemed determined never to
let me finish a sentence.  "Send her up here."

She was in the kitchen by herself.

"He wants to see you at once," I said.

"Who does?" she asked.

"Mr. John," I said.

"What's he want to see me for?" she asked.

"How do I know?" I answered.

"But you do," she said.  She always had an obstinate twist in her, and,
feeling it would save time, I told her what had happened.

"Well," I said, "aren't you going?"

She was standing stock still staring at the pastry she was making. She
turned to me, and there was a curious smile about her lips.

"Do you know what you ought to be wearing?" she said.  "Wings, and a
little bow and arrow."

She didn't even think to wipe her hands, but went straight upstairs. It
was about half an hour later when the bell rang.  Mr. John was standing
by the window.

"Is that bag ready?" he said.

"It will be," I said.

I went out into the hall and returned with the clothes brush.

"What are you going to do?" he said.

"Perhaps you don't know it," I said, "but you are all over flour."

"Cook's going with me to Scotland," he said.

I have looked after Mr. John ever since he was a boy.  He was forty-two
last birthday, but when I shook hands with him through the cab window I
could have sworn he was twenty-five again.




THE LESSON.

The first time I met him, to my knowledge, was on an evil-smelling,
one-funnelled steam boat that in those days plied between London Bridge
and Antwerp.  He was walking the deck arm-in-arm with a showily dressed
but decidedly attractive young woman; both of them talking and laughing
loudly.  It struck me as odd, finding him a fellow-traveller by such a
route.  The passage occupied eighteen hours, and the first-class return
fare was one pound twelve and six, including three meals each way;
drinks, as the contract was careful to explain, being extra.  I was
earning thirty shillings a week at the time as clerk with a firm of
agents in Fenchurch Street.  Our business was the purchasing of
articles on commission for customers in India, and I had learned to be
a judge of values.  The beaver lined coat he was wearing--for the
evening, although it was late summer, was chilly--must have cost him a
couple of hundred pounds, while his carelessly displayed jewellery he
could easily have pawned for a thousand or more.

I could not help staring at him, and once, as they passed, he returned
my look.

After dinner, as I was leaning with my back against the gunwale on the
starboard side, he came out of the only private cabin that the vessel
boasted, and taking up a position opposite to me, with his legs well
apart and a big cigar between his thick lips, stood coolly regarding
me, as if appraising me.

"Treating yourself to a little holiday on the Continent?" he inquired.

I had not been quite sure before he spoke, but his lisp, though slight,
betrayed the Jew.  His features were coarse, almost brutal; but the
restless eyes were so brilliant, the whole face so suggestive of power
and character, that, taking him as a whole, the feeling he inspired was
admiration, tempered by fear.  His tone was one of kindly contempt--the
tone of a man accustomed to find most people his inferiors, and too
used to the discovery to be conceited about it.

Behind it was a note of authority that it did not occur to me to
dispute.

"Yes," I answered, adding the information that I had never been abroad
before, and had heard that Antwerp was an interesting town.

"How long have you got?" he asked.

"A fortnight," I told him.

"Like to see a bit more than Antwerp, if you could afford it, wouldn't
you?" he suggested.  "Fascinating little country Holland. Just long
enough--a fortnight--to do the whole of it.  I'm a Dutchman, a Dutch
Jew."

"You speak English just like an Englishman," I told him.  It was
somehow in my mind to please him.  I could hardly have explained why.

"And half a dozen other languages equally well," he answered, laughing.
"I left Amsterdam when I was eighteen as steerage passenger in an
emigrant ship.  I haven't seen it since."

He closed the cabin door behind him, and, crossing over, laid a strong
hand on my shoulder.

"I will make a proposal to you," he said.  "My business is not of the
kind that can be put out of mind, even for a few days, and there are
reasons"--he glanced over his shoulder towards the cabin door, and gave
vent to a short laugh--"why I did not want to bring any of my own staff
with me.  If you care for a short tour, all expenses paid at slap-up
hotels and a ten-pound note in your pocket at the end, you can have it
for two hours' work a day."

I suppose my face expressed my acceptance, for he did not wait for me
to speak.

"Only one thing I stipulate for," he added, "that you mind your own
business and keep your mouth shut.  You're by yourself, aren't you?"

"Yes," I told him.

He wrote on a sheet of his notebook, and, tearing it out, handed it to
me.

"That's your hotel at Antwerp," he said.  "You are Mr. Horatio Jones's
secretary."  He chuckled to himself as he repeated the name, which
certainly did not fit him.  "Knock at my sitting-room door at nine
o'clock tomorrow morning.  Good night!"

He ended the conversation as abruptly as he had begun it, and returned
to his cabin.

I got a glimpse of him next morning, coming out of the hotel bureau. He
was speaking to the manager in French, and had evidently given
instructions concerning me, for I found myself preceded by an
obsequious waiter to quite a charming bedroom on the second floor,
while the "English breakfast" placed before me later in the coffee-room
was of a size and character that in those days I did not often enjoy.
About the work, also, he was as good as his word.  I was rarely
occupied for more than two hours each morning.  The duties consisted
chiefly of writing letters and sending off telegrams.  The letters he
signed and had posted himself, so that I never learnt his real
name--not during that fortnight--but I gathered enough to be aware that
he was a man whose business interests must have been colossal and
world-wide.

He never introduced me to "Mrs. Horatio Jones," and after a few days he
seemed to be bored with her, so that often I would take her place as
his companion in afternoon excursions.

I could not help liking the man.  Strength always compels the adoration
of youth; and there was something big and heroic about him.  His
daring, his swift decisions, his utter unscrupulousness, his occasional
cruelty when necessity seemed to demand it.  One could imagine him in
earlier days a born leader of savage hordes, a lover of fighting for
its own sake, meeting all obstacles with fierce welcome, forcing his
way onward, indifferent to the misery and destruction caused by his
progress, his eyes never swerving from their goal; yet not without a
sense of rough justice, not altogether without kindliness when it could
be indulged in without danger.

One afternoon he took me with him into the Jewish quarter of Amsterdam,
and threading his way without hesitation through its maze of unsavoury
slums, paused before a narrow three-storeyed house overlooking a
stagnant backwater.

"The room I was born in," he explained.  "Window with the broken pane
on the second floor.  It has never been mended."

I stole a glance at him.  His face betrayed no suggestion of sentiment,
but rather of amusement.  He offered me a cigar, which I was glad of,
for the stench from the offal-laden water behind us was distracting,
and for a while we both smoked in silence:  he with his eyes
half-closed; it was a trick of his when working out a business problem.

"Curious, my making such a choice," he remarked.  "A butcher's
assistant for my father and a consumptive buttonhole-maker for my
mother.  I suppose I knew what I was about.  Quite the right thing for
me to have done, as it turned out."

I stared at him, wondering whether he was speaking seriously or in grim
jest.  He was given at times to making odd remarks.  There was a vein
of the fantastic in him that was continually cropping out and
astonishing me.

"It was a bit risky," I suggested.  "Better choose something a little
safer next time."

He looked round at me sharply, and, not quite sure of his mood, I kept
a grave face.

"Perhaps you are right," he agreed, with a laugh.  "We must have a talk
about it one day."

After that visit to the Goortgasse he was less reserved with me, and
would often talk to me on subjects that I should never have guessed
would have interested him.  I found him a curious mixture.  Behind the
shrewd, cynical man of business I caught continual glimpses of the
visionary.

I parted from him at The Hague.  He paid my fare back to London, and
gave me an extra pound for travelling expenses, together with the
ten-pound note he had promised me.  He had packed off "Mrs. Horatio
Jones" some days before, to the relief, I imagine, of both of them, and
he himself continued his journey to Berlin.  I never expected to see
him again, although for the next few months I often thought of him, and
even tried to discover him by inquiries in the City.  I had, however,
very little to go upon, and after I had left Fenchurch Street behind
me, and drifted into literature, I forgot him.

Until one day I received a letter addressed to the care of my
publishers.  It bore the Swiss postmark, and opening it and turning to
the signature I sat wondering for the moment where I had met "Horatio
Jones."  And then I remembered.

He was lying bruised and broken in a woodcutter's hut on the slopes of
the Jungfrau.  Had been playing a fool's trick, so he described it,
thinking he could climb mountains at his age.  They would carry him
down to Lauterbrunnen as soon as he could be moved farther with safety,
but for the present he had no one to talk to but the nurse and a Swiss
doctor who climbed up to see him every third day.  He begged me, if I
could spare the time, to come over and spend a week with him.  He
enclosed a hundred-pound cheque for my expenses, making no apology for
doing so.  He was complimentary about my first book, which he had been
reading, and asked me to telegraph him my reply, giving me his real
name, which, as I had guessed it would, proved to be one of the best
known in the financial world.  My time was my own now, and I wired him
that I would be with him the following Monday.

He was lying in the sun outside the hut when I arrived late in the
afternoon, after a three-hours' climb followed by a porter carrying my
small amount of luggage.  He could not raise his hand, but his
strangely brilliant eyes spoke their welcome.

"I am glad you were able to come," he said.  "I have no near relations,
and my friends--if that is the right term--are business men who would
be bored to tears.  Besides, they are not the people I feel I want to
talk to, now."

He was entirely reconciled to the coming of death.  Indeed, there were
moments when he gave me the idea that he was looking forward to it with
an awed curiosity.  With the conventional notion of cheering him, I
talked of staying till he was able to return with me to civilisation,
but he only laughed.

"I am not going back," he said.  "Not that way.  What they may do
afterwards with these broken bones does not much concern either you or
me.

"It's a good place to die in," he continued.  "A man can think up here."

It was difficult to feel sorry for him, his own fate appearing to make
so little difference to himself.  The world was still full of interest
to him--not his own particular corner of it:  that, he gave me to
understand, he had tidied up and dismissed from his mind.  It was the
future, its coming problems, its possibilities, its new developments,
about which he seemed eager to talk.  One might have imagined him a
young man with the years before him.

One evening--it was near the end--we were alone together.  The
woodcutter and his wife had gone down into the valley to see their
children, and the nurse, leaving him in my charge, had gone for a walk.
We had carried him round to his favourite side of the hut facing the
towering mass of the Jungfrau.  As the shadows lengthened it seemed to
come nearer to us, and there fell a silence upon us.

Gradually I became aware that his piercing eyes were fixed on me, and
in answer I turned and looked at him.

"I wonder if we shall meet again," he said, "or, what is more
important, if we shall remember one another."

I was puzzled for the moment.  We had discussed more than once the
various religions of mankind, and his attitude towards the orthodox
beliefs had always been that of amused contempt.

"It has been growing upon me these last few days," he continued. "It
flashed across me the first time I saw you on the boat.  We were
fellow-students.  Something, I don't know what, drew us very close
together.  There was a woman.  They were burning her.  And then there
was a rush of people and a sudden darkness, and your eyes close to
mine."

I suppose it was some form of hypnotism, for, as he spoke, his
searching eyes fixed on mine, there came to me a dream of narrow
streets filled with a strange crowd, of painted houses such as I had
never seen, and a haunting fear that seemed to be always lurking behind
each shadow.  I shook myself free, but not without an effort.

"So that's what you meant," I said, "that evening in the Goortgasse.
You believe in it?"

"A curious thing happened to me," he said, "when I was a child.  I
could hardly have been six years old.  I had gone to Ghent with my
parents.  I think it was to visit some relative.  One day we went into
the castle.  It was in ruins then, but has since been restored. We were
in what was once the council chamber.  I stole away by myself to the
other end of the great room and, not knowing why I did so, I touched a
spring concealed in the masonry, and a door swung open with a harsh,
grinding noise.  I remember peering round the opening.  The others had
their backs towards me, and I slipped through and closed the door
behind me.  I seemed instinctively to know my way.  I ran down a flight
of steps and along dark corridors through which I had to feel my way
with my hands, till I came to a small door in an angle of the wall.  I
knew the room that lay the other side.  A photograph was taken of it
and published years afterwards, when the place was discovered, and it
was exactly as I knew it with its way out underneath the city wall
through one of the small houses in the Aussermarkt.

"I could not open the door.  Some stones had fallen against it, and
fearing to get punished, I made my way back into the council room. It
was empty when I reached it.  They were searching for me in the other
rooms, and I never told them of my adventure."

At any other time I might have laughed.  Later, recalling his talk that
evening, I dismissed the whole story as mere suggestion, based upon the
imagination of a child; but at the time those strangely brilliant eyes
had taken possession of me.  They remained still fixed upon me as I sat
on the low rail of the veranda watching his white face, into which the
hues of death seemed already to be creeping.

I had a feeling that, through them, he was trying to force remembrance
of himself upon me.  The man himself--the very soul of him--seemed to
be concentrated in them.  Something formless and yet distinct was
visualising itself before me.  It came to me as a physical relief when
a spasm of pain caused him to turn his eyes away from me.

"You will find a letter when I am gone," he went on, after a moment's
silence.  "I thought that you might come too late, or that I might not
have strength enough to tell you.  I felt that out of the few people I
have met outside business, you would be the most likely not to dismiss
the matter as mere nonsense.  What I am glad of myself, and what I wish
you to remember, is that I am dying with all my faculties about me.
The one thing I have always feared through life was old age, with its
gradual mental decay.  It has always seemed to me that I have died more
or less suddenly while still in possession of my will.  I have always
thanked God for that."

He closed his eyes, but I do not think he was sleeping; and a little
later the nurse returned, and we carried him indoors.  I had no further
conversation with him, though at his wish during the following two days
I continued to read to him, and on the third day he died.

I found the letter he had spoken of.  He had told me where it would be.
It contained a bundle of banknotes which he was giving me--so he
wrote--with the advice to get rid of them as quickly as possible.

"If I had not loved you," the letter continued, "I would have left you
an income, and you would have blessed me, instead of cursing me, as you
should have done, for spoiling your life."

This world was a school, so he viewed it, for the making of men; and
the one thing essential to a man was strength.  One gathered the
impression of a deeply religious man.  In these days he would, no
doubt, have been claimed as a theosophist; but his beliefs he had made
for, and adapted to, himself--to his vehement, conquering temperament.
God needed men to serve Him--to help Him.  So, through many changes,
through many ages, God gave men life:  that by contest and by struggle
they might ever increase in strength; to those who proved themselves
most fit the sterner task, the humbler beginnings, the greater
obstacles.  And the crown of well-doing was ever victory.  He appeared
to have convinced himself that he was one of the chosen, that he was
destined for great ends.  He had been a slave in the time of the
Pharaohs; a priest in Babylon; had clung to the swaying ladders in the
sack of Rome; had won his way into the councils when Europe was a
battlefield of contending tribes; had climbed to power in the days of
the Borgias.

To most of us, I suppose, there come at odd moments haunting thoughts
of strangely familiar, far-off things; and one wonders whether they are
memories or dreams.  We dismiss them as we grow older and the present
with its crowding interests shuts them out; but in youth they were more
persistent.  With him they appeared to have remained, growing in
reality.  His recent existence, closed under the white sheet in the hut
behind me as I read, was only one chapter of the story; he was looking
forward to the next.

He wondered, so the letter ran, whether he would have any voice in
choosing it.  In either event he was curious of the result.  What he
anticipated confidently were new opportunities, wider experience. In
what shape would these come to him?

The letter ended with a strange request.  It was that, on returning to
England, I should continue to think of him:  not of the dead man I had
known, the Jewish banker, the voice familiar to me, the trick of
speech, of manner--all such being but the changing clothes--but of the
man himself, the soul of him, that would seek and perhaps succeed in
revealing itself to me.

A postscript concluded the letter, to which at the time I attached no
importance.  He had made a purchase of the hut in which he had died.
After his removal it was to remain empty.

I folded the letter and placed it among other papers, and passing into
the hut took a farewell glance at the massive, rugged face. The mask
might have served a sculptor for the embodiment of strength.  He gave
one the feeling that having conquered death he was sleeping.

I did what he had requested of me.  Indeed, I could not help it.  I
thought of him constantly.  That may have been the explanation of it.

I was bicycling through Norfolk, and one afternoon, to escape a coming
thunderstorm, I knocked at the door of a lonely cottage on the
outskirts of a common.  The woman, a kindly bustling person, asked me
in; and hoping I would excuse her, as she was busy ironing, returned to
her work in another room.  I thought myself alone, and was standing at
the window watching the pouring rain.  After a while, without knowing
why, I turned.  And then I saw a child seated on a high chair behind a
table in a dark corner of the room.  A book of pictures was open before
it, but it was looking at me.  I could hear the sound of the woman at
her ironing in the other room. Outside there was the steady thrashing
of the rain.  The child was looking at me with large, round eyes filled
with a terrible pathos. I noticed that the little body was misshapen.
It never moved; it made no sound; but I had the feeling that out of
those strangely wistful eyes something was trying to speak to me.
Something was forming itself before me--not visible to my sight; but it
was there, in the room.  It was the man I had last looked upon as,
dying, he sat beside me in the hut below the Jungfrau.  But something
had happened to him.  Moved by instinct I went over to him and lifted
him out of his chair, and with a sob the little wizened arms closed
round my neck and he clung to me crying--a pitiful, low, wailing cry.

Hearing his cry, the woman came back.  A comely, healthy-looking woman.
She took him from my arms and comforted him.

"He gets a bit sorry for himself at times," she explained.  "At least,
so I fancy.  You see, he can't run about like other children, or do
anything without getting pains."

"Was it an accident?" I asked.

"No," she answered, "and his father as fine a man as you would find in
a day's march.  Just a visitation of God, as they tell me.  Sure I
don't know why.  There never was a better little lad, and clever, too,
when he's not in pain.  Draws wonderfully."

The storm had passed.  He grew quieter in her arms, and when I had
promised to come again and bring him a new picture-book, a little
grateful smile flickered across the drawn face, but he would not talk.

I kept in touch with him.  Mere curiosity would have made me do that.
He grew more normal as the years went by, and gradually the fancy that
had come to me at our first meeting faded farther into the background.
Sometimes, using the very language of the dead man's letter, I would
talk to him, wondering if by any chance some flash of memory would come
back to him, and once or twice it seemed to me that into the mild,
pathetic eyes there came a look that I had seen before, but it passed
away, and indeed, it was difficult to think of this sad little human
oddity, with its pleading helplessness, in connection with the strong,
swift, conquering spirit that I had watched passing away amid the
silence of the mountains.

The one thing that brought joy to him was his art.  I cannot help
thinking that, but for his health, he would have made a name for
himself.  His work was always clever and original, but it was the work
of an invalid.

"I shall never be great," he said to me once.  "I have such wonderful
dreams, but when it comes to working them out there is something that
hampers me.  It always seems to me as if at the last moment a hand was
stretched out that clutched me by the feet.  I long so, but I have not
the strength.  It is terrible to be one of the weaklings."

It clung to me, that word he had used.  For a man to know he is weak;
it sounds a paradox, but a man must be strong to know that. And
dwelling upon this, and upon his patience and his gentleness, there
came to me suddenly remembrance of that postscript, the significance of
which I had not understood.

He was a young man of about three- or four-and-twenty at the time. His
father had died, and he was living in poor lodgings in the south of
London, supporting himself and his mother by strenuous, ill-paid work.

"I want you to come with me for a few days' holiday," I told him.

I had some difficulty in getting him to accept my help, for he was very
proud in his sensitive, apologetic way.  But I succeeded eventually,
persuading him it would be good for his work. Physically the journey
must have cost him dear, for he could never move his body without pain,
but the changing landscapes and the strange cities more than repaid
him; and when one morning I woke him early and he saw for the first
time the distant mountains clothed in dawn, there came a new light into
his eyes.

We reached the hut late in the afternoon.  I had made my arrangements
so that we should be there alone.  Our needs were simple, and in
various wanderings I had learnt to be independent.  I did not tell him
why I had brought him there, beyond the beauty and stillness of the
place.  Purposely I left him much alone there, making ever-lengthening
walks my excuse, and though he was always glad of my return I felt that
the desire was growing upon him to be there by himself.

One evening, having climbed farther than I had intended, I lost my way.
It was not safe in that neighbourhood to try new pathways in the dark,
and chancing upon a deserted shelter, I made myself a bed upon the
straw.

I found him seated outside the hut when I returned, and he greeted me
as if he had been expecting me just at that moment and not before.  He
guessed just what had happened, he told me, and had not been alarmed.
During the day I found him watching me, and in the evening, as we sat
in his favourite place outside the hut, he turned to me.

"You think it true?" he said.  "That you and I sat here years ago and
talked?"

"I cannot tell," I answered.  "I only know that he died here, if there
be such a thing as death--that no one has ever lived here since.  I
doubt if the door has ever been opened till we came."

"They have always been with me," he continued, "these dreams.  But I
have always dismissed them.  They seemed so ludicrous.  Always there
came to me wealth, power, victory.  Life was so easy."

He laid his thin hand on mine.  A strange new look came into his
eyes--a look of hope, almost of joy.

"Do you know what it seems to me?" he said.  "You will laugh perhaps,
but the thought has come to me up here that God has some fine use for
me.  Success was making me feeble.  He has given me weakness and
failure that I may learn strength.  The great thing is to be strong."




SYLVIA OF THE LETTERS.

Old Ab Herrick, so most people called him.  Not that he was actually
old; the term was an expression of liking rather than any reflection on
his years.  He lived in an old-fashioned house--old-fashioned, that is,
for New York--on the south side of West Twentieth Street: once upon a
time, but that was long ago, quite a fashionable quarter.  The house,
together with Mrs. Travers, had been left him by a maiden aunt.  An
"apartment" would, of course, have been more suitable to a bachelor of
simple habits, but the situation was convenient from a journalistic
point of view, and for fifteen years Abner Herrick had lived and worked
there.

Then one evening, after a three days' absence, Abner Herrick returned
to West Twentieth Street, bringing with him a little girl wrapped up in
a shawl, and a wooden box tied with a piece of cord. He put the box on
the table; and the young lady, loosening her shawl, walked to the
window and sat down facing the room.

Mrs. Travers took the box off the table and put it on the floor--it was
quite a little box--and waited.

"This young lady," explained Abner Herrick, "is Miss Ann Kavanagh,
daughter of--of an old friend of mine."

"Oh!" said Mrs. Travers, and remained still expectant.

"Miss Kavanagh," continued Abner Herrick, "will be staying with us
for--"  He appeared to be uncertain of the length of Miss Kavanagh's
visit.  He left the sentence unfinished and took refuge in more
pressing questions.

"What about the bedroom on the second floor?  Is it ready?  Sheets
aired--all that sort of thing?"

"It can be," replied Mrs. Travers.  The tone was suggestive of judgment
reserved.

"I think, if you don't mind, Mrs. Travers, that we'd like to go to bed
as soon as possible."  From force of habit Abner S. Herrick in speaking
employed as a rule the editorial "we."  "We have been travelling all
day and we are very tired.  To-morrow morning--"

"I'd like some supper," said Miss Kavanagh from her seat in the window,
without moving.

"Of course," agreed Miss Kavanagh's host, with a feeble pretence that
the subject had been on the tip of his tongue.  As a matter of fact, he
really had forgotten all about it.  "We might have it up here while the
room is being got ready.  Perhaps a little--"

"A soft boiled egg and a glass of milk, if you please, Mrs. Travers,"
interrupted Miss Kavanagh, still from her seat at the window.

"I'll see about it," said Mrs. Travers, and went out, taking the quite
small box with her.

Such was the coming into this story of Ann Kavanagh at the age of eight
years; or, as Miss Kavanagh herself would have explained, had the
question been put to her, eight years and seven months, for Ann
Kavanagh was a precise young lady.  She was not beautiful--not then.
She was much too sharp featured; the little pointed chin protruding
into space to quite a dangerous extent.  Her large dark eyes were her
one redeeming feature.  But the level brows above them were much too
ready with their frown.  A sallow complexion and nondescript hair
deprived her of that charm of colouring on which youth can generally
depend for attraction, whatever its faults of form.  Nor could it
truthfully be said that sweetness of disposition afforded compensation.

"A self-willed, cantankerous little imp I call her," was Mrs. Travers's
comment, expressed after one of the many trials of strength between
them, from which Miss Kavanagh had as usual emerged triumphant.

"It's her father," explained Abner Herrick, feeling himself unable to
contradict.

"It's unfortunate," answered Mrs. Travers, "whatever it is."

To Uncle Ab himself, as she had come to call him, she could on occasion
be yielding and affectionate; but that, as Mrs. Travers took care to
point out to her, was a small thing to her credit.

"If you had the instincts of an ordinary Christian child," explained
Mrs. Travers to her, "you'd be thinking twenty-four hours a day of what
you could do to repay him for all his loving kindness to you; instead
of causing him, as you know you do, a dozen heartaches in a week.
You're an ungrateful little monkey, and when he's gone you'll--"

Upon which Miss Kavanagh, not waiting to hear more, flew upstairs and,
locking herself in her own room, gave herself up to howling and
remorse; but was careful not to emerge until she felt bad tempered
again; and able, should opportunity present itself, to renew the
contest with Mrs. Travers unhampered by sentiment.

But Mrs. Travers's words had sunk in deeper than that good lady herself
had hoped for; and one evening, when Abner Herrick was seated at his
desk penning a scathing indictment of the President for lack of
firmness and decision on the tariff question, Ann, putting her thin
arms round his neck and rubbing her little sallow face against his
right-hand whisker, took him to task on the subject.

"You're not bringing me up properly--not as you ought to," explained
Ann.  "You give way to me too much, and you never scold me."

"Not scold you!" exclaimed Abner with a certain warmth of indignation.
"Why, I'm doing it all--"

"Not what _I_ call scolding," continued Ann.  "It's very wrong of you.
I shall grow up horrid if you don't help me."

As Ann with great clearness pointed out to him, there was no one else
to undertake the job with any chance of success.  If Abner failed her,
then she supposed there was no hope for her:  she would end by becoming
a wicked woman, and everybody, including herself, would hate her.  It
was a sad prospect.  The contemplation of it brought tears to Ann's
eyes.

He saw the justice of her complaint and promised to turn over a new
leaf.  He honestly meant to do so; but, like many another repentant
sinner, found himself feeble before the difficulties of performance. He
might have succeeded better had it not been for her soft deep eyes
beneath her level brows.

"You're not much like your mother," so he explained to her one day,
"except about the eyes.  Looking into your eyes I can almost see your
mother."

He was smoking a pipe beside the fire, and Ann, who ought to have been
in bed, had perched herself upon one of the arms of his chair and was
kicking a hole in the worn leather with her little heels.

"She was very beautiful, my mother, wasn't she?" suggested Ann.

Abner Herrick blew a cloud from his pipe and watched carefully the
curling smoke.

"In a way, yes," he answered.  "Quite beautiful."

"What do you mean, 'In a way'?" demanded Ann with some asperity.

"It was a spiritual beauty, your mother's," Abner explained.  "The soul
looking out of her eyes.  I don't think it possible to imagine a more
beautiful disposition than your mother's.  Whenever I think of your
mother," continued Abner after a pause, "Wordsworth's lines always come
into my mind."

He murmured the quotation to himself, but loud enough to be heard by
sharp ears.  Miss Kavanagh was mollified.

"You were in love with my mother, weren't you?" she questioned him
kindly.

"Yes, I suppose I was," mused Abner, still with his gaze upon the
curling smoke.

"What do you mean by 'you suppose you were'?" snapped Ann.  "Didn't you
know?"

The tone recalled him from his dreams.

"I was in love with your mother very much," he corrected himself,
turning to her with a smile.

"Then why didn't you marry her?" asked Ann.  "Wouldn't she have you?"

"I never asked her," explained Abner.

"Why not?" persisted Ann, returning to asperity.

He thought a moment.

"You wouldn't understand," he told her.

"Yes, I would," retorted Ann.

"No, you wouldn't," he contradicted her quite shortly.  They were both
beginning to lose patience with one another.  "No woman ever could."

"I'm not a woman," explained Ann, "and I'm very smart.  You've said so
yourself."

"Not so smart as all that," growled Abner.  "Added to which, it's time
for you to go to bed."

Her anger with him was such that it rendered her absolutely polite. It
had that occasional effect upon her.  She slid from the arm of his
chair and stood beside him, a rigid figure of frozen femininity.

"I think you are quite right, Uncle Herrick.  Good night!"  But at the
door she could not resist a parting shot:

"You might have been my father, and then perhaps she wouldn't have
died.  I think it was very wicked of you."

After she was gone Abner sat gazing into the fire, and his pipe went
out.  Eventually the beginnings of a smile stole to the corners of his
mouth, but before it could spread any farther he dismissed it with a
sigh.

Abner, for the next day or two, feared a renewal of the conversation,
but Ann appeared to have forgotten it; and as time went by it faded
from Abner's own memory.  Until one evening quite a while later.

The morning had brought him his English mail.  It had been arriving
with some regularity, and Ann had noticed that Abner always opened it
before his other correspondence.  One letter he read through twice, and
Ann, who was pretending to be reading the newspaper, felt that he was
looking at her.

"I have been thinking, my dear," said Abner, "that it must be rather
lonely for you here, all by yourself."

"It would be," answered Ann, "if I were here all by myself."

"I mean," said Abner, "without any other young person to talk to
and--and to play with."

"You forget," said Ann, "that I'm nearly thirteen."

"God bless my soul," said Abner.  "How time does fly!"

"Who is she?" asked Ann.

"It isn't a 'she,'" explained Abner.  "It's a 'he.' Poor little chap
lost his mother two years ago, and now his father's dead.  I
thought--it occurred to me we might put him up for a time.  Look after
him a bit.  What do you think?  It would make the house more lively,
wouldn't it?"

"It might," said Ann.

She sat very silent, and Abner, whose conscience was troubling him,
watched her a little anxiously.  After a time she looked up.

"What's he like?" she asked.

"Precisely what I am wondering myself," confessed Abner.  "We shall
have to wait and see.  But his mother--his mother," repeated Abner,
"was the most beautiful woman I have ever known.  If he is anything
like she was as a girl--"  He left the sentence unfinished.

"You have not seen her since--since she was young?" questioned Ann.

Abner shook his head.  "She married an Englishman.  He took her back
with him to London."

"I don't like Englishmen," said Ann.

"They have their points," suggested Abner.  "Besides, boys take after
their mothers, they say."  And Abner rose and gathered his letters
together.

Ann remained very thoughtful all that day.  In the evening, when Abner
for a moment laid down his pen for the purpose of relighting his pipe,
Ann came to him, seating herself on the corner of the desk.

"I suppose," she said, "that's why you never married mother?"

Abner's mind at the moment was much occupied with the Panama Canal.

"What mother?" he asked.  "Whose mother?"

"My mother," answered Ann.  "I suppose men are like that."

"What are you talking about?" said Abner, dismissing altogether the
Panama Canal.

"You loved my mother very much," explained Ann with cold deliberation.
"She always made you think of Wordsworth's perfect woman."

"Who told you all that?" demanded Abner.

"You did."

"I did?"

"It was the day you took me away from Miss Carew's because she said she
couldn't manage me," Ann informed him.

"Good Lord! Why, that must be two years ago," mused Abner.

"Three," Ann corrected him.  "All but a few days."

"I wish you'd use your memory for things you're wanted to remember,"
growled Abner.

"You said you had never asked her to marry you," pursued Ann
relentlessly; "you wouldn't tell me why.  You said I shouldn't
understand."

"My fault," muttered Abner.  "I forget you're a child.  You ask all
sorts of questions that never ought to enter your head, and I'm fool
enough to answer you."

One small tear that had made its escape unnoticed by her was stealing
down her cheek.  He wiped it away and took one of her small paws in
both his hands.

"I loved your mother very dearly," he said gravely.  "I had loved her
from a child.  But no woman will ever understand the power that beauty
has upon a man.  You see we're built that way.  It's Nature's lure.
Later on, of course, I might have forgotten; but then it was too late.
Can you forgive me?"

"But you still love her," reasoned Ann through her tears, "or you
wouldn't want him to come here."

"She had such a hard time of it," pleaded Abner.  "It made things
easier to her, my giving her my word that I would always look after the
boy.  You'll help me?"

"I'll try," said Ann.  But there was not much promise in the tone.

Nor did Matthew Pole himself, when he arrived, do much to help matters.
He was so hopelessly English.  At least, that was the way Ann put it.
He was shy and sensitive.  It is a trying combination. It made him
appear stupid and conceited.  A lonely childhood had rendered him
unsociable, unadaptable.  A dreamy, imaginative temperament imposed
upon him long moods of silence:  a liking for long solitary walks.  For
the first time Ann and Mrs. Travers were in agreement.

"A sulky young dog," commented Mrs. Travers.  "If I were your uncle I'd
look out for a job for him in San Francisco."

"You see," said Ann in excuse for him, "it's such a foggy country,
England.  It makes them like that."

"It's a pity they can't get out of it," said Mrs. Travers.

Also, sixteen is an awkward age for a boy.  Virtues, still in the
chrysalis state, are struggling to escape from their parent vices.
Pride, an excellent quality making for courage and patience, still
appears in the swathings of arrogance.  Sincerity still expresses
itself in the language of rudeness.  Kindness itself is apt to be
mistaken for amazing impertinence and love of interference.

It was kindness--a genuine desire to be useful, that prompted him to
point out to Ann her undoubted faults and failings, nerved him to the
task of bringing her up in the way she should go.  Mrs. Travers had
long since washed her hands of the entire business.  Uncle Ab, as
Matthew also called him, had proved himself a weakling. Providence, so
it seemed to Matthew, must have been waiting impatiently for his
advent.  Ann at first thought it was some new school of humour.  When
she found he was serious she set herself to cure him.  But she never
did.  He was too conscientious for that. The instincts of the guide,
philosopher, and friend to humanity in general were already too strong
in him.  There were times when Abner almost wished that Matthew Pole
senior had lived a little longer.

But he did not lose hope.  At the back of his mind was the fancy that
these two children of his loves would come together.  Nothing is quite
so sentimental as a healthy old bachelor.  He pictured them making
unity from his confusions; in imagination heard the patter on the
stairs of tiny feet.  To all intents and purposes he would be a
grandfather.  Priding himself on his cunning, he kept his dream to
himself, as he thought, but under-estimated Ann's smartness.

For days together she would follow Matthew with her eyes, watching him
from behind her long lashes, listening in silence to everything he
said, vainly seeking to find points in him.  He was unaware of her
generous intentions.  He had a vague feeling he was being criticised.
He resented it even in those days.

"I do try," said Ann suddenly one evening apropos of nothing at all.
"No one will ever know how hard I try not to dislike him."

Abner looked up.

"Sometimes," continued Ann, "I tell myself I have almost succeeded. And
then he will go and do something that will bring it all on again."

"What does he do?" asked Abner.

"Oh, I can't tell you," confessed Ann.  "If I told you it would sound
as if it was my fault.  It's all so silly.  And then he thinks such a
lot of himself.  If one only knew why!  He can't tell you himself when
you ask him."

"You have asked him?" queried Abner.

"I wanted to know," explained Ann.  "I thought there might be something
in him that I could like."

"Why do you want to like him?" asked Abner, wondering how much she had
guessed.

"I know," wailed Ann.  "You are hoping that when I am grown up I shall
marry him.  And I don't want to.  It's so ungrateful of me."

"Well, you're not grown up yet," Abner consoled her.  "And so long as
you are feeling like that about it, I'm not likely to want you to marry
him."

"It would make you so happy," sobbed Ann.

"Yes, but we've got to think of the boy, don't forget that," laughed
Abner.  "Perhaps he might object."

"He would.  I know he would," cried Ann with conviction.  "He's no
better than I am."

"Have you been asking him to?" demanded Abner, springing up from his
chair.

"Not to marry me," explained Ann.  "But I told him he must be an
unnatural little beast not to try to like me when he knew how you loved
me."

"Helpful way of putting it," growled Abner.  "And what did he say to
that?"

"Admitted it," flashed Ann indignantly.  "Said he had tried."

Abner succeeded in persuading her that the path of dignity and virtue
lay in her dismissing the whole subject from her mind.

He had made a mistake, so he told himself.  Age may be attracted by
contrast, but youth has no use for its opposite.  He would send Matthew
away.  He could return for week-ends.  Continually so close to one
another, they saw only one another's specks and flaws; there is no
beauty without perspective.  Matthew wanted the corners rubbed off him,
that was all.  Mixing more with men, his priggishness would be laughed
out of him.  Otherwise he was quite a decent youngster, clean minded,
high principled.  Clever, too:  he often said quite unexpected things.
With approaching womanhood, changes were taking place in Ann.  Seeing
her every day one hardly noticed them; but there were times when,
standing before him flushed from a walk or bending over him to kiss him
before starting for some friendly dance, Abner would blink his eyes and
be puzzled.  The thin arms were growing round and firm; the sallow
complexion warming into olive; the once patchy, mouse-coloured hair
darkening into a rich harmony of brown.  The eyes beneath her level
brows, that had always been her charm, still reminded Abner of her
mother; but there was more light in them, more danger.

"I'll run down to Albany and talk to Jephson about him," decided Abner.
"He can come home on Saturdays."

The plot might have succeeded:  one never can tell.  But a New York
blizzard put a stop to it.  The cars broke down, and Abner, walking
home in thin shoes from a meeting, caught a chill, which, being
neglected, proved fatal.

Abner was troubled as he lay upon his bed.  The children were sitting
very silent by the window.  He sent Matthew out on a message, and then
beckoned Ann to come to him.  He loved the boy, too, but Ann was nearer
to him.

"You haven't thought any more," he whispered, "about--"

"No," answered Ann.  "You wished me not to."

"You must never think," he said, "to show your love for my memory by
doing anything that would not make you happy.  If I am anywhere
around," he continued with a smile, "it will be your good I shall be
watching for, not my own way.  You will remember that?"

He had meant to do more for them, but the end had come so much sooner
than he had expected.  To Ann he left the house (Mrs. Travers had
already retired on a small pension) and a sum that, judiciously
invested, the friend and attorney thought should be sufficient for her
needs, even supposing--The friend and attorney, pausing to dwell upon
the oval face with its dark eyes, left the sentence unfinished.

To Matthew he wrote a loving letter, enclosing a thousand dollars. He
knew that Matthew, now in a position to earn his living as a
journalist, would rather have taken nothing.  It was to be looked upon
merely as a parting gift.  Matthew decided to spend it on travel.  It
would fit him the better for his journalistic career, so he explained
to Ann.  But in his heart he had other ambitions.  It would enable him
to put them to the test.

So there came an evening when Ann stood waving a handkerchief as a
great liner cast its moorings.  She watched it till its lights grew
dim, and then returned to West Twentieth Street.  Strangers would take
possession of it on the morrow.  Ann had her supper in the kitchen in
company with the nurse, who had stayed on at her request; and that
night, slipping noiselessly from her room, she lay upon the floor, her
head resting against the arm of the chair where Abner had been wont to
sit and smoke his evening pipe; somehow it seemed to comfort her.  And
Matthew the while, beneath the stars, was pacing the silent deck of the
great liner and planning out the future.

To only one other being had he ever confided his dreams.  She lay in
the churchyard; and there was nothing left to encourage him but his own
heart.  But he had no doubts.  He would be a great writer.  His two
hundred pounds would support him till he had gained a foothold. After
that he would climb swiftly.  He had done right, so he told himself, to
turn his back on journalism:  the grave of literature. He would see men
and cities, writing as he went.  Looking back, years later, he was able
to congratulate himself on having chosen the right road.  He thought it
would lead him by easy ascent to fame and fortune.  It did better for
him than that.  It led him through poverty and loneliness, through hope
deferred and heartache--through long nights of fear, when pride and
confidence fell upon him, leaving him only the courage to endure.

His great poems, his brilliant essays, had been rejected so often that
even he himself had lost all love for them.  At the suggestion of an
editor more kindly than the general run, and urged by need, he had
written some short pieces of a less ambitious nature.  It was in bitter
disappointment he commenced them, regarding them as mere pot-boilers.
He would not give them his name.  He signed them "Aston Rowant."  It
was the name of the village in Oxfordshire where he had been born.  It
occurred to him by chance.  It would serve the purpose as well as
another.  As the work progressed it grew upon him.  He made his stories
out of incidents and people he had seen; everyday comedies and
tragedies that he had lived among, of things that he had felt; and when
after their appearance in the magazine a publisher was found willing to
make them into a book, hope revived in him.

It was but short-lived.  The few reviews that reached him contained
nothing but ridicule.  So he had no place even as a literary hack!

He was living in Paris at the time in a noisy, evil-smelling street
leading out of the Quai Saint-Michel.  He thought of Chatterton, and
would loaf on the bridges looking down into the river where the drowned
lights twinkled.

And then one day there came to him a letter, sent on to him from the
publisher of his one book.  It was signed "Sylvia," nothing else, and
bore no address.  Matthew picked up the envelope.  The postmark was
"London, S.E."

It was a childish letter.  A prosperous, well-fed genius, familiar with
such, might have smiled at it.  To Matthew in his despair it brought
healing.  She had found the book lying in an empty railway carriage;
and undeterred by moral scruples had taken it home with her.  It had
remained forgotten for a time, until when the end really seemed to have
come her hand by chance had fallen on it.  She fancied some kind little
wandering spirit--the spirit perhaps of someone who had known what it
was to be lonely and very sad and just about broken almost--must have
manoeuvred the whole thing.  It had seemed to her as though some strong
and gentle hand had been laid upon her in the darkness.  She no longer
felt friendless.  And so on.

The book, he remembered, contained a reference to the magazine in which
the sketches had first appeared.  She would be sure to have noticed
this.  He would send her his answer.  He drew his chair up to the
flimsy table, and all that night he wrote.

He did not have to think.  It came to him, and for the first time since
the beginning of things he had no fear of its not being accepted.  It
was mostly about himself, and the rest was about her, but to most of
those who read it two months later it seemed to be about themselves.
The editor wrote a charming letter, thanking him for it; but at the
time the chief thing that worried him was whether "Sylvia" had seen it.
He waited anxiously for a few weeks, and then received her second
letter.  It was a more womanly letter than the first.  She had
understood the story, and her words of thanks almost conveyed to him
the flush of pleasure with which she had read it. His friendship, she
confessed, would be very sweet to her, and still more delightful the
thought that he had need of her:  that she also had something to give.
She would write, as he wished, her real thoughts and feelings.  They
would never know one another, and that would give her boldness.  They
would be comrades, meeting only in dreamland.

In this way commenced the whimsical romance of Sylvia and Aston Rowant;
for it was too late now to change the name--it had become a name to
conjure with.  The stories, poems, and essays followed now in regular
succession.  The anxiously expected letters reached him in orderly
procession.  They grew in interest, in helpfulness.  They became the
letters of a wonderfully sane, broad-minded, thoughtful woman--a woman
of insight, of fine judgment.  Their praise was rare enough to be
precious.  Often they would contain just criticism, tempered by
sympathy, lightened by humour.  Of her troubles, sorrows, fears, she
came to write less and less, and even then not until they were past and
she could laugh at them.  The subtlest flattery she gave him was the
suggestion that he had taught her to put these things into their proper
place.  Intimate, self-revealing as her letters were, it was curious he
never shaped from them any satisfactory image of the writer.

A brave, kind, tender woman.  A self-forgetting, quickly-forgiving
woman.  A many-sided woman, responding to joy, to laughter:  a merry
lady, at times.  Yet by no means a perfect woman.  There could be
flashes of temper, one felt that; quite often occasional
unreasonableness; a tongue that could be cutting.  A sweet, restful,
greatly loving woman, but still a woman:  it would be wise to remember
that.  So he read her from her letters.  But herself, the eyes, and
hair, and lips of her, the voice and laugh and smile of her, the hands
and feet of her, always they eluded him.


He was in Alaska one spring, where he had gone to collect material for
his work, when he received the last letter she ever wrote him. They
neither of them knew then it would be the last.  She was leaving
London, so the postscript informed him, sailing on the following
Saturday for New York, where for the future she intended to live.

It worried him that postscript.  He could not make out for a long time
why it worried him.  Suddenly, in a waste of endless snows, the
explanation flashed across him.  Sylvia of the letters was a living
woman!  She could travel--with a box, he supposed, possibly with two or
three, and parcels.  Could take tickets, walk up a gangway, stagger
about a deck feeling, maybe, a little seasick.  All these years he had
been living with her in dreamland she had been, if he had only known
it, a Miss Somebody-or-other, who must have stood every morning in
front of a looking-glass with hairpins in her mouth.  He had never
thought of her doing these things; it shocked him.  He could not help
feeling it was indelicate of her--coming to life in this sudden,
uncalled-for manner.

He struggled with this new conception of her, and had almost forgiven
her, when a further and still more startling suggestion arrived to
plague him.  If she really lived why should he not see her, speak to
her?  So long as she had remained in her hidden temple, situate in the
vague recesses of London, S.E., her letters had contented him.  But now
that she had moved, now that she was no longer a voice but a woman!
Well, it would be interesting to see what she was like.  He imagined
the introduction:  "Miss Somebody-or-other, allow me to present you to
Mr. Matthew Pole."  She would have no idea he was Aston Rowant.  If she
happened to be young, beautiful, in all ways satisfactory, he would
announce himself.  How astonished, how delighted she would be.

But if not!  If she were elderly, plain?  The wisest, wittiest of women
have been known to have an incipient moustache.  A beautiful spirit
can, and sometimes does, look out of goggle eyes.  Suppose she suffered
from indigestion and had a shiny nose!  Would her letters ever again
have the same charm for him?  Absurd that they should not.  But would
they?

The risk was too great.  Giving the matter long and careful
consideration, he decided to send her back into dreamland.

But somehow she would not go back into dreamland, would persist in
remaining in New York, a living, breathing woman.

Yet even so, how could he find her?  He might, say, in a poem convey to
her his desire for a meeting.  Would she comply?  And if she did, what
would be his position, supposing the inspection to result unfavourably
for her?  Could he, in effect, say to her:  "Thank you for letting me
have a look at you; that is all I wanted.  Good-bye"?

She must, she should remain in dreamland.  He would forget her
postscript; in future throw her envelopes unglanced at into the
wastepaper basket.  Having by this simple exercise of his will replaced
her in London, he himself started for New York--on his way back to
Europe, so he told himself.  Still, being in New York, there was no
reason for not lingering there a while, if merely to renew old memories.

Of course, if he had really wanted to find Sylvia it would have been
easy from the date upon the envelope to have discovered the ship
"sailing the following Saturday."  Passengers were compelled to
register their names in full, and to state their intended movements
after arrival in America.  Sylvia was not a common Christian name. By
the help of a five-dollar bill or two--.  The idea had not occurred to
him before.  He dismissed it from his mind and sought a quiet hotel up
town.


New York was changed less than he had anticipated.  West Twentieth
Street in particular was precisely as, leaning out of the cab window,
he had looked back upon it ten years ago.  Business had more and more
taken possession of it, but had not as yet altered its appearance.  His
conscience smote him as he turned the corner that he had never once
written to Ann.  He had meant to, it goes without saying, but during
those first years of struggle and failure his pride had held him back.
She had always thought him a fool; he had felt she did.  He would wait
till he could write to her of success, of victory.  And then when it
had slowly, almost imperceptibly, arrived--!  He wondered why he never
had.  Quite a nice little girl, in some respects.  If only she had been
less conceited, less self-willed.  Also rather a pretty girl she had
shown signs of becoming.  There were times--  He remembered an evening
before the lamps were lighted.  She had fallen asleep curled up in
Abner's easy chair, one small hand resting upon the arm.  She had
always had quite attractive hands--a little too thin.  Something had
moved him to steal across softly without waking her.  He smiled at the
memory.

And then her eyes, beneath the level brows!  It was surprising how Ann
was coming back to him.  Perhaps they would be able to tell him, the
people of the house, what had become of her.  If they were decent
people they would let him wander round a while.  He would explain that
he had lived there in Abner Herrick's time.  The room where they had
sometimes been agreeable to one another while Abner, pretending to
read, had sat watching them out of the corner of an eye.  He would like
to sit there for a few moments, by himself.

He forgot that he had rung the bell.  A very young servant had answered
the door and was staring at him.  He would have walked in if the small
servant had not planted herself deliberately in his way.  It recalled
him to himself.

"I beg pardon," said Matthew, "but would you please tell me who lives
here?"

The small servant looked him up and down with growing suspicion.

"Miss Kavanagh lives here," she said.  "What do you want?"

The surprise was so great it rendered him speechless.  In another
moment the small servant would have slammed the door.

"Miss Ann Kavanagh?" he inquired, just in time.

"That's her name," admitted the small servant, less suspicious.

"Will you please tell her Mr. Pole--Mr. Matthew Pole," he requested.

"I'll see first if she is in," said the small servant, and shut the
door.

It gave Matthew a few minutes to recover himself, for which he was
glad.  Then the door opened again suddenly.

"You are to come upstairs," said the small servant.

It sounded so like Ann that it quite put him at his ease.  He followed
the small servant up the stairs.

"Mr. Matthew Pole," she announced severely, and closed the door behind
him.

Ann was standing by the window and came to meet him.  It was in front
of Abner's empty chair that they shook hands.

"So you have come back to the old house," said Matthew.

"Yes," she answered.  "It never let well.  The last people who had it
gave it up at Christmas.  It seemed the best thing to do, even from a
purely economical point of view.

"What have you been doing all these years?" she asked him.

"Oh, knocking about," he answered.  "Earning my living."  He was
curious to discover what she thought of Matthew, first of all.

"It seems to have agreed with you," she commented, with a glance that
took him in generally, including his clothes.

"Yes," he answered.  "I have had more luck than perhaps I deserved."

"I am glad of that," said Ann.

He laughed.  "So you haven't changed so very much," he said. "Except in
appearance.

"Isn't that the most important part of a woman?" suggested Ann.

"Yes," he answered, thinking.  "I suppose it is."

She was certainly very beautiful.

"How long are you stopping in New York?" she asked him.

"Oh, not long," he explained.

"Don't leave it for another ten years," she said, "before letting me
know what is happening to you.  We didn't get on very well together as
children; but we mustn't let him think we're not friends.  It would
hurt him."

She spoke quite seriously, as if she were expecting him any moment to
open the door and join them.  Involuntarily Matthew glanced round the
room.  Nothing seemed altered.  The worn carpet, the faded curtains,
Abner's easy chair, his pipe upon the corner of the mantelpiece beside
the vase of spills.

"It is curious," he said, "finding this vein of fancy, of tenderness in
you.  I always regarded you as such a practical, unsentimental young
person."

"Perhaps we neither of us knew each other too well, in those days," she
answered.

The small servant entered with the tea.

"What have you been doing with yourself?" he asked, drawing his chair
up to the table.

She waited till the small servant had withdrawn.

"Oh, knocking about," she answered.  "Earning my living."

"It seems to have agreed with you," he repeated, smiling.

"It's all right now," she answered.  "It was a bit of a struggle at
first."

"Yes," he agreed.  "Life doesn't temper the wind to the human lamb. But
was there any need in your case?" he asked.  "I thought--"

"Oh, that all went," she explained.  "Except the house."

"I'm sorry," said Matthew.  "I didn't know."

"Oh, we have been a couple of pigs," she laughed, replying to his
thoughts.  "I did sometimes think of writing you.  I kept the address
you gave me.  Not for any assistance; I wanted to fight it out for
myself.  But I was a bit lonely."

"Why didn't you?" he asked.

She hesitated for a moment.

"It's rather soon to make up one's mind," she said, "but you seem to me
to have changed.  Your voice sounds so different.  But as a boy--well,
you were a bit of a prig, weren't you?  I imagined you writing me good
advice and excellent short sermons.  And it wasn't that that I was
wanting."

"I think I understand," he said.  "I'm glad you got through.

"What is your line?" he asked.  "Journalism?"

"No," she answered.  "Too self-opinionated."

She opened a bureau that had always been her own and handed him a
programme.  "Miss Ann Kavanagh, Contralto," was announced on it as one
of the chief attractions.

"I didn't know you had a voice," said Matthew.

"You used to complain of it," she reminded him.

"Your speaking voice," he corrected her.  "And it wasn't the quality of
that I objected to.  It was the quantity."

She laughed.

"Yes, we kept ourselves pretty busy bringing one another up," she
admitted.

They talked a while longer:  of Abner and his kind, quaint ways; of old
friends.  Ann had lost touch with most of them.  She had studied
singing in Brussels, and afterwards her master had moved to London and
she had followed him.  She had only just lately returned to New York.

The small servant entered to clear away the tea things.  She said she
thought that Ann had rung.  Her tone implied that anyhow it was time
she had.  Matthew rose and Ann held out her hand.

"I shall be at the concert," he said.

"It isn't till next week," Ann reminded him.

"Oh, I'm not in any particular hurry," said Matthew.  "Are you
generally in of an afternoon?"

"Sometimes," said Ann.


He thought as he sat watching her from his stall that she was one of
the most beautiful women he had ever seen.  Her voice was not great.
She had warned him not to expect too much.

"It will never set the Thames on fire," she had said.  "I thought at
first that it would.  But such as it is I thank God for it."

It was worth that.  It was sweet and clear and had a tender quality.

Matthew waited for her at the end.  She was feeling well disposed
towards all creatures and accepted his suggestion of supper with
gracious condescension.

He had called on her once or twice during the preceding days.  It was
due to her after his long neglect of her, he told himself, and had
found improvement in her.  But to-night she seemed to take a freakish
pleasure in letting him see that there was much of the old Ann still
left in her:  the frank conceit of her; the amazing
self-opinionatedness of her; the waywardness, the wilfulness, the
unreasonableness of her; the general uppishness and dictatorialness of
her; the contradictoriness and flat impertinence of her; the swift
temper and exasperating tongue of her.

It was almost as if she were warning him.  "You see, I am not changed,
except, as you say, in appearance.  I am still Ann with all the old
faults and failings that once made life in the same house with me a
constant trial to you.  Just now my very imperfections appear charms.
You have been looking at the sun--at the glory of my face, at the
wonder of my arms and hands.  Your eyes are blinded. But that will
pass.  And underneath I am still Ann.  Just Ann."

They had quarrelled in the cab on the way home.  He forgot what it was
about, but Ann had said some quite rude things, and her face not being
there in the darkness to excuse her, it had made him very angry.  She
had laughed again on the steps, and they had shaken hands.  But walking
home through the still streets Sylvia had plucked at his elbow.

What fools we mortals be--especially men!  Here was a noble woman--a
restful, understanding, tenderly loving woman; a woman as nearly
approaching perfection as it was safe for a woman to go!  This
marvellous woman was waiting for him with outstretched arms (why should
he doubt it?)--and just because Nature had at last succeeded in making
a temporary success of Ann's skin and had fashioned a rounded line
above her shoulder-blade!  It made him quite cross with himself.  Ten
years ago she had been gawky and sallow-complexioned. Ten years hence
she might catch the yellow jaundice and lose it all. Passages in
Sylvia's letters returned to him.  He remembered that far-off evening
in his Paris attic when she had knocked at his door with her great gift
of thanks.  Recalled how her soft shadow hand had stilled his pain.  He
spent the next two days with Sylvia.  He re-read all her letters, lived
again the scenes and moods in which he had replied to them.

Her personality still defied the efforts of his imagination, but he
ended by convincing himself that he would know her when he saw her. But
counting up the women on Fifth Avenue towards whom he had felt
instinctively drawn, and finding that the number had already reached
eleven, began to doubt his intuition.  On the morning of the third day
he met Ann by chance in a bookseller's shop.  Her back was towards him.
She was glancing through Aston Rowant's latest volume.

"What I," said the cheerful young lady who was attending to her, "like
about him is that he understands women so well."

"What I like about him," said Ann, "is that he doesn't pretend to."

"There's something in that," agreed the cheerful young lady.  "They say
he's here in New York."

Ann looked up.

"So I've been told," said the cheerful young lady.

"I wonder what he's like?" said Ann.

"He wrote for a long time under another name," volunteered the cheerful
young lady.  "He's quite an elderly man."

It irritated Matthew.  He spoke without thinking.

"No, he isn't," he said.  "He's quite young."

The ladies turned and looked at him.

"You know him?" queried Ann.  She was most astonished, and appeared
disbelieving.  That irritated him further.

"If you care about it," he said.  "I will introduce you to him."

Ann made no answer.  He bought a copy of the book for himself, and they
went out together.  They turned towards the park.

Ann seemed thoughtful.  "What is he doing here in New York?" she
wondered.

"Looking for a lady named Sylvia," answered Matthew.

He thought the time was come to break it to her that he was a great and
famous man.  Then perhaps she would be sorry she had said what she had
said in the cab.  Seeing he had made up his mind that his relationship
to her in the future would be that of an affectionate brother, there
would be no harm in also letting her know about Sylvia.  That also
might be good for her.

They walked two blocks before Ann spoke.  Matthew, anticipating a
pleasurable conversation, felt no desire to hasten matters.

"How intimate are you with him?" she demanded.  "I don't think he would
have said that to a mere acquaintance."

"I'm not a mere acquaintance," said Matthew.  "I've known him a long
time."

"You never told me," complained Ann.

"Didn't know it would interest you," replied Matthew.

He waited for further questions, but they did not come.  At
Thirty-fourth Street he saved her from being run over and killed, and
again at Forty-second Street.  Just inside the park she stopped
abruptly and held out her hand.

"Tell him," she replied, "that if he is really serious about finding
Sylvia, I may--I don't say I can--but I may be able to help him."

He did not take her hand, but stood stock still in the middle of the
path and stared at her.

"You!" he said.  "You know her?"

She was prepared for his surprise.  She was also prepared--not with a
lie, that implies evil intention.  Her only object was to have a talk
with the gentleman and see what he was like before deciding on her
future proceedings--let us say, with a plausible story.

"We crossed on the same boat," she said.  "We found there was a good
deal in common between us.  She--she told me things."  When you came to
think it out it was almost the truth.

"What is she like?" demanded Matthew.

"Oh, just--well, not exactly--"  It was an awkward question.  There
came to her relief the reflection that there was really no need for her
to answer it.

"What's it got to do with you?" she said.

"I am Aston Rowant," said Matthew.

The Central Park, together with the universe in general, fell away and
disappeared.  Somewhere out of chaos was sounding a plaintive voice:
"What is she like?  Can't you tell me?  Is she young or old?"

It seemed to have been going on for ages.  She made one supreme
gigantic effort, causing the Central Park to reappear, dimly, faintly,
but it was there again.  She was sitting on a seat. Matthew--Aston
Rowant, whatever it was--was seated beside her.

"You've seen her?  What is she like?"

"I can't tell you."

He was evidently very cross with her.  It seemed so unkind of him.

"Why can't you tell me--or, why won't you tell me?  Do you mean she's
too awful for words?"

"No, certainly not--as a matter of fact--"

"Well, what?"

She felt she must get away or there would be hysterics somewhere. She
sprang up and began to walk rapidly towards the gate.  He followed her.

"I'll write you," said Ann.

"But why--?"

"I can't," said Ann.  "I've got a rehearsal."

A car was passing.  She made a dash for it and clambered on.  Before he
could make up his mind it had gathered speed.

Ann let herself in with her key.  She called downstairs to the small
servant that she wasn't to be disturbed for anything.  She locked the
door.

So it was to Matthew that for six years she had been pouring out her
inmost thoughts and feelings!  It was to Matthew that she had laid bare
her tenderest, most sacred dreams!  It was at Matthew's feet that for
six years she had been sitting, gazing up with respectful admiration,
with reverential devotion!  She recalled her letters, almost passage
for passage, till she had to hold her hands to her face to cool it.
Her indignation, one might almost say fury, lasted till tea-time.

In the evening--it was in the evening time that she had always written
to him--a more reasonable frame of mind asserted itself. After all, it
was hardly his fault.  He couldn't have known who she was.  He didn't
know now.  She had wanted to write.  Without doubt he had helped her,
comforted her loneliness; had given her a charming friendship, a
delightful comradeship.  Much of his work had been written for her, to
her.  It was fine work.  She had been proud of her share in it.  Even
allowing there were faults--irritability, shortness of temper, a
tendency to bossiness!--underneath it all was a man.  The gallant
struggle, the difficulties overcome, the long suffering, the high
courage--all that she, reading between the lines, had divined of his
life's battle!  Yes, it was a man she had worshipped.  A woman need not
be ashamed of that.  As Matthew he had seemed to her conceited,
priggish.  As Aston Rowant she wondered at his modesty, his patience.

And all these years he had been dreaming of her; had followed her to
New York; had--

There came a sudden mood so ludicrous, so absurdly unreasonable that
Ann herself stopped to laugh at it.  Yet it was real, and it hurt. He
had come to New York thinking of Sylvia, yearning for Sylvia.  He had
come to New York with one desire:  to find Sylvia.  And the first
pretty woman that had come across his path had sent Sylvia clean out of
his head.  There could be no question of that.  When Ann Kavanagh
stretched out her hand to him in that very room a fortnight ago he had
stood before her dazzled, captured.  From that moment Sylvia had been
tossed aside and forgotten.  Ann Kavanagh could have done what she
liked with him.  She had quarrelled with him that evening of the
concert.  She had meant to quarrel with him.

And then for the first time he had remembered Sylvia.  That was her
reward--Sylvia's:  it was Sylvia she was thinking of--for six years'
devoted friendship; for the help, the inspiration she had given him.

As Sylvia, she suffered from a very genuine and explainable wave of
indignant jealousy.  As Ann, she admitted he ought not to have done it,
but felt there was excuse for him.  Between the two she feared her mind
would eventually give way.  On the morning of the second day she sent
Matthew a note asking him to call in the afternoon. Sylvia might be
there, or she might not.  She would mention it to her.

She dressed herself in a quiet, dark-coloured frock.  It seemed
uncommittal and suitable to the occasion.  It also happened to be the
colour that best suited her.  She would not have the lamps lighted.

Matthew arrived in a dark serge suit and a blue necktie, so that the
general effect was quiet.  Ann greeted him with kindliness and put him
with his face to what little light there was.  She chose for herself
the window-seat.  Sylvia had not arrived.  She might be a little
late--that is, if she came at all.

They talked about the weather for a while.  Matthew was of opinion they
were going to have some rain.  Ann, who was in one of her contradictory
moods, thought there was frost in the air.

"What did you say to her?" he asked.

"Sylvia?  Oh, what you told me," replied Ann.  "That you had come to
New York to--to look for her."

"What did she say?" he asked.

"Said you'd taken your time about it," retorted Ann.

Matthew looked up with an injured expression.

"It was her own idea that we should never meet," he explained.

"Um!" Ann grunted.

"What do you think yourself she will be like?" she continued.  "Have
you formed any notion?"

"It is curious," he replied.  "I have never been able to conjure up any
picture of her until just now."

"Why 'just now'?" demanded Ann.

"I had an idea I should find her here when I opened the door," he
answered.  "You were standing in the shadow.  It seemed to be just what
I had expected."

"You would have been satisfied?" she asked.

"Yes," he said.

There was silence for a moment.

"Uncle Ab made a mistake," he continued.  "He ought to have sent me
away.  Let me come home now and then."

"You mean," said Ann, "that if you had seen less of me you might have
liked me better?"

"Quite right," he admitted.  "We never see the things that are always
there."

"A thin, gawky girl with a bad complexion," she suggested.  "Would it
have been of any use?"

"You must always have been wonderful with those eyes," he answered.
"And your hands were beautiful even then."

"I used to cry sometimes when I looked at myself in the glass as a
child," she confessed.  "My hands were the only thing that consoled me."

"I kissed them once," he told her.  "You were asleep, curled up in
Uncle Ab's chair."

"I wasn't asleep," said Ann.

She was seated with one foot tucked underneath her.  She didn't look a
bit grown up.

"You always thought me a fool," he said.

"It used to make me so angry with you," said Ann, "that you seemed to
have no go, no ambition in you.  I wanted you to wake up--do something.
If I had known you were a budding genius--"

"I did hint it to you," said he.

"Oh, of course it was all my fault," said Ann.

He rose.  "You think she means to come?" he asked.  Ann also had risen.

"Is she so very wonderful?" she asked.

"I may be exaggerating to myself," he answered.  "But I am not sure
that I could go on with my work without her--not now."

"You forgot her," flashed Ann, "till we happened to quarrel in the cab."

"I often do," he confessed.  "Till something goes wrong.  Then she
comes to me.  As she did on that first evening, six years ago.  You
see, I have been more or less living with her since then," he added
with a smile.

"In dreamland," Ann corrected.

"Yes, but in my case," he answered, "the best part of my life is passed
in dreamland."

"And when you are not in dreamland?" she demanded.  "When you're just
irritable, short-tempered, cranky Matthew Pole.  What's she going to do
about you then?"

"She'll put up with me," said Matthew.

"No she won't," said Ann.  "She'll snap your head off.  Most of the
'putting up with' you'll have to do."

He tried to get between her and the window, but she kept her face close
to the pane.

"You make me tired with Sylvia," she said.  "It's about time you did
know what she's like.  She's just the commonplace, short-tempered,
disagreeable-if-she-doesn't-get-her-own-way, unreasonable woman. Only
more so."

He drew her away from the window by brute force.

"So you're Sylvia," he said.

"I thought that would get it into your head," said Ann.

It was not at all the way she had meant to break it to him.  She had
meant the conversation to be chiefly about Sylvia.  She had a high
opinion of Sylvia, a much higher opinion than she had of Ann Kavanagh.
If he proved to be worthy of her--of Sylvia, that is, then, with the
whimsical smile that she felt belonged to Sylvia, she would remark
quite simply, "Well, what have you got to say to her?"

What had happened to interfere with the programme was Ann Kavanagh. It
seemed that Ann Kavanagh had disliked Matthew Pole less than she had
thought she did.  It was after he had sailed away that little Ann
Kavanagh had discovered this.  If only he had shown a little more
interest in, a little more appreciation of, Ann Kavanagh!  He could be
kind and thoughtful in a patronising sort of way.  Even that would not
have mattered if there had been any justification for his airs of
superiority.

Ann Kavanagh, who ought to have taken a back seat on this occasion, had
persisted in coming to the front.  It was so like her.

"Well," she said, "what are you going to say to her?"  She did get it
in, after all.

"I was going," said Matthew, "to talk to her about Art and Literature,
touching, maybe, upon a few other subjects.  Also, I might have
suggested our seeing each other again once or twice, just to get better
acquainted.  And then I was going away."

"Why going away?" asked Ann.

"To see if I could forget you."

She turned to him.  The fading light was full upon her face.

"I don't believe you could--again," she said.

"No," he agreed.  "I'm afraid I couldn't."

"You're sure there's nobody else," said Ann, "that you're in love with.
Only us two?"

"Only you two," he said.

She was standing with her hand on old Abner's empty chair.  "You've got
to choose," she said.  She was trembling.  Her voice sounded just a
little hard.

He came and stood beside her.  "I want Ann," he said.

She held out her hand to him.

"I'm so glad you said Ann," she laughed.




THE FAWN GLOVES.

Always he remembered her as he saw her first:  the little spiritual
face, the little brown shoes pointed downwards, their toes just
touching the ground; the little fawn gloves folded upon her lap.  He
was not conscious of having noticed her with any particular attention:
a plainly dressed, childish-looking figure alone on a seat between him
and the setting sun.  Even had he felt curious his shyness would have
prevented his deliberately running the risk of meeting her eyes.  Yet
immediately he had passed her he saw her again, quite clearly:  the
pale oval face, the brown shoes, and, between them, the little fawn
gloves folded one over the other.  All down the Broad Walk and across
Primrose Hill, he saw her silhouetted against the sinking sun.  At
least that much of her:  the wistful face and the trim brown shoes and
the little folded hands; until the sun went down behind the high
chimneys of the brewery beyond Swiss Cottage, and then she faded.

She was there again the next evening, precisely in the same place.
Usually he walked home by the Hampstead Road.  Only occasionally, when
the beauty of the evening tempted him, would he take the longer way by
Regent Street and through the Park.  But so often it made him feel sad,
the quiet Park, forcing upon him the sense of his own loneliness.

He would walk down merely as far as the Great Vase, so he arranged with
himself.  If she were not there--it was not likely that she would
be--he would turn back into Albany Street.  The newsvendors' shops with
their display of the cheaper illustrated papers, the second-hand
furniture dealers with their faded engravings and old prints, would
give him something to look at, to take away his thoughts from himself.
But seeing her in the distance, almost the moment he had entered the
gate, it came to him how disappointed he would have been had the seat
in front of the red tulip bed been vacant.  A little away from her he
paused, turning to look at the flowers.  He thought that, waiting his
opportunity, he might be able to steal a glance at her undetected.
Once for a moment he did so, but venturing a second time their eyes
met, or he fancied they did, and blushing furiously he hurried past.
But again she came with him, or, rather, preceded him.  On each empty
seat between him and the sinking sun he saw her quite plainly:  the
pale oval face and the brown shoes, and, between them, the fawn gloves
folded one upon the other.

Only this evening, about the small, sensitive mouth there seemed to be
hovering just the faintest suggestion of a timid smile.  And this time
she lingered with him past Queen's Crescent and the Malden Road, till
he turned into Carlton Street.  It was dark in the passage, and he had
to grope his way up the stairs, but with his hand on the door of the
bed-sitting room on the third floor he felt less afraid of the solitude
that would rise to meet him.

All day long in the dingy back office in Abingdon Street, Westminster,
where from ten to six each day he sat copying briefs and petitions, he
thought over what he would say to her; tactful beginnings by means of
which he would slide into conversation with her.  Up Portland Place he
would rehearse them to himself.  But at Cambridge Gate, when the little
fawn gloves came in view, the words would run away, to join him again
maybe at the gate into the Chester Road, leaving him meanwhile to pass
her with stiff, hurried steps and eyes fixed straight in front of him.
And so it might have continued, but that one evening she was no longer
at her usual seat. A crowd of noisy children swarmed over it, and
suddenly it seemed to him as if the trees and flowers had all turned
drab.  A terror gnawed at his heart, and he hurried on, more for the
need of movement than with any definite object.  And just beyond a bed
of geraniums that had hidden his view she was seated on a chair, and
stopping with a jerk absolutely in front of her, he said, quite angrily:

"Oh! there you are!"

Which was not a bit the speech with which he had intended to introduce
himself, but served his purpose just as well--perhaps better.

She did not resent his words or the tone.

"It was the children," she explained.  "They wanted to play; so I
thought I would come on a little farther."

Upon which, as a matter of course, he took the chair beside her, and it
did not occur to either of them that they had not known one another
since the beginning, when between St. John's Wood and Albany Street God
planted a garden.

Each evening they would linger there, listening to the pleading passion
of the blackbird's note, the thrush's call to joy and hope. He loved
her gentle ways.  From the bold challenges, the sly glances of
invitation flashed upon him in the street or from some neighbouring
table in the cheap luncheon room he had always shrunk confused and
awkward.  Her shyness gave him confidence.  It was she who was half
afraid, whose eyes would fall beneath his gaze, who would tremble at
his touch, giving him the delights of manly dominion, of tender
authority.  It was he who insisted on the aristocratic seclusion
afforded by the private chair; who, with the careless indifference of a
man to whom pennies were unimportant, would pay for them both.  Once on
his way through Piccadilly Circus he had paused by the fountain to
glance at a great basket of lilies of the valley, struck suddenly by
the thought how strangely their little pale petals seemed suggestive of
her.

"'Ere y' are, honey.  Her favourite flower!" cried the girl, with a
grin, holding a bunch towards him.

"How much?" he had asked, vainly trying to keep the blood from rushing
to his face.

The girl paused a moment, a coarse, kindly creature.

"Sixpence," she demanded; and he bought them.  She had meant to ask him
a shilling, and knew he would have paid it.  "Same as silly fool!" she
called herself as she pocketed the money.

He gave them to her with a fine lordly air, and watched her while she
pinned them to her blouse, and a squirrel halting in the middle of the
walk watched her also with his head on one side, wondering what was the
good of them that she should store them with so much care.  She did not
thank him in words, but there were tears in her eyes when she turned
her face to his, and one of the little fawn gloves stole out and sought
his hand.  He took it in both his, and would have held it, but she
withdrew it almost hurriedly.

They appealed to him, her gloves, in spite of their being old and much
mended; and he was glad they were of kid.  Had they been of cotton,
such as girls of her class usually wore, the thought of pressing his
lips to them would have put his teeth on edge.  He loved the little
brown shoes, that must have been expensive when new, for they still
kept their shape.  And the fringe of dainty petticoat, always so
spotless and with never a tear, and the neat, plain stockings that
showed below the closely fitting frock.  So often he had noticed girls,
showily, extravagantly dressed, but with red bare hands and sloppy
shoes.  Handsome girls, some of them, attractive enough if you were not
of a finicking nature, to whom the little accessories are almost of
more importance than the whole.

He loved her voice, so different from the strident tones that every now
and then, as some couple, laughing and talking, passed them, would fall
upon him almost like a blow; her quick, graceful movements that always
brought back to his memory the vision of hill and stream.  In her
little brown shoes and gloves and the frock which was also of a shade
of brown though darker, she was strangely suggestive to him of a fawn.
The gentle look, the swift, soft movements that have taken place before
they are seen; the haunting suggestion of fear never quite conquered,
as if the little nervous limbs were always ready for sudden flight.  He
called her that one day.  Neither of them had ever thought to ask one
another's names; it did not seem to matter.

"My little brown fawn," he had whispered, "I am always expecting you to
suddenly dig your little heels into the ground and spring away"; and
she had laughed and drawn a little closer to him.  And even that was
just the movement of a fawn.  He had known them, creeping near to them
upon the hill-sides when he was a child.

There was much in common between them, so they found.  Though he could
claim a few distant relatives scattered about the North, they were
both, for all practical purposes, alone in the world.  To her, also,
home meant a bed-sitting room--"over there," as she indicated with a
wave of the little fawn glove embracing the north-west district
generally; and he did not press her for any more precise address.

It was easy enough for him to picture it:  the mean, close-smelling
street somewhere in the neighbourhood of Lisson Grove, or farther on
towards the Harrow Road.  Always he preferred to say good-bye to her at
some point in the Outer Circle, with its peaceful vista of fine trees
and stately houses, watching her little fawn-like figure fading away
into the twilight.

No friend or relative had she ever known, except the pale,
girlish-looking mother who had died soon after they had come to London.
The elderly landlady had let her stay on, helping in the work of the
house; and when even this last refuge had failed her, well-meaning folk
had interested themselves and secured her employment.  It was light and
fairly well paid, but there were objections to it, so he gathered, more
from her halting silences than from what she said.  She had tried for a
time to find something else, but it was so difficult without help or
resources.  There was nothing really to complain about it, except--
And then she paused with a sudden clasp of the gloved hands, and,
seeing the troubled look in her eyes, he had changed the conversation.

It did not matter; he would take her away from it.  It was very sweet
to him, the thought of putting a protective arm about this little
fragile creature whose weakness gave him strength.  He was not always
going to be a clerk in an office.  He was going to write poetry, books,
plays.  Already he had earned a little.  He told her of his hopes, and
her great faith in him gave him new courage.  One evening, finding a
seat where few people ever passed, he read to her.  And she had
understood.  All unconsciously she laughed in the right places, and
when his own voice trembled, and he found it difficult to continue for
the lump in his own throat, glancing at her he saw the tears were in
her eyes.  It was the first time he had tasted sympathy.

And so spring grew to summer.  And then one evening a great thing
happened.  He could not make out at first what it was about her: some
little added fragrance that made itself oddly felt, while she herself
seemed to be conscious of increased dignity.  It was not until he took
her hand to say good-bye that he discovered it.  There was something
different about the feel of her, and, looking down at the little hand
that lay in his, he found the reason.  She had on a pair of new gloves.
They were still of the same fawn colour, but so smooth and soft and
cool.  They fitted closely without a wrinkle, displaying the slightness
and the gracefulness of the hands beneath. The twilight had almost
faded, and, save for the broad back of a disappearing policeman, they
had the Outer Circle to themselves; and, the sudden impulse coming to
him, he dropped on one knee, as they do in plays and story books and
sometimes elsewhere, and pressed the little fawn gloves to his lips in
a long, passionate kiss.  The sound of approaching footsteps made him
rise hurriedly. She did not move, but her whole body was trembling, and
in her eyes was a look that was almost of fear.  The approaching
footsteps came nearer, but a bend of the road still screened them.
Swiftly and in silence she put her arms about his neck and kissed him.
It was a strange, cold kiss, but almost fierce, and then without a word
she turned and walked away; and he watched her to the corner of Hanover
Gate, but she did not look back.

It was almost as if it had raised a barrier between them, that kiss.
The next evening she came to meet him with a smile as usual, but in her
eyes was still that odd suggestion of lurking fear; and when, seated
beside her, he put his hand on hers it seemed to him she shrank away
from him.  It was an unconscious movement.  It brought back to him that
haunting memory of hill and stream when some soft-eyed fawn, strayed
from her fellows, would let him approach quite close to her, and then,
when he put out his hand to caress her, would start away with a swift,
quivering movement.

"Do you always wear gloves?" he asked her one evening a little later.

"Yes," she answered, speaking low; "when I'm out of doors."

"But this is not out of doors," he had pleaded.  "We have come into the
garden.  Won't you take them off?"

She had looked at him from under bent brows, as if trying to read him.
She did not answer him then.  But on the way out, on the last seat
close to the gate, she had sat down, motioning him to sit beside her.
Quietly she unbuttoned the fawn gloves; drew each one off and laid them
aside.  And then, for the first time, he saw her hands.

Had he looked at her, seen the faint hope die out, the mute agony in
the quiet eyes watching him, he would have tried to hide the disgust,
the physical repulsion that showed itself so plainly in his face, in
the involuntary movement with which he drew away from her. They were
small and shapely with rounded curves, but raw and seared as with hot
irons, with a growth of red, angry-coloured warts, and the nails all
worn away.

"I ought to have shown them to you before," she said simply as she drew
the gloves on again.  "It was silly of me.  I ought to have known."

He tried to comfort her, but his phrases came meaningless and halting.

It was the work, she explained as they walked on.  It made your hands
like that after a time.  If only she could have got out of it earlier!
But now!  It was no good worrying about it now.

They parted near to the Hanover Gate, but to-night he did not stand
watching her as he had always done till she waved a last good-bye to
him just before disappearing; so whether she turned or not he never
knew.

He did not go to meet her the next evening.  A dozen times his
footsteps led him unconsciously almost to the gate.  Then he would
hurry away again, pace the mean streets, jostling stupidly against the
passers-by.  The pale, sweet face, the little nymph-like figure, the
little brown shoes kept calling to him.  If only there would pass away
the horror of those hands!  All the artist in him shuddered at the
memory of them.  Always he had imagined them under the neat, smooth
gloves as fitting in with all the rest of her, dreaming of the time
when he would hold them in his own, caressing them, kissing them.
Would it be possible to forget them, to reconcile oneself to them?  He
must think--must get away from these crowded streets where faces seemed
to grin at him.  He remembered that Parliament had just risen, that
work was slack in the office. He would ask that he might take his
holiday now--the next day.  And they had agreed.

He packed a few things into a knapsack.  From the voices of the hills
and streams he would find counsel.

He took no count of his wanderings.  One evening at a lonely inn he met
a young doctor.  The innkeeper's wife was expecting to be taken with
child that night, and the doctor was waiting downstairs till summoned.
While they were talking, the idea came to him.  Why had he not thought
of it?  Overcoming his shyness, he put his questions. What work would
it be that would cause such injuries?  He described them, seeing them
before him in the shadows of the dimly lighted room, those poor,
pitiful little hands.

Oh! a dozen things might account for it--the doctor's voice sounded
callous--the handling of flax, even of linen under certain conditions.
Chemicals entered so much nowadays into all sorts of processes and
preparations.  All this new photography, cheap colour printing, dyeing
and cleaning, metal work.  Might all be avoided by providing rubber
gloves.  It ought to be made compulsory.  The doctor seemed inclined to
hold forth.  He interrupted him.

But could it be cured?  Was there any hope?

Cured?  Hope?  Of course it could be cured.  It was only local--the
effect being confined to the hands proved that.  A poisoned condition
of the skin aggravated by general poverty of blood.  Take her away from
it; let her have plenty of fresh air and careful diet, using some such
simple ointment or another as any local man, seeing them, would
prescribe; and in three or four months they would recover.

He could hardly stay to thank the young doctor.  He wanted to get away
by himself, to shout, to wave his arms, to leap.  Had it been possible
he would have returned that very night.  He cursed himself for the
fancifulness that had prevented his inquiring her address. He could
have sent a telegram.  Rising at dawn, for he had not attempted to
sleep, he walked the ten miles to the nearest railway station, and
waited for the train.  All day long it seemed to creep with him through
the endless country.  But London came at last.

It was still the afternoon, but he did not care to go to his room.
Leaving his knapsack at the station, he made his way to Westminster. He
wanted all things to be unchanged, so that between this evening and
their parting it might seem as if there had merely passed an ugly
dream; and timing himself, he reached the park just at their usual hour.

He waited till the gates were closed, but she did not come.  All day
long at the back of his mind had been that fear, but he had driven it
away.  She was ill, just a headache, or merely tired.

And the next evening he told himself the same.  He dared not whisper to
himself anything else.  And each succeeding evening again.  He never
remembered how many.  For a time he would sit watching the path by
which she had always come; and when the hour was long past he would
rise and walk towards the gate, look east and west, and then return.
One evening he stopped one of the park-keepers and questioned him.
Yes, the man remembered her quite well:  the young lady with the fawn
gloves.  She had come once or twice--maybe oftener, the park-keeper
could not be sure--and had waited.  No, there had been nothing to show
that she was in any way upset.  She had just sat there for a time, now
and then walking a little way and then coming back again, until the
closing hour, and then she had gone.  He left his address with the
park-keeper.  The man promised to let him know if he ever saw her there
again.

Sometimes, instead of the park, he would haunt the mean streets about
Lisson Grove and far beyond the other side of the Edgware Road, pacing
them till night fell.  But he never found her.

He wondered, beating against the bars of his poverty, if money would
have helped him.  But the grim, endless city, hiding its million
secrets, seemed to mock the thought.  A few pounds he had scraped
together he spent in advertisements; but he expected no response, and
none came.  It was not likely she would see them.

And so after a time the park, and even the streets round about it,
became hateful to him; and he moved away to another part of London,
hoping to forget.  But he never quite succeeded.  Always it would come
back to him when he was not thinking:  the broad, quiet walk with its
prim trees and gay beds of flowers.  And always he would see her seated
there, framed by the fading light.  At least, that much of her:  the
little spiritual face, and the brown shoes pointing downwards, and
between them the little fawn gloves folded upon her lap.




MRS. KORNER SINS HER MERCIES


By Jerome K. Jerome



"I do mean it," declared Mrs. Korner, "I like a man to be a man."

"But you would not like Christopher--I mean Mr. Korner--to be that sort
of man," suggested her bosom friend.

"I don't mean that I should like it if he did it often. But I should
like to feel that he was able to be that sort of man.--Have you told
your master that breakfast is ready?" demanded Mrs. Korner of the
domestic staff, entering at the moment with three boiled eggs and a
teapot.

"Yus, I've told 'im," replied the staff indignantly.

The domestic staff at Acacia Villa, Ravenscourt Park, lived in a state
of indignation. It could be heard of mornings and evenings saying its
prayers indignantly.

"What did he say?"

"Said 'e'11 be down the moment 'e's dressed."

"Nobody wants him to come before," commented Mrs. Korner. "Answered me
that he was putting on his collar when I called up to him five minutes
ago."

"Answer yer the same thing now, if yer called up to 'im agen, I 'spect,"
was the opinion of the staff. "Was on 'is 'ands and knees when I looked
in, scooping round under the bed for 'is collar stud."

Mrs. Korner paused with the teapot in her hand. "Was he talking?"

"Talkin'? Nobody there to talk to; I 'adn't got no time to stop and
chatter."

"I mean to himself," explained Mrs. Korner. "He--he wasn't swearing?"
There was a note of eagerness, almost of hope, in Mrs. Korner's voice.

"Swearin'! 'E! Why, 'e don't know any."

"Thank you," said Mrs. Korner. "That will do, Harriet; you may go."

Mrs Korner put down the teapot with a bang. "The very girl," said Mrs.
Korner bitterly, "the very girl despises him."

"Perhaps," suggested Miss Greene, "he had been swearing and had
finished."

But Mrs. Korner was not to be comforted. "Finished! Any other man would
have been swearing all the time."

"Perhaps," suggested the kindly bosom friend, ever the one to plead the
cause of the transgressor, "perhaps he was swearing, and she did not
hear him. You see, if he had his head well underneath the bed--"

The door opened.

"Sorry I am late," said Mr. Korner, bursting cheerfully into the room.
It was a point with Mr. Korner always to be cheerful in the morning.
"Greet the day with a smile and it will leave you with a blessing," was
the motto Mrs. Korner, this day a married woman of six months and three
weeks standing had heard her husband murmur before getting out of bed on
precisely two hundred and two occasions. The Motto entered largely into
the scheme of Mr. Korner's life. Written in fine copperplate upon cards
all of the same size, a choice selection counselled him each morning
from the rim of his shaving-glass.

"Did you find it?" asked Mrs. Korner.

"It is most extraordinary," replied Mr. Korner, as he seated himself
at the breakfast-table. "I saw it go under the bed with my own eyes.
Perhaps--"

"Don't ask me to look for it," interrupted Mrs. Korner. "Crawling about
on their hands and knees, knocking their heads against iron bedsteads,
would be enough to make some people swear." The emphasis was on the
"some."

"It is not bad training for the character," hinted Mr. Korner,
"occasionally to force oneself to perform patiently tasks calculated--"

"If you get tied up in one of those long sentences of yours, you will
never get out in time to eat your breakfast," was the fear of Mrs.
Korner.

"I should be sorry for anything to happen to it," remarked Mr. Korner,
"its intrinsic value may perhaps--"

"I will look for it after breakfast," volunteered the amiable Miss
Greene. "I am good at finding things."

"I can well believe it," the gallant Mr. Korner assured her, as with the
handle of his spoon he peeled his egg. "From such bright eyes as yours,
few--"

"You've only got ten minutes," his wife reminded him. "Do get on with
your breakfast."

"I should like," said Mr. Korner, "to finish a speech occasionally."

"You never would," asserted Mrs. Korner.

"I should like to try," sighed Mr. Korner, "one of these days--"

"How did you sleep, dear? I forgot to ask you," questioned Mrs. Korner
of the bosom friend.

"I am always restless in a strange bed the first night," explained Miss
Greene. "I daresay, too, I was a little excited."

"I could have wished," said Mr. Korner, "it had been a better example
of the delightful art of the dramatist. When one goes but seldom to the
theatre--"

"One wants to enjoy oneself" interrupted Mrs. Korner.

"I really do not think," said the bosom friend, "that I have ever
laughed so much in all my life."

"It was amusing. I laughed myself," admitted Mr. Korner. "At the same
time I cannot help thinking that to treat drunkenness as a theme--"

"He wasn't drunk," argued Mrs. Korner, "he was just jovial."

"My dear!" Mr. Korner Corrected her, "he simply couldn't stand."

"He was much more amusing than some people who can," retorted Mrs.
Korner.

"It is possible, my dear Aimee," her husband pointed out to her, "for
a man to be amusing without being drunk; also for a man to be drunk
without--"

"Oh, a man is all the better," declared Mrs. Korner, "for letting
himself go occasionally."

"My dear--"

"You, Christopher, would be all the better for letting yourself
go--occasionally."

"I wish," said Mr. Korner, as he passed his empty cup, "you would not
say things you do not mean. Anyone hearing you--"

"If there's one thing makes me more angry than another," said Mrs.
Korner, "it is being told I say things that I do not mean."

"Why say them then?" suggested Mr. Korner.

"I don't. I do--I mean I do mean them," explained Mrs. Korner.

"You can hardly mean, my dear," persisted her husband, "that you really
think I should be all the better for getting drunk--even occasionally."

"I didn't say drunk; I said 'going it.'"

"But I do 'go it' in moderation," pleaded Mr. Korner, "'Moderation in
all things,' that is my motto."

"I know it," returned Mrs. Korner.

"A little of everything and nothing--" this time Mr. Korner interrupted
himself. "I fear," said Mr. Korner, rising, "we must postpone the
further discussion of this interesting topic. If you would not mind
stepping out with me into the passage, dear, there are one or two little
matters connected with the house--"

Host and hostess squeezed past the visitor and closed the door behind
them. The visitor continued eating.

"I do mean it," repeated Mrs. Korner, for the third time, reseating
herself a minute later at the table. "I would give anything--anything,"
reiterated the lady recklessly, "to see Christopher more like the
ordinary sort of man."

"But he has always been the sort--the sort of man he is," her bosom
friend reminded her.

"Oh, during the engagement, of course, one expects a man to be perfect.
I didn't think he was going to keep it up."

"He seems to me," said Miss Greene, "a dear, good fellow. You are one of
those people who never know when they are well off."

"I know he is a good fellow," agreed Mrs. Korner, "and I am very fond of
him. It is just because I am fond of him that I hate feeling ashamed of
him. I want him to be a manly man, to do the things that other men do."

"Do all the ordinary sort of men swear and get occasionally drunk?"

"Of course they do," asserted Mrs. Korner, in a tone of authority. "One
does not want a man to be a milksop."

"Have you ever seen a drunken man?" inquired the bosom friend, who was
nibbling sugar.

"Heaps," replied Mrs. Korner, who was sucking marmalade off her fingers.

By which Mrs. Korner meant that some half a dozen times in her life she
had visited the play, choosing by preference the lighter form of British
drama. The first time she witnessed the real thing, which happened just
precisely a month later, long after the conversation here recorded had
been forgotten by the parties most concerned, no one could have been
more utterly astonished than was Mrs. Korner.

How it came about Mr. Korner was never able to fully satisfy himself.
Mr. Korner was not the type that serves the purpose of the temperance
lecturer. His "first glass" he had drunk more years ago than he could
recollect, and since had tasted the varied contents of many others. But
never before had Mr. Korner exceeded, nor been tempted to exceed, the
limits of his favourite virtue, moderation.

"We had one bottle of claret between us," Mr. Korner would often recall
to his mind, "of which he drank the greater part. And then he brought
out the little green flask. He said it was made from pears--that in Peru
they kept it specially for Children's parties. Of course, that may have
been his joke; but in any case I cannot see how just one glass--I wonder
could I have taken more than one glass while he was talking." It was a
point that worried Mr. Korner.

The "he" who had talked, possibly, to such bad effect was a distant
cousin of Mr. Korner's, one Bill Damon, chief mate of the steamship
_La Fortuna_. Until their chance meeting that afternoon in Leadenhall
Street, they had not seen each other since they were boys together. The
_Fortuna_ was leaving St. Katherine's Docks early the next morning bound
for South America, and it might be years before they met again. As Mr.
Damon pointed out, Fate, by thus throwing them into each other's arms,
clearly intended they should have a cosy dinner together that very
evening in the captain's cabin of the _Fortuna_.

Mr. Korner, returning to the office, despatched to Ravenscourt Park an
express letter, announcing the strange news that he might not be home
that evening much before ten, and at half-past six, for the first time
since his marriage, directed his steps away from home and Mrs. Korner.

The two friends talked of many things. And later on they spoke of
sweethearts and of wives. Mate Damon's experiences had apparently been
wide and varied. They talked--or, rather, the mate talked, and Mr.
Korner listened--of the olive-tinted beauties of the Spanish Main, of
the dark-eyed passionate creoles, of the blond Junos of the Californian
valleys. The mate had theories concerning the care and management of
women: theories that, if the mate's word could be relied upon, had stood
the test of studied application. A new world opened out to Mr. Korner;
a world where lovely women worshipped with doglike devotion men who,
though loving them in return, knew how to be their masters. Mr. Korner,
warmed gradually from cold disapproval to bubbling appreciation,
sat entranced. Time alone set a limit to the recital of the mate's
adventures. At eleven o'clock the cook reminded them that the captain
and the pilot might be aboard at any moment. Mr. Korner, surprised at
the lateness of the hour, took a long and tender farewell of his cousin,
and found St. Katherine's Docks one of the most bewildering places out
of which he had ever tried to escape. Under a lamp-post in the Minories,
it suddenly occurred to Mr. Korner that he was an unappreciated man.
Mrs. Korner never said and did the sort of things by means of which
the beauties of the Southern Main endeavoured feebly to express their
consuming passion for gentlemen superior in no way--as far as he could
see--to Mr. Korner himself. Thinking over the sort of things Mrs. Korner
did say and did do, tears sprung into Mr. Korner's eyes. Noticing that
a policeman was eyeing him with curiosity, he dashed them aside and
hurried on. Pacing the platform of the Mansion House Station, where
it is always draughty, the thought of his wrongs returned to him with
renewed force. Why was there no trace of doglike devotion about Mrs.
Korner? The fault--so he bitterly told himself--the fault was his.
"A woman loves her master; it is her instinct," mused Mr. Korner to
himself. "Damme," thought Mr. Korner, "I don't believe that half her
time she knows I am her master."

"Go away," said Mr. Korner to a youth of pasty appearance who, with open
mouth, had stopped immediately in front of him.

"I'm fond o' listening," explained the pasty youth.

"Who's talking?" demanded Mr. Korner.

"You are," replied the pasty youth.

It is a long journey from the city to Ravenscourt Park, but the task of
planning out the future life of Mrs. Korner and himself kept Mr. Korner
wide awake and interested. When he got out of the train the thing
chiefly troubling him was the three-quarters of a mile of muddy road
stretching between him and his determination to make things clear to
Mrs. Korner then and there.

The sight of Acacia Villa, suggesting that everybody was in bed and
asleep, served to further irritate him. A dog-like wife would have been
sitting up to see if there was anything he wanted. Mr. Korner, acting
on the advice of his own brass plate, not only knocked but also rang. As
the door did not immediately fly open, he continued to knock and ring.
The window of the best bedroom on the first floor opened.

"Is that you?" said the voice of Mrs. Korner. There was, as it happened,
a distinct suggestion of passion in Mrs. Korner's voice, but not of the
passion Mr. Korner was wishful to inspire. It made him a little more
angry than he was before.

"Don't you talk to me with your head out of the window as if this were a
gallanty show. You come down and open the door," commanded Mr. Korner.

"Haven't you got your latchkey?" demanded Mrs. Korner.

For answer Mr. Korner attacked the door again. The window closed. The
next moment but six or seven, the door was opened with such suddenness
that Mr. Korner, still gripping the knocker, was borne inward in a
flying attitude. Mrs. Korner had descended the stairs ready with a
few remarks. She had not anticipated that Mr. Korner, usually slow of
speech, could be even readier.

"Where's my supper?" indignantly demanded Mr. Korner, still supported by
the knocker.

Mrs. Korner, too astonished for words, simply stared.

"Where's my supper?" repeated Mr. Korner, by this time worked up into
genuine astonishment that it was not ready for him. "What's everybody
mean, going off to bed, when the masterororous hasn't had his supper?"

"Is anything the matter, dear?" was heard the voice of Miss Greene,
speaking from the neighbourhood of the first landing.

"Come in, Christopher," pleaded Mrs. Korner, "please come in, and let me
shut the door."

Mrs. Korner was the type of young lady fond of domineering with a not
un-graceful hauteur over those accustomed to yield readily to her; it is
a type that is easily frightened.

"I wan' grilled kinneys-on-toast," explained Mr. Korner, exchanging the
knocker for the hat-stand, and wishing the next moment that he had not.
"Don' let's 'avareytalk about it. Unnerstan'? I dowan' any talk about
it."

"What on earth am I to do?" whispered the terrified Mrs. Korner to her
bosom friend, "there isn't a kidney in the house."

"I should poach him a couple of eggs," suggested the helpful bosom
friend; "put plenty of Cayenne pepper on them. Very likely he won't
remember."

Mr. Korner allowed himself to be persuaded into the dining-room, which
was also the breakfast parlour and the library. The two ladies, joined
by the hastily clad staff, whose chronic indignation seemed to have
vanished in face of the first excuse for it that Acacia Villa had
afforded her, made haste to light the kitchen fire.

"I should never have believed it," whispered the white-faced Mrs.
Korner, "never."

"Makes yer know there's a man about the 'ouse, don't it?" chirped the
delighted staff. Mrs. Korner, for answer, boxed the girl's ears; it
relieved her feelings to a slight extent.

The staff retained its equanimity, but the operations of Mrs. Korner and
her bosom friend were retarded rather than assisted by the voice of Mr.
Korner, heard every quarter of a minute, roaring out fresh directions.

"I dare not go in alone," said Mrs. Korner, when all things were in
order on the tray. So the bosom friend followed her, and the staff
brought up the rear.

"What's this?" frowned Mr. Korner. "I told you chops."

"I'm so sorry, dear," faltered Mrs. Korner, "but there weren't any in
the house."

"In a perfectly organizedouse, such as for the future I meanterave,"
continued Mr. Korner, helping himself to beer, "there should always be
chopanteak. Unnerstanme? chopanteak!"

"I'll try and remember, dear," said Mrs. Korner.

"Pearsterme," said Mr. Korner, between mouthfuls, "you're norrer sort of
housekeeper I want."

"I'll try to be, dear," pleaded Mrs. Korner.

"Where's your books?" Mr. Korner suddenly demanded.

"My books?" repeated Mrs. Korner, in astonishment.

Mr. Korner struck the corner of the table with his fist, which made most
things in the room, including Mrs. Korner, jump.

"Don't you defy me, my girl," said Mr. Korner. "You know whatermean,
your housekeepin' books."

They happened to be in the drawer of the chiffonier. Mrs. Korner
produced them, and passed them to her husband with a trembling hand. Mr.
Korner, opening one by hazard, bent over it with knitted brows.

"Pearsterme, my girl, you can't add," said Mr. Korner.

"I--I was always considered rather good at arithmetic, as a girl,"
stammered Mrs. Korner.

"What you mayabeen as a girl, and what--twenner-seven and nine?"
fiercely questioned Mr. Korner.

"Thirty-eight--seven," commenced to blunder the terrified Mrs. Korner.

"Know your nine tables or don't you?" thundered Mr. Korner.

"I used to," sobbed Mrs. Korner.

"Say it," commanded Mr. Korner.

"Nine times one are nine," sobbed the poor little woman, "nine times
two--"

"Goron," said Mr. Korner sternly.

She went on steadily, in a low monotone, broken by stifled sobs. The
dreary rhythm of the repetition may possibly have assisted. As she
mentioned fearfully that nine times eleven were ninety-nine, Miss Greene
pointed stealthily toward the table. Mrs. Korner, glancing up fearfully,
saw that the eyes of her lord and master were closed; heard the rising
snore that issued from his head, resting between the empty beer-jug and
the cruet stand.

"He will be all right," counselled Miss Greene. "You go to bed and lock
yourself in. Harriet and I will see to his breakfast in the morning. It
will be just as well for you to be out of the way."

And Mrs. Korner, only too thankful for some one to tell her what to do,
obeyed in all things.

Toward seven o'clock the sunlight streaming into the room caused Mr.
Korner first to blink, then yawn, then open half an eye.

"Greet the day with a smile," murmured Mr. Korner, sleepily, "and it
will--"

Mr. Korner sat up suddenly and looked about him. This was not bed.
The fragments of a jug and glass lay scattered round his feet. To the
tablecloth an overturned cruet-stand mingled with egg gave colour. A
tingling sensation about his head called for investigation. Mr. Korner
was forced to the conclusion that somebody had been trying to make a
salad of him--somebody with an exceptionally heavy hand for mustard. A
sound directed Mr. Korner's attention to the door.

The face of Miss Greene, portentously grave, was peeping through the
jar.

Mr. Korner rose. Miss Greene entered stealthily, and, closing the door,
stood with her back against it.

"I suppose you know what--what you've done?" suggested Miss Greene.

She spoke in a sepulchral tone; it chilled poor Mr. Korner to the bone.

"It is beginning to come back to me, but not--not very clearly,"
admitted Mr. Korner.

"You came home drunk--very drunk," Miss Greene informed him, "at two
o'clock in the morning. The noise you made must have awakened half the
street."

A groan escaped from his parched lips.

"You insisted upon Aimee cooking you a hot supper."

"I insisted!" Mr. Korner glanced down upon the table. "And--and she did
it!"

"You were very violent," explained Miss Greene; "we were terrified at
you, all three of us." Regarding the pathetic object in front of her,
Miss Greene found it difficult to recollect that a few hours before she
really had been frightened of it. Sense of duty alone restrained her
present inclination to laugh.

"While you sat there, eating your supper," continued Miss Greene
remorselessly, "you made her bring you her books."

Mr. Korner had passed the stage when anything could astonish him.

"You lectured her about her housekeeping." There was a twinkle in the
eye of Mrs. Korner's bosom friend. But lightning could have flashed
before Mr. Korner's eyes without his noticing it just then.

"You told her that she could not add, and you made her say her tables."

"I made her--" Mr. Korner spoke in the emotionless tones of one merely
desiring information. "I made Aimee say her tables?"

"Her nine times," nodded Miss Greene.

Mr. Korner sat down upon his chair and stared with stony eyes into the
future.

"What's to be done?" said Mr. Korner, "she'll never forgive me; I know
her. You are not chaffing me?" he cried with a momentary gleam of hope.
"I really did it?"

"You sat in that very chair where you are sitting now and ate poached
eggs, while she stood opposite to you and said her nine times table. At
the end of it, seeing you had gone to sleep yourself, I persuaded her
to go to bed. It was three o'clock, and we thought you would not mind."
Miss Greene drew up a chair, and, with her elbows on the table, looked
across at Mr. Korner. Decidedly there was a twinkle in the eyes of Mrs.
Korner's bosom friend.

"You'll never do it again," suggested Miss Greene.

"Do you think it possible," cried Mr. Korner, "that she may forgive me?"

"No, I don't," replied Miss Greene. At which Mr. Korner's face fell back
to zero. "I think the best way out will be for you to forgive her."

The idea did not even amuse him. Miss Greene glanced round to satisfy
herself that the door was still closed, and listened a moment to assure
herself of the silence.

"Don't you remember," Miss Greene took the extra precaution to whisper
it, "the talk we had at breakfast-time the first morning of my
visit, when Aimee said you would be all the better for 'going it'
occasionally?"

Yes, slowly it came back to Mr. Korner. But she only said "going it,"
Mr. Korner recollected to his dismay.

"Well, you've been 'going it,'" persisted Miss Greene. "Besides, she did
not mean 'going it.' She meant the real thing, only she did not like to
say the word. We talked about it after you had gone. She said she would
give anything to see you more like the ordinary man. And that is her
idea of the ordinary man."

Mr. Korner's sluggishness of comprehension irritated Miss Greene. She
leaned across the table and shook him. "Don't you understand? You have
done it on purpose to teach her a lesson. It is she who has got to ask
you to forgive her."

"You think--?"

"I think, if you manage it properly, it will be the best day's work
you have ever done. Get out of the house before she wakes. I shall say
nothing to her. Indeed, I shall not have the time; I must catch the
ten o'clock from Paddington. When you come home this evening, you talk
first; that's what you've got to do." And Mr. Korner, in his excitement,
kissed the bosom friend before he knew what he had done.

Mrs. Korner sat waiting for her husband that evening in the
drawing-room. She was dressed as for a journey, and about the corners
of her mouth were lines familiar to Christopher, the sight of which sent
his heart into his boots. Fortunately, he recovered himself in time to
greet her with a smile. It was not the smile he had been rehearsing half
the day, but that it was a smile of any sort astonished the words away
from Mrs. Korner's lips, and gave him the inestimable advantage of first
speech.

"Well," said Mr. Korner cheerily, "and how did you like it?"

For the moment Mrs. Korner feared her husband's new complaint had
already reached the chronic stage, but his still smiling face reassured
her--to that extent at all events.

"When would you like me to 'go it' again? Oh, come," continued Mr.
Korner in response to his wife's bewilderment, "you surely have not
forgotten the talk we had at breakfast-time--the first morning of
Mildred's visit. You hinted how much more attractive I should be for
occasionally 'letting myself go!'"

Mr. Korner, watching intently, perceived that upon Mrs. Korner
recollection was slowly forcing itself.

"I was unable to oblige you before," explained Mr. Korner, "having to
keep my head clear for business, and not knowing what the effect upon
one might be. Yesterday I did my best, and I hope you are pleased with
me. Though, if you could see your way to being content--just for the
present and until I get more used to it--with a similar performance not
oftener than once a fortnight, say, I should be grateful," added Mr.
Korner.

"You mean--" said Mrs. Korner, rising.

"I mean, my dear," said Mr. Korner, "that almost from the day of our
marriage you have made it clear that you regard me as a milksop. You
have got your notion of men from silly books and sillier plays, and your
trouble is that I am not like them. Well, I've shown you that, if you
insist upon it, I can be like them."

"But you weren't," argued Mrs. Korner, "not a bit like them."

"I did my best," repeated Mr. Korner; "we are not all made alike. That
was _my_ drunk."

"I didn't say 'drunk.'"

"But you meant it," interrupted Mr. Korner. "We were talking about
drunken men. The man in the play was drunk. You thought him amusing."

"He was amusing," persisted Mrs. Korner, now in tears. "I meant that
sort of drunk."

"His wife," Mr. Korner reminded her, "didn't find him amusing. In the
third act she was threatening to return home to her mother, which, if
I may judge from finding you here with all your clothes on, is also the
idea that has occurred to you."

"But you--you were so awful," whimpered Mrs. Korner.

"What did I do?" questioned Mr. Korner.

"You came hammering at the door--"

"Yes, yes, I remember that. I wanted my supper, and you poached me a
couple of eggs. What happened after that?"

The recollection of that crowning indignity lent to her voice the true
note of tragedy.

"You made me say my tables--my nine times!"

Mr. Korner looked at Mrs. Korner, and Mrs. Korner looked at Mr. Korner,
and for a while there was silence.

"Were you--were you really a little bit on," faltered Mrs. Korner, "or
only pretending?"

"Really," confessed Mr. Korner. "For the first time in my life. If you
are content, for the last time also."

"I am sorry," said Mrs. Korner, "I have been very silly. Please forgive
me."


NOVEL NOTES


To Big-Hearted, Big-Souled, Big-Bodied friend Conan Doyle




PROLOGUE


Years ago, when I was very small, we lived in a great house in a long,
straight, brown-coloured street, in the east end of London.  It was a
noisy, crowded street in the daytime; but a silent, lonesome street at
night, when the gas-lights, few and far between, partook of the character
of lighthouses rather than of illuminants, and the tramp, tramp of the
policeman on his long beat seemed to be ever drawing nearer, or fading
away, except for brief moments when the footsteps ceased, as he paused to
rattle a door or window, or to flash his lantern into some dark passage
leading down towards the river.

The house had many advantages, so my father would explain to friends who
expressed surprise at his choosing such a residence, and among these was
included in my own small morbid mind the circumstance that its back
windows commanded an uninterrupted view of an ancient and much-peopled
churchyard.  Often of a night would I steal from between the sheets, and
climbing upon the high oak chest that stood before my bedroom window, sit
peering down fearfully upon the aged gray tombstones far below, wondering
whether the shadows that crept among them might not be ghosts--soiled
ghosts that had lost their natural whiteness by long exposure to the
city's smoke, and had grown dingy, like the snow that sometimes lay
there.

I persuaded myself that they were ghosts, and came, at length, to have
quite a friendly feeling for them.  I wondered what they thought when
they saw the fading letters of their own names upon the stones, whether
they remembered themselves and wished they were alive again, or whether
they were happier as they were.  But that seemed a still sadder idea.

One night, as I sat there watching, I felt a hand upon my shoulder.  I
was not frightened, because it was a soft, gentle hand that I well knew,
so I merely laid my cheek against it.

"What's mumma's naughty boy doing out of bed?  Shall I beat him?"  And
the other hand was laid against my other cheek, and I could feel the soft
curls mingling with my own.

"Only looking at the ghosts, ma," I answered.  "There's such a lot of 'em
down there."  Then I added, musingly, "I wonder what it feels like to be
a ghost."

My mother said nothing, but took me up in her arms, and carried me back
to bed, and then, sitting down beside me, and holding my hand in
hers--there was not so very much difference in the size--began to sing in
that low, caressing voice of hers that always made me feel, for the time
being, that I wanted to be a good boy, a song she often used to sing to
me, and that I have never heard any one else sing since, and should not
care to.

But while she sang, something fell on my hand that caused me to sit up
and insist on examining her eyes.  She laughed; rather a strange, broken
little laugh, I thought, and said it was nothing, and told me to lie
still and go to sleep.  So I wriggled down again and shut my eyes tight,
but I could not understand what had made her cry.

Poor little mother, she had a notion, founded evidently upon inborn
belief rather than upon observation, that all children were angels, and
that, in consequence, an altogether exceptional demand existed for them
in a certain other place, where there are more openings for angels,
rendering their retention in this world difficult and undependable.  My
talk about ghosts must have made that foolishly fond heart ache with a
vague dread that night, and for many a night onward, I fear.

For some time after this I would often look up to find my mother's eyes
fixed upon me.  Especially closely did she watch me at feeding times, and
on these occasions, as the meal progressed, her face would acquire an
expression of satisfaction and relief.

Once, during dinner, I heard her whisper to my father (for children are
not quite so deaf as their elders think), "He seems to eat all right."

"Eat!" replied my father in the same penetrating undertone; "if he dies
of anything, it will be of eating."

So my little mother grew less troubled, and, as the days went by, saw
reason to think that my brother angels might consent to do without me for
yet a while longer; and I, putting away the child with his ghostly
fancies, became, in course of time, a grown-up person, and ceased to
believe in ghosts, together with many other things that, perhaps, it were
better for a man if he did believe in.

But the memory of that dingy graveyard, and of the shadows that dwelt
therein, came back to me very vividly the other day, for it seemed to me
as though I were a ghost myself, gliding through the silent streets where
once I had passed swiftly, full of life.

Diving into a long unopened drawer, I had, by chance, drawn forth a dusty
volume of manuscript, labelled upon its torn brown paper cover, NOVEL
NOTES.  The scent of dead days clung to its dogs'-eared pages; and, as it
lay open before me, my memory wandered back to the summer evenings--not
so very long ago, perhaps, if one but adds up the years, but a long, long
while ago if one measures Time by feeling--when four friends had sat
together making it, who would never sit together any more.  With each
crumpled leaf I turned, the uncomfortable conviction that I was only a
ghost, grew stronger.  The handwriting was my own, but the words were the
words of a stranger, so that as I read I wondered to myself, saying: did
I ever think this? did I really hope that? did I plan to do this? did I
resolve to be such? does life, then, look so to the eyes of a young man?
not knowing whether to smile or sigh.

The book was a compilation, half diary, half memoranda.  In it lay the
record of many musings, of many talks, and out of it--selecting what
seemed suitable, adding, altering, and arranging--I have shaped the
chapters that hereafter follow.

That I have a right to do so I have fully satisfied my own conscience, an
exceptionally fussy one.  Of the four joint authors, he whom I call
"MacShaughnassy" has laid aside his title to all things beyond six feet
of sun-scorched ground in the African veldt; while from him I have
designated "Brown" I have borrowed but little, and that little I may
fairly claim to have made my own by reason of the artistic merit with
which I have embellished it.  Indeed, in thus taking a few of his bald
ideas and shaping them into readable form, am I not doing him a kindness,
and thereby returning good for evil?  For has he not, slipping from the
high ambition of his youth, sunk ever downward step by step, until he has
become a critic, and, therefore, my natural enemy?  Does he not, in the
columns of a certain journal of large pretension but small circulation,
call me "'Arry" (without an "H," the satirical rogue), and is not his
contempt for the English-speaking people based chiefly upon the fact that
some of them read my books?  But in the days of Bloomsbury lodgings and
first-night pits we thought each other clever.

From "Jephson" I hold a letter, dated from a station deep in the heart of
the Queensland bush.  "_Do what you like with it, dear boy_," the letter
runs, "_so long as you keep me out of it.  Thanks for your complimentary
regrets, but I cannot share them.  I was never fitted for a literary
career.  Lucky for me, I found it out in time.  Some poor devils don't.
(I'm not getting at you, old man.  We read all your stuff, and like it
very much.  Time hangs a bit heavy, you know, here, in the winter, and we
are glad of almost anything.)  This life suits me better.  I love to feel
my horse between my thighs, and the sun upon my skin.  And there are the
youngsters growing up about us, and the hands to look after, and the
stock.  I daresay it seems a very commonplace unintellectual life to you,
but it satisfies my nature more than the writing of books could ever do.
Besides, there are too many authors as it is.  The world is so busy
reading and writing, it has no time left for thinking.  You'll tell me,
of course, that books are thought, but that is only the jargon of the
Press.  You come out here, old man, and sit as I do sometimes for days
and nights together alone with the dumb cattle on an upheaved island of
earth, as it were, jutting out into the deep sky, and you will know that
they are not.  What a man thinks--really thinks--goes down into him and
grows in silence.  What a man writes in books are the thoughts that he
wishes to be thought to think_."

Poor Jephson! he promised so well at one time.  But he always had strange
notions.




CHAPTER I


When, on returning home one evening, after a pipe party at my friend
Jephson's, I informed my wife that I was going to write a novel, she
expressed herself as pleased with the idea.  She said she had often
wondered I had never thought of doing so before.  "Look," she added, "how
silly all the novels are nowadays; I'm sure you could write one."
(Ethelbertha intended to be complimentary, I am convinced; but there is a
looseness about her mode of expression which, at times, renders her
meaning obscure.)

When, however, I told her that my friend Jephson was going to collaborate
with me, she remarked, "Oh," in a doubtful tone; and when I further went
on to explain to her that Selkirk Brown and Derrick MacShaughnassy were
also going to assist, she replied, "Oh," in a tone which contained no
trace of doubtfulness whatever, and from which it was clear that her
interest in the matter, as a practical scheme, had entirely evaporated.

I fancy that the fact of my three collaborators being all bachelors
diminished somewhat our chances of success, in Ethelbertha's mind.
Against bachelors, as a class, she entertains a strong prejudice.  A
man's not having sense enough to want to marry, or, having that, not
having wit enough to do it, argues to her thinking either weakness of
intellect or natural depravity, the former rendering its victim unable,
and the latter unfit, ever to become a really useful novelist.

I tried to make her understand the peculiar advantages our plan
possessed.

"You see," I explained, "in the usual commonplace novel we only get, as a
matter of fact, one person's ideas.  Now, in this novel, there will be
four clever men all working together.  The public will thus be enabled to
obtain the thoughts and opinions of the whole four of us, at the price
usually asked for merely one author's views.  If the British reader knows
his own business, he will order this book early, to avoid disappointment.
Such an opportunity may not occur again for years."

Ethelbertha agreed that this was probable.

"Besides," I continued, my enthusiasm waxing stronger the more I
reflected upon the matter, "this work is going to be a genuine bargain in
another way also.  We are not going to put our mere everyday ideas into
it.  We are going to crowd into this one novel all the wit and wisdom
that the whole four of us possess, if the book will hold it.  We shall
not write another novel after this one.  Indeed, we shall not be able to;
we shall have nothing more to write.  This work will partake of the
nature of an intellectual clearance sale.  We are going to put into this
novel simply all we know."

Ethelbertha shut her lips, and said something inside; and then remarked
aloud that she supposed it would be a one volume affair.

I felt hurt at the implied sneer.  I pointed out to her that there
already existed a numerous body of specially-trained men employed to do
nothing else but make disagreeable observations upon authors and their
works--a duty that, so far as I could judge, they seemed capable of
performing without any amateur assistance whatever.  And I hinted that,
by his own fireside, a literary man looked to breathe a more sympathetic
atmosphere.

Ethelbertha replied that of course I knew what she meant.  She said that
she was not thinking of me, and that Jephson was, no doubt, sensible
enough (Jephson is engaged), but she did not see the object of bringing
half the parish into it.  (Nobody suggested bringing "half the parish"
into it.  Ethelbertha will talk so wildly.)  To suppose that Brown and
MacShaughnassy could be of any use whatever, she considered absurd.  What
could a couple of raw bachelors know about life and human nature?  As
regarded MacShaughnassy in particular, she was of opinion that if we only
wanted out of him all that _he_ knew, and could keep him to the subject,
we ought to be able to get that into about a page.

My wife's present estimate of MacShaughnassy's knowledge is the result of
reaction.  The first time she ever saw him, she and he got on wonderfully
well together; and when I returned to the drawing-room, after seeing him
down to the gate, her first words were, "What a wonderful man that Mr.
MacShaughnassy is.  He seems to know so much about everything."

That describes MacShaughnassy exactly.  He does seem to know a tremendous
lot.  He is possessed of more information than any man I ever came
across.  Occasionally, it is correct information; but, speaking broadly,
it is remarkable for its marvellous unreliability.  Where he gets it from
is a secret that nobody has ever yet been able to fathom.

Ethelbertha was very young when we started housekeeping.  (Our first
butcher very nearly lost her custom, I remember, once and for ever by
calling her "Missie," and giving her a message to take back to her
mother.  She arrived home in tears.  She said that perhaps she wasn't fit
to be anybody's wife, but she did not see why she should be told so by
the tradespeople.)  She was naturally somewhat inexperienced in domestic
affairs, and, feeling this keenly, was grateful to any one who would give
her useful hints and advice.  When MacShaughnassy came along he seemed,
in her eyes, a sort of glorified Mrs. Beeton.  He knew everything wanted
to be known inside a house, from the scientific method of peeling a
potato to the cure of spasms in cats, and Ethelbertha would sit at his
feet, figuratively speaking, and gain enough information in one evening
to make the house unlivable in for a month.

He told her how fires ought to be laid.  He said that the way fires were
usually laid in this country was contrary to all the laws of nature, and
he showed her how the thing was done in Crim Tartary, or some such place,
where the science of laying fires is alone properly understood.  He
proved to her that an immense saving in time and labour, to say nothing
of coals, could be effected by the adoption of the Crim Tartary system;
and he taught it to her then and there, and she went straight downstairs
and explained it to the girl.

Amenda, our then "general," was an extremely stolid young person, and, in
some respects, a model servant.  She never argued.  She never seemed to
have any notions of her own whatever.  She accepted our ideas without
comment, and carried them out with such pedantic precision and such
evident absence of all feeling of responsibility concerning the result as
to surround our home legislation with quite a military atmosphere.

On the present occasion she stood quietly by while the MacShaughnassy
method of fire-laying was expounded to her.  When Ethelbertha had
finished she simply said:--

"You want me to lay the fires like that?"

"Yes, Amenda, we'll always have the fires laid like that in future, if
you please."

"All right, mum," replied Amenda, with perfect unconcern, and there the
matter ended, for that evening.

On coming downstairs the next morning we found the breakfast table spread
very nicely, but there was no breakfast.  We waited.  Ten minutes went
by--a quarter of an hour--twenty minutes.  Then Ethelbertha rang the
bell.  In response Amenda presented herself, calm and respectful.

"Do you know that the proper time for breakfast is half-past eight,
Amenda?"

"Yes'm."

"And do you know that it's now nearly nine?"

"Yes'm."

"Well, isn't breakfast ready?"

"No, mum."

"Will it _ever_ be ready?"

"Well, mum," replied Amenda, in a tone of genial frankness, "to tell you
the truth, I don't think it ever will."

"What's the reason?  Won't the fire light?"

"Oh yes, it lights all right."

"Well, then, why can't you cook the breakfast?"

"Because before you can turn yourself round it goes out again."

Amenda never volunteered statements.  She answered the question put to
her and then stopped dead.  I called downstairs to her on one occasion,
before I understood her peculiarities, to ask her if she knew the time.
She replied, "Yes, sir," and disappeared into the back kitchen.  At the
end of thirty seconds or so, I called down again.  "I asked you, Amenda,"
I said reproachfully, "to tell me the time about ten minutes ago."

"Oh, did you?" she called back pleasantly.  "I beg your pardon.  I
thought you asked me if I knew it--it's half-past four."

Ethelbertha inquired--to return to our fire--if she had tried lighting it
again.

"Oh yes, mum," answered the girl.  "I've tried four times."  Then she
added cheerfully, "I'll try again if you like, mum."

Amenda was the most willing servant we ever paid wages to.

Ethelbertha said she would step down and light the fire herself, and told
Amenda to follow her and watch how she did it.  I felt interested in the
experiment, and followed also.  Ethelbertha tucked up her frock and set
to work.  Amenda and I stood around and looked on.

At the end of half an hour Ethelbertha retired from the contest, hot,
dirty, and a trifle irritable.  The fireplace retained the same cold,
cynical expression with which it had greeted our entrance.

Then I tried.  I honestly tried my best.  I was eager and anxious to
succeed.  For one reason, I wanted my breakfast.  For another, I wanted
to be able to say that I had done this thing.  It seemed to me that for
any human being to light a fire, laid as that fire was laid, would be a
feat to be proud of.  To light a fire even under ordinary circumstances
is not too easy a task: to do so, handicapped by MacShaughnassy's rules,
would, I felt, be an achievement pleasant to look back upon.  My idea,
had I succeeded, would have been to go round the neighbourhood and brag
about it.

However, I did not succeed.  I lit various other things, including the
kitchen carpet and the cat, who would come sniffing about, but the
materials within the stove appeared to be fire-proof.

Ethelbertha and I sat down, one each side of our cheerless hearth, and
looked at one another, and thought of MacShaughnassy, until Amenda chimed
in on our despair with one of those practical suggestions of hers that
she occasionally threw out for us to accept or not, as we chose.

"Maybe," said she, "I'd better light it in the old way just for to-day."

"Do, Amenda," said Ethelbertha, rising.  And then she added, "I think
we'll always have them lighted in the old way, Amenda, if you please."

Another time he showed us how to make coffee--according to the Arabian
method.  Arabia must be a very untidy country if they made coffee often
over there.  He dirtied two saucepans, three jugs, one tablecloth, one
nutmeg-grater, one hearthrug, three cups, and himself.  This made coffee
for two--what would have been necessary in the case of a party, one dares
not think.

That we did not like the coffee when made, MacShaughnassy attributed to
our debased taste--the result of long indulgence in an inferior article.
He drank both cups himself, and afterwards went home in a cab.

He had an aunt in those days, I remember, a mysterious old lady, who
lived in some secluded retreat from where she wrought incalculable
mischief upon MacShaughnassy's friends.  What he did not know--the one or
two things that he was _not_ an authority upon--this aunt of his knew.
"No," he would say with engaging candour--"no, that is a thing I cannot
advise you about myself.  But," he would add, "I'll tell you what I'll
do.  I'll write to my aunt and ask her."  And a day or two afterwards he
would call again, bringing his aunt's advice with him; and, if you were
young and inexperienced, or a natural born fool, you might possibly
follow it.

She sent us a recipe on one occasion, through MacShaughnassy, for the
extermination of blackbeetles.  We occupied a very picturesque old house;
but, as with most picturesque old houses, its advantages were chiefly
external.  There were many holes and cracks and crevices within its
creaking framework.  Frogs, who had lost their way and taken the wrong
turning, would suddenly discover themselves in the middle of our dining-
room, apparently quite as much to their own surprise and annoyance as to
ours.  A numerous company of rats and mice, remarkably fond of physical
exercise, had fitted the place up as a gymnasium for themselves; and our
kitchen, after ten o'clock, was turned into a blackbeetles' club.  They
came up through the floor and out through the walls, and gambolled there
in their light-hearted, reckless way till daylight.

The rats and mice Amenda did not object to.  She said she liked to watch
them.  But against the blackbeetles she was prejudiced.  Therefore, when
my wife informed her that MacShaughnassy's aunt had given us an
infallible recipe for their annihilation, she rejoiced.

We purchased the materials, manufactured the mixture, and put it about.
The beetles came and ate it.  They seemed to like it.  They finished it
all up, and were evidently vexed that there was not more.  But they did
not die.

We told these facts to MacShaughnassy.  He smiled, a very grim smile, and
said in a low tone, full of meaning, "Let them eat!"

It appeared that this was one of those slow, insidious poisons.  It did
not kill the beetle off immediately, but it undermined his constitution.
Day by day he would sink and droop without being able to tell what was
the matter with himself, until one morning we should enter the kitchen to
find him lying cold and very still.

So we made more stuff and laid it round each night, and the blackbeetles
from all about the parish swarmed to it.  Each night they came in greater
quantities.  They fetched up all their friends and relations.  Strange
beetles--beetles from other families, with no claim on us whatever--got
to hear about the thing, and came in hordes, and tried to rob our
blackbeetles of it.  By the end of a week we had lured into our kitchen
every beetle that wasn't lame for miles round.

MacShaughnassy said it was a good thing.  We should clear the suburb at
one swoop.  The beetles had now been eating this poison steadily for ten
days, and he said that the end could not be far off.  I was glad to hear
it, because I was beginning to find this unlimited hospitality expensive.
It was a dear poison that we were giving them, and they were hearty
eaters.

We went downstairs to see how they were getting on.  MacShaughnassy
thought they seemed queer, and was of opinion that they were breaking up.
Speaking for myself, I can only say that a healthier-looking lot of
beetles I never wish to see.

One, it is true, did die that very evening.  He was detected in the act
of trying to make off with an unfairly large portion of the poison, and
three or four of the others set upon him savagely and killed him.

But he was the only one, so far as I could ever discover, to whom
MacShaughnassy's recipe proved fatal.  As for the others, they grew fat
and sleek upon it.  Some of them, indeed, began to acquire quite a
figure.  We lessened their numbers eventually by the help of some common
oil-shop stuff.  But such vast numbers, attracted by MacShaughnassy's
poison, had settled in the house, that to finally exterminate them now
was hopeless.

I have not heard of MacShaughnassy's aunt lately.  Possibly, one of
MacShaughnassy's bosom friends has found out her address and has gone
down and murdered her.  If so, I should like to thank him.

I tried a little while ago to cure MacShaughnassy of his fatal passion
for advice-giving, by repeating to him a very sad story that was told to
me by a gentleman I met in an American railway car.  I was travelling
from Buffalo to New York, and, during the day, it suddenly occurred to me
that I might make the journey more interesting by leaving the cars at
Albany and completing the distance by water.  But I did not know how the
boats ran, and I had no guide-book with me.  I glanced about for some one
to question.  A mild-looking, elderly gentleman sat by the next window
reading a book, the cover of which was familiar to me.  I deemed him to
be intelligent, and approached him.

"I beg your pardon for interrupting you," I said, sitting down opposite
to him, "but could you give me any information about the boats between
Albany and New York?"

"Well," he answered, looking up with a pleasant smile, "there are three
lines of boats altogether.  There is the Heggarty line, but they only go
as far as Catskill.  Then there are the Poughkeepsie boats, which go
every other day.  Or there is what we call the canal boat."

"Oh," I said.  "Well now, which would you advise me to--"

He jumped to his feet with a cry, and stood glaring down at me with a
gleam in his eyes which was positively murderous.

"You villain!" he hissed in low tones of concentrated fury, "so that's
your game, is it?  I'll give you something that you'll want advice
about," and he whipped out a six-chambered revolver.

I felt hurt.  I also felt that if the interview were prolonged I might
feel even more hurt.  So I left him without a word, and drifted over to
the other end of the car, where I took up a position between a stout lady
and the door.

I was still musing upon the incident, when, looking up, I observed my
elderly friend making towards me.  I rose and laid my hand upon the door-
knob.  He should not find me unprepared.  He smiled, reassuringly,
however, and held out his hand.

"I've been thinking," he said, "that maybe I was a little rude just now.
I should like, if you will let me, to explain.  I think, when you have
heard my story, you will understand, and forgive me."

There was that about him which made me trust him.  We found a quiet
corner in the smoking-car.  I had a "whiskey sour," and he prescribed for
himself a strange thing of his own invention.  Then we lighted our
cigars, and he talked.

"Thirty years ago," said he, "I was a young man with a healthy belief in
myself, and a desire to do good to others.  I did not imagine myself a
genius.  I did not even consider myself exceptionally brilliant or
talented.  But it did seem to me, and the more I noted the doings of my
fellow-men and women, the more assured did I become of it, that I
possessed plain, practical common sense to an unusual and remarkable
degree.  Conscious of this, I wrote a little book, which I entitled _How
to be Happy, Wealthy, and Wise_, and published it at my own expense.  I
did not seek for profit.  I merely wished to be useful.

"The book did not make the stir that I had anticipated.  Some two or
three hundred copies went off, and then the sale practically ceased.

"I confess that at first I was disappointed.  But after a while, I
reflected that, if people would not take my advice, it was more their
loss than mine, and I dismissed the matter from my mind.

"One morning, about a twelvemonth afterwards, I was sitting in my study,
when the servant entered to say that there was a man downstairs who
wanted very much to see me.

"I gave instructions that he should be sent up, and up accordingly he
came.

"He was a common man, but he had an open, intelligent countenance, and
his manner was most respectful.  I motioned him to be seated.  He
selected a chair, and sat down on the extreme edge of it.

"'I hope you'll pard'n this intrusion, sir,' he began, speaking
deliberately, and twirling his hat the while; 'but I've come more'n two
hundred miles to see you, sir.'

"I expressed myself as pleased, and he continued: 'They tell me, sir, as
you're the gentleman as wrote that little book, _How to be Happy,
Wealthy, and Wise_."

He enumerated the three items slowly, dwelling lovingly on each.  I
admitted the fact.

"'Ah, that's a wonderful book, sir,' he went on.  'I ain't one of them as
has got brains of their own--not to speak of--but I know enough to know
them as has; and when I read that little book, I says to myself, Josiah
Hackett (that's my name, sir), when you're in doubt don't you get addling
that thick head o' yours, as will only tell you all wrong; you go to the
gentleman as wrote that little book and ask him for his advice.  He is a
kind-hearted gentleman, as any one can tell, and he'll give it you; and
_when_ you've got it, you go straight ahead, full steam, and don't you
stop for nothing, 'cause he'll know what's best for you, same as he knows
what's best for everybody.  That's what I says, sir; and that's what I'm
here for.'

"He paused, and wiped his brow with a green cotton handkerchief.  I
prayed him to proceed.

"It appeared that the worthy fellow wanted to marry, but could not make
up his mind _whom_ he wanted to marry.  He had his eye--so he expressed
it--upon two young women, and they, he had reason to believe, regarded
him in return with more than usual favour.  His difficulty was to decide
which of the two--both of them excellent and deserving young
persons--would make him the best wife.  The one, Juliana, the only
daughter of a retired sea-captain, he described as a winsome lassie.  The
other, Hannah, was an older and altogether more womanly girl.  She was
the eldest of a large family.  Her father, he said, was a God-fearing
man, and was doing well in the timber trade.  He asked me which of them I
should advise him to marry.

"I was flattered.  What man in my position would not have been?  This
Josiah Hackett had come from afar to hear my wisdom.  He was willing--nay,
anxious--to entrust his whole life's happiness to my discretion.  That he
was wise in so doing, I entertained no doubt.  The choice of a wife I had
always held to be a matter needing a calm, unbiassed judgment, such as no
lover could possibly bring to bear upon the subject.  In such a case, I
should not have hesitated to offer advice to the wisest of men.  To this
poor, simple-minded fellow, I felt it would be cruel to refuse it.

"He handed me photographs of both the young persons under consideration.
I jotted down on the back of each such particulars as I deemed would
assist me in estimating their respective fitness for the vacancy in
question, and promised to carefully consider the problem, and write him
in a day or two.

"His gratitude was touching.  'Don't you trouble to write no letters,
sir,' he said; 'you just stick down "Julia" or "Hannah" on a bit of
paper, and put it in an envelope.  I shall know what it means, and that's
the one as I shall marry.'

"Then he gripped me by the hand and left me.

"I gave a good deal of thought to the selection of Josiah's wife.  I
wanted him to be happy.

"Juliana was certainly very pretty.  There was a lurking playfulness
about the corners of Juliana's mouth which conjured up the sound of
rippling laughter.  Had I acted on impulse, I should have clasped Juliana
in Josiah's arms.

"But, I reflected, more sterling qualities than mere playfulness and
prettiness are needed for a wife.  Hannah, though not so charming,
clearly possessed both energy and sense--qualities highly necessary to a
poor man's wife.  Hannah's father was a pious man, and was 'doing well'--a
thrifty, saving man, no doubt.  He would have instilled into her lessons
of economy and virtue; and, later on, she might possibly come in for a
little something.  She was the eldest of a large family.  She was sure to
have had to help her mother a good deal.  She would be experienced in
household matters, and would understand the bringing up of children.

"Julia's father, on the other hand, was a retired sea-captain.  Seafaring
folk are generally loose sort of fish.  He had probably been in the habit
of going about the house, using language and expressing views, the
hearing of which could not but have exercised an injurious effect upon
the formation of a growing girl's character.  Juliana was his only child.
Only children generally make bad men and women.  They are allowed to have
their own way too much.  The pretty daughter of a retired sea-captain
would be certain to be spoilt.

"Josiah, I had also to remember, was a man evidently of weak character.
He would need management.  Now, there was something about Hannah's eye
that eminently suggested management.

"At the end of two days my mind was made up.  I wrote 'Hannah' on a slip
of paper, and posted it.

"A fortnight afterwards I received a letter from Josiah.  He thanked me
for my advice, but added, incidentally, that he wished I could have made
it Julia.  However, he said, he felt sure I knew best, and by the time I
received the letter he and Hannah would be one.

"That letter worried me.  I began to wonder if, after all, I had chosen
the right girl.  Suppose Hannah was not all I thought her!  What a
terrible thing it would be for Josiah.  What data, sufficient to reason
upon, had I possessed?  How did I know that Hannah was not a lazy, ill-
tempered girl, a continual thorn in the side of her poor, overworked
mother, and a perpetual blister to her younger brothers and sisters?  How
did I know she had been well brought up?  Her father might be a precious
old fraud: most seemingly pious men are.  She may have learned from him
only hypocrisy.

"Then also, how did I know that Juliana's merry childishness would not
ripen into sweet, cheerful womanliness?  Her father, for all I knew to
the contrary, might be the model of what a retired sea-captain should be;
with possibly a snug little sum safely invested somewhere.  And Juliana
was his only child.  What reason had I for rejecting this fair young
creature's love for Josiah?

"I took her photo from my desk.  I seemed to detect a reproachful look in
the big eyes.  I saw before me the scene in the little far-away home when
the first tidings of Josiah's marriage fell like a cruel stone into the
hitherto placid waters of her life.  I saw her kneeling by her father's
chair, while the white-haired, bronzed old man gently stroked the golden
head, shaking with silent sobs against his breast.  My remorse was almost
more than I could bear.

"I put her aside and took up Hannah--my chosen one.  She seemed to be
regarding me with a smile of heartless triumph.  There began to take
possession of me a feeling of positive dislike to Hannah.

"I fought against the feeling.  I told myself it was prejudice.  But the
more I reasoned against it the stronger it became.  I could tell that, as
the days went by, it would grow from dislike to loathing, from loathing
to hate.  And this was the woman I had deliberately selected as a life
companion for Josiah!

"For weeks I knew no peace of mind.  Every letter that arrived I dreaded
to open, fearing it might be from Josiah.  At every knock I started up,
and looked about for a hiding-place.  Every time I came across the
heading, 'Domestic Tragedy,' in the newspapers, I broke into a cold
perspiration.  I expected to read that Josiah and Hannah had murdered
each other, and died cursing me.

"As the time went by, however, and I heard nothing, my fears began to
assuage, and my belief in my own intuitive good judgment to return.
Maybe, I had done a good thing for Josiah and Hannah, and they were
blessing me.  Three years passed peacefully away, and I was beginning to
forget the existence of the Hacketts.

"Then he came again.  I returned home from business one evening to find
him waiting for me in the hall.  The moment I saw him I knew that my
worst fears had fallen short of the truth.  I motioned him to follow me
to my study.  He did so, and seated himself in the identical chair on
which he had sat three years ago.  The change in him was remarkable; he
looked old and careworn.  His manner was that of resigned hopelessness.

"We remained for a while without speaking, he twirling his hat as at our
first interview, I making a show of arranging papers on my desk.  At
length, feeling that anything would be more bearable than this silence, I
turned to him.

"'Things have not been going well with you, I'm afraid, Josiah?' I said.

"'No, sir,' he replied quietly; 'I can't say as they have, altogether.
That Hannah of yours has turned out a bit of a teaser.'

"There was no touch of reproach in his tones.  He simply stated a
melancholy fact.

"'But she is a good wife to you in other ways,' I urged.  'She has her
faults, of course.  We all have.  But she is energetic.  Come now, you
will admit she's energetic.'

"I owed it to myself to find some good in Hannah, and this was the only
thing I could think of at that moment.

"'Oh yes, she's that,' he assented.  'A little too much so for our sized
house, I sometimes think.'

"'You see,' he went on, 'she's a bit cornery in her temper, Hannah is;
and then her mother's a bit trying, at times.'

"'Her mother!' I exclaimed, 'but what's _she_ got to do with you?'

"'Well, you see, sir,' he answered, 'she's living with us now--ever since
the old man went off.'

"'Hannah's father!  Is he dead, then?'

"'Well, not exactly, sir,' he replied.  'He ran off about a twelvemonth
ago with one of the young women who used to teach in the Sunday School,
and joined the Mormons.  It came as a great surprise to every one.'

"I groaned.  'And his business,' I inquired--'the timber business, who
carries that on?'

"'Oh, that!' answered Josiah.  'Oh, that had to be sold to pay his
debts--leastways, to go towards 'em.'

"I remarked what a terrible thing it was for his family.  I supposed the
home was broken up, and they were all scattered.

"'No, sir,' he replied simply, 'they ain't scattered much.  They're all
living with us.'

"'But there,' he continued, seeing the look upon my face; 'of course, all
this has nothing to do with you sir.  You've got troubles of your own, I
daresay, sir.  I didn't come here to worry you with mine.  That would be
a poor return for all your kindness to me.'

"'What has become of Julia?' I asked.  I did not feel I wanted to
question him any more about his own affairs.

"A smile broke the settled melancholy of his features.  'Ah,' he said, in
a more cheerful tone than he had hitherto employed, 'it does one good to
think about _her_, it does.  She's married to a friend of mine now, young
Sam Jessop.  I slips out and gives 'em a call now and then, when Hannah
ain't round.  Lord, it's like getting a glimpse of heaven to look into
their little home.  He often chaffs me about it, Sam does.  "Well, you
_was_ a sawny-headed chunk, Josiah, _you_ was," he often says to me.
We're old chums, you know, sir, Sam and me, so he don't mind joking a bit
like.'

"Then the smile died away, and he added with a sigh, 'Yes, I've often
thought since, sir, how jolly it would have been if you could have seen
your way to making it Juliana.'

"I felt I must get him back to Hannah at any cost.  I said, 'I suppose
you and your wife are still living in the old place?'

"'Yes,' he replied, 'if you can call it living.  It's a hard struggle
with so many of us.'

"He said he did not know how he should have managed if it had not been
for the help of Julia's father.  He said the captain had behaved more
like an angel than anything else he knew of.

"'I don't say as he's one of your clever sort, you know, sir,' he
explained.  'Not the man as one would go to for advice, like one would to
you, sir; but he's a good sort for all that.'

"'And that reminds me, sir,' he went on, 'of what I've come here about.
You'll think it very bold of me to ask, sir, but--'

"I interrupted him.  'Josiah,' I said, 'I admit that I am much to blame
for what has come upon you.  You asked me for my advice, and I gave it
you.  Which of us was the bigger idiot, we will not discuss.  The point
is that I did give it, and I am not a man to shirk my responsibilities.
What, in reason, you ask, and I can grant, I will give you.'

"He was overcome with gratitude.  'I knew it, sir,' he said.  'I knew you
would not refuse me.  I said so to Hannah.  I said, "I will go to that
gentleman and ask him.  I will go to him and ask him for his advice."'

"I said, 'His what?'

"'His advice,' repeated Josiah, apparently surprised at my tone, 'on a
little matter as I can't quite make up my mind about.'

"I thought at first he was trying to be sarcastic, but he wasn't.  That
man sat there, and wrestled with me for my advice as to whether he should
invest a thousand dollars which Julia's father had offered to lend him,
in the purchase of a laundry business or a bar.  He hadn't had enough of
it (my advice, I mean); he wanted it again, and he spun me reasons why I
should give it him.  The choice of a wife was a different thing
altogether, he argued.  Perhaps he ought _not_ to have asked me for my
opinion as to that.  But advice as to which of two trades a man would do
best to select, surely any business man could give.  He said he had just
been reading again my little book, _How to be Happy_, etc., and if the
gentleman who wrote that could not decide between the respective merits
of one particular laundry and one particular bar, both situate in the
same city, well, then, all he had got to say was that knowledge and
wisdom were clearly of no practical use in this world whatever.

"Well, it did seem a simple thing to advise a man about.  Surely as to a
matter of this kind, I, a professed business man, must be able to form a
sounder judgment than this poor pumpkin-headed lamb.  It would be
heartless to refuse to help him.  I promised to look into the matter, and
let him know what I thought.

"He rose and shook me by the hand.  He said he would not try to thank me;
words would only seem weak.  He dashed away a tear and went out.

"I brought an amount of thought to bear upon this thousand-dollar
investment sufficient to have floated a bank.  I did not mean to make
another Hannah job, if I could help it.  I studied the papers Josiah had
left with me, but did not attempt to form any opinion from them.  I went
down quietly to Josiah's city, and inspected both businesses on the spot.
I instituted secret but searching inquiries in the neighbourhood.  I
disguised myself as a simple-minded young man who had come into a little
money, and wormed myself into the confidence of the servants.  I
interviewed half the town upon the pretence that I was writing the
commercial history of New England, and should like some particulars of
their career, and I invariably ended my examination by asking them which
was their favourite bar, and where they got their washing done.  I stayed
a fortnight in the town.  Most of my spare time I spent at the bar.  In
my leisure moments I dirtied my clothes so that they might be washed at
the laundry.

"As the result of my investigations I discovered that, so far as the two
businesses themselves were concerned, there was not a pin to choose
between them.  It became merely a question of which particular trade
would best suit the Hacketts.

"I reflected.  The keeper of a bar was exposed to much temptation.  A
weak-minded man, mingling continually in the company of topers, might
possibly end by giving way to drink.  Now, Josiah was an exceptionally
weak-minded man.  It had also to be borne in mind that he had a shrewish
wife, and that her whole family had come to live with him.  Clearly, to
place Josiah in a position of easy access to unlimited liquor would be
madness.

"About a laundry, on the other hand, there was something soothing.  The
working of a laundry needed many hands.  Hannah's relatives might be used
up in a laundry, and made to earn their own living.  Hannah might expend
her energy in flat-ironing, and Josiah could turn the mangle.  The idea
conjured up quite a pleasant domestic picture.  I recommended the
laundry.

"On the following Monday, Josiah wrote to say that he had bought the
laundry.  On Tuesday I read in the _Commercial Intelligence_ that one of
the most remarkable features of the time was the marvellous rise taking
place all over New England in the value of hotel and bar property.  On
Thursday, in the list of failures, I came across no less than four
laundry proprietors; and the paper added, in explanation, that the
American washing industry, owing to the rapid growth of Chinese
competition, was practically on its last legs.  I went out and got drunk.

"My life became a curse to me.  All day long I thought of Josiah.  All
night I dreamed of him.  Suppose that, not content with being the cause
of his domestic misery, I had now deprived him of the means of earning a
livelihood, and had rendered useless the generosity of that good old sea-
captain.  I began to appear to myself as a malignant fiend, ever
following this simple but worthy man to work evil upon him.

"Time passed away, however; I heard nothing from or of him, and my burden
at last fell from me.

"Then at the end of about five years he came again.

"He came behind me as I was opening the door with my latch-key, and laid
an unsteady hand upon my arm.  It was a dark night, but a gas-lamp showed
me his face.  I recognised it in spite of the red blotches and the bleary
film that hid the eyes.  I caught him roughly by the arm, and hurried him
inside and up into my study.

"'Sit down,' I hissed, 'and tell me the worst first.'

"He was about to select his favourite chair.  I felt that if I saw him
and that particular chair in association for the third time, I should do
something terrible to both.  I snatched it away from him, and he sat down
heavily on the floor, and burst into tears.  I let him remain there, and,
thickly, between hiccoughs, he told his tale.

"The laundry had gone from bad to worse.  A new railway had come to the
town, altering its whole topography.  The business and residential
portion had gradually shifted northward.  The spot where the bar--the
particular one which I had rejected for the laundry--had formerly stood
was now the commercial centre of the city.  The man who had purchased it
in place of Josiah had sold out and made a fortune.  The southern area
(where the laundry was situate) was, it had been discovered, built upon a
swamp, and was in a highly unsanitary condition.  Careful housewives
naturally objected to sending their washing into such a neighbourhood.

"Other troubles had also come.  The baby--Josiah's pet, the one bright
thing in his life--had fallen into the copper and been boiled.  Hannah's
mother had been crushed in the mangle, and was now a helpless cripple,
who had to be waited on day and night.

"Under these accumulated misfortunes Josiah had sought consolation in
drink, and had become a hopeless sot.  He felt his degradation keenly,
and wept copiously.  He said he thought that in a cheerful place, such as
a bar, he might have been strong and brave; but that there was something
about the everlasting smell of damp clothes and suds, that seemed to sap
his manhood.

"I asked him what the captain had said to it all.  He burst into fresh
tears, and replied that the captain was no more.  That, he added,
reminded him of what he had come about.  The good-hearted old fellow had
bequeathed him five thousand dollars.  He wanted my advice as to how to
invest it.

"My first impulse was to kill him on the spot.  I wish now that I had.  I
restrained myself, however, and offered him the alternative of being
thrown from the window or of leaving by the door without another word.

"He answered that he was quite prepared to go by the window if I would
first tell him whether to put his money in the Terra del Fuego Nitrate
Company, Limited, or in the Union Pacific Bank.  Life had no further
interest for him.  All he cared for was to feel that this little nest-egg
was safely laid by for the benefit of his beloved ones after he was gone.

"He pressed me to tell him what I thought of nitrates.  I replied that I
declined to say anything whatever on the subject.  He assumed from my
answer that I did not think much of nitrates, and announced his intention
of investing the money, in consequence, in the Union Pacific Bank.

"I told him by all means to do so, if he liked.

"He paused, and seemed to be puzzling it out.  Then he smiled knowingly,
and said he thought he understood what I meant.  It was very kind of me.
He should put every dollar he possessed in the Terra del Fuego Nitrate
Company.

"He rose (with difficulty) to go.  I stopped him.  I knew, as certainly
as I knew the sun would rise the next morning, that whichever company I
advised him, or he persisted in thinking I had advised him (which was the
same thing), to invest in, would, sooner or later, come to smash.  My
grandmother had all her little fortune in the Terra del Fuego Nitrate
Company.  I could not see her brought to penury in her old age.  As for
Josiah, it could make no difference to him whatever.  He would lose his
money in any event.  I advised him to invest in Union Pacific Bank
Shares.  He went and did it.

"The Union Pacific Bank held out for eighteen months.  Then it began to
totter.  The financial world stood bewildered.  It had always been
reckoned one of the safest banks in the country.  People asked what could
be the cause.  I knew well enough, but I did not tell.

"The Bank made a gallant fight, but the hand of fate was upon it.  At the
end of another nine months the crash came.

"(Nitrates, it need hardly be said, had all this time been going up by
leaps and bounds.  My grandmother died worth a million dollars, and left
the whole of it to a charity.  Had she known how I had saved her from
ruin, she might have been more grateful.)

"A few days after the failure of the Bank, Josiah arrived on my doorstep;
and, this time, he brought his families with him.  There were sixteen of
them in all.

"What was I to do?  I had brought these people step by step to the verge
of starvation.  I had laid waste alike their happiness and their
prospects in life.  The least amends I could make was to see that at all
events they did not want for the necessities of existence.

"That was seventeen years ago.  I am still seeing that they do not want
for the necessities of existence; and my conscience is growing easier by
noticing that they seem contented with their lot.  There are twenty-two
of them now, and we have hopes of another in the spring.

"That is my story," he said.  "Perhaps you will now understand my sudden
emotion when you asked for my advice.  As a matter of fact, I do not give
advice now on any subject."

* * * * *

I told this tale to MacShaughnassy.  He agreed with me that it was
instructive, and said he should remember it.  He said he should remember
it so as to tell it to some fellows that he knew, to whom he thought the
lesson should prove useful.




CHAPTER II


I can't honestly say that we made much progress at our first meeting.  It
was Brown's fault.  He would begin by telling us a story about a dog.  It
was the old, old story of the dog who had been in the habit of going
every morning to a certain baker's shop with a penny in his mouth, in
exchange for which he always received a penny bun.  One day, the baker,
thinking he would not know the difference, tried to palm off upon the
poor animal a ha'penny bun, whereupon the dog walked straight outside and
fetched in a policeman.  Brown had heard this chestnut for the first time
that afternoon, and was full of it.  It is always a mystery to me where
Brown has been for the last hundred years.  He stops you in the street
with, "Oh, I must tell you!--such a capital story!"  And he thereupon
proceeds to relate to you, with much spirit and gusto, one of Noah's best
known jokes, or some story that Romulus must have originally told to
Remus.  One of these days somebody will tell him the history of Adam and
Eve, and he will think he has got hold of a new plot, and will work it up
into a novel.

He gives forth these hoary antiquities as personal reminiscences of his
own, or, at furthest, as episodes in the life of his second cousin.  There
are certain strange and moving catastrophes that would seem either to
have occurred to, or to have been witnessed by, nearly every one you
meet.  I never came across a man yet who had not seen some other man
jerked off the top of an omnibus into a mud-cart.  Half London must, at
one time or another, have been jerked off omnibuses into mud-carts, and
have been fished out at the end of a shovel.

Then there is the tale of the lady whose husband is taken suddenly ill
one night at an hotel.  She rushes downstairs, and prepares a stiff
mustard plaster to put on him, and runs up with it again.  In her
excitement, however, she charges into the wrong room, and, rolling down
the bedclothes, presses it lovingly upon the wrong man.  I have heard
that story so often that I am quite nervous about going to bed in an
hotel now.  Each man who has told it me has invariably slept in the room
next door to that of the victim, and has been awakened by the man's yell
as the plaster came down upon him.  That is how he (the story-teller)
came to know all about it.

Brown wanted us to believe that this prehistoric animal he had been
telling us about had belonged to his brother-in-law, and was hurt when
Jephson murmured, _sotto voce_, that that made the twenty-eighth man he
had met whose brother-in-law had owned that dog--to say nothing of the
hundred and seventeen who had owned it themselves.

We tried to get to work afterwards, but Brown had unsettled us for the
evening.  It is a wicked thing to start dog stories among a party of
average sinful men.  Let one man tell a dog story, and every other man in
the room feels he wants to tell a bigger one.

There is a story going--I cannot vouch for its truth, it was told me by a
judge--of a man who lay dying.  The pastor of the parish, a good and
pious man, came to sit with him, and, thinking to cheer him up, told him
an anecdote about a dog.  When the pastor had finished, the sick man sat
up, and said, "I know a better story than that.  I had a dog once, a big,
brown, lop-sided--"

The effort had proved too much for his strength.  He fell back upon the
pillows, and the doctor, stepping forward, saw that it was a question
only of minutes.

The good old pastor rose, and took the poor fellow's hand in his, and
pressed it.  "We shall meet again," he gently said.

The sick man turned towards him with a consoled and grateful look.

"I'm glad to hear you say that," he feebly murmured.  "Remind me about
that dog."

Then he passed peacefully away, with a sweet smile upon his pale lips.

Brown, who had had his dog story and was satisfied, wanted us to settle
our heroine; but the rest of us did not feel equal to settling anybody
just then.  We were thinking of all the true dog stories we had ever
heard, and wondering which was the one least likely to be generally
disbelieved.

MacShaughnassy, in particular, was growing every moment more restless and
moody.  Brown concluded a long discourse--to which nobody had listened--by
remarking with some pride, "What more can you want?  The plot has never
been used before, and the characters are entirely original!"

Then MacShaughnassy gave way.  "Talking of plots," he said, hitching his
chair a little nearer the table, "that puts me in mind.  Did I ever tell
you about that dog we had when we lived in Norwood?"

"It's not that one about the bull-dog, is it?" queried Jephson anxiously.

"Well, it was a bull-dog," admitted MacShaughnassy, "but I don't think
I've ever told it you before."

We knew, by experience, that to argue the matter would only prolong the
torture, so we let him go on.

"A great many burglaries had lately taken place in our neighbourhood," he
began, "and the pater came to the conclusion that it was time he laid
down a dog.  He thought a bull-dog would be the best for his purpose, and
he purchased the most savage and murderous-looking specimen that he could
find.

"My mother was alarmed when she saw the dog.  'Surely you're not going to
let that brute loose about the house!' she exclaimed.  'He'll kill
somebody.  I can see it in his face.'

"'I want him to kill somebody,' replied my father; 'I want him to kill
burglars.'

"'I don't like to hear you talk like that, Thomas,' answered the mater;
'it's not like you.  We've a right to protect our property, but we've no
right to take a fellow human creature's life.'

"'Our fellow human creatures will be all right--so long as they don't
come into our kitchen when they've no business there,' retorted my
father, somewhat testily.  'I'm going to fix up this dog in the scullery,
and if a burglar comes fooling around--well, that's _his_ affair.'

"The old folks quarrelled on and off for about a month over this dog.  The
dad thought the mater absurdly sentimental, and the mater thought the dad
unnecessarily vindictive.  Meanwhile the dog grew more ferocious-looking
every day.

"One night my mother woke my father up with: 'Thomas, there's a burglar
downstairs, I'm positive.  I distinctly heard the kitchen door open.'

"'Oh, well, the dog's got him by now, then,' murmured my father, who had
heard nothing, and was sleepy.

"'Thomas,' replied my mother severely, 'I'm not going to lie here while a
fellow-creature is being murdered by a savage beast.  If you won't go
down and save that man's life, I will.'

"'Oh, bother,' said my father, preparing to get up.  'You're always
fancying you hear noises.  I believe that's all you women come to bed
for--to sit up and listen for burglars.'  Just to satisfy her, however,
he pulled on his trousers and socks, and went down.

"Well, sure enough, my mother was right, this time.  There _was_ a
burglar in the house.  The pantry window stood open, and a light was
shining in the kitchen.  My father crept softly forward, and peeped
through the partly open door.  There sat the burglar, eating cold beef
and pickles, and there, beside him, on the floor, gazing up into his face
with a blood-curdling smile of affection, sat that idiot of a dog,
wagging his tail.

"My father was so taken aback that he forgot to keep silent.

"'Well, I'm--,' and he used a word that I should not care to repeat to
you fellows.

"The burglar, hearing him, made a dash, and got clear off by the window;
and the dog seemed vexed with my father for having driven him away.

"Next morning we took the dog back to the trainer from whom we had bought
it.

"'What do you think I wanted this dog for?' asked my father, trying to
speak calmly.

"'Well,' replied the trainer, 'you said you wanted a good house dog.'

"'Exactly so,' answered the dad.  'I didn't ask for a burglar's
companion, did I?  I didn't say I wanted a dog who'd chum on with a
burglar the first time he ever came to the house, and sit with him while
he had supper, in case he might feel lonesome, did I?'  And my father
recounted the incidents of the previous night.

"The man agreed that there was cause for complaint.  'I'll tell you what
it is, sir,' he said.  'It was my boy Jim as trained this 'ere dawg, and
I guess the young beggar's taught 'im more about tackling rats than
burglars.  You leave 'im with me for a week, sir; I'll put that all
right.'

"We did so, and at the end of the time the trainer brought him back
again.

"'You'll find 'im game enough now, sir,' said the man.  ''E ain't what I
call an intellectual dawg, but I think I've knocked the right idea into
'im.'

"My father thought he'd like to test the matter, so we hired a man for a
shilling to break in through the kitchen window while the trainer held
the dog by a chain.  The dog remained perfectly quiet until the man was
fairly inside.  Then he made one savage spring at him, and if the chain
had not been stout the fellow would have earned his shilling dearly.

"The dad was satisfied now that he could go to bed in peace; and the
mater's alarm for the safety of the local burglars was proportionately
increased.

"Months passed uneventfully by, and then another burglar sampled our
house.  This time there could be no doubt that the dog was doing
something for his living.  The din in the basement was terrific.  The
house shook with the concussion of falling bodies.

"My father snatched up his revolver and rushed downstairs, and I followed
him.  The kitchen was in confusion.  Tables and chairs were overturned,
and on the floor lay a man gurgling for help.  The dog was standing over
him, choking him.

"The pater held his revolver to the man's ear, while I, by superhuman
effort, dragged our preserver away, and chained him up to the sink, after
which I lit the gas.

"Then we perceived that the gentleman on the floor was a police
constable.

"'Good heavens!' exclaimed my father, dropping the revolver, 'however did
you come here?'

"''Ow did _I_ come 'ere?' retorted the man, sitting up and speaking in a
tone of bitter, but not unnatural, indignation.  'Why, in the course of
my dooty, that's 'ow _I_ come 'ere.  I see a burglar getting in through
the window, so I just follows and slips in after 'im.'

"'Did you catch him?' asked my father.

"'Did I catch 'im!' almost shrieked the man.  ''Ow could I catch 'im with
that blasted dog of yours 'olding me down by the throat, while 'e lights
'is pipe and walks out by the back door?'

"The dog was for sale the next day.  The mater, who had grown to like
him, because he let the baby pull his tail, wanted us to keep him.  The
mistake, she said, was not the animal's fault.  Two men broke into the
house almost at the same time.  The dog could not go for both of them.  He
did his best, and went for one.  That his selection should have fallen
upon the policeman instead of upon the burglar was unfortunate.  But
still it was a thing that might have happened to any dog.

"My father, however, had become prejudiced against the poor creature, and
that same week he inserted an advertisement in _The Field_, in which the
animal was recommended as an investment likely to prove useful to any
enterprising member of the criminal classes."

MacShaughnassy having had his innings, Jephson took a turn, and told us a
pathetic story about an unfortunate mongrel that was run over in the
Strand one day and its leg broken.  A medical student, who was passing at
the time, picked it up and carried it to the Charing Cross Hospital,
where its leg was set, and where it was kept and tended until it was
quite itself again, when it was sent home.

The poor thing had quite understood what was being done for it, and had
been the most grateful patient they had ever had in the hospital.  The
whole staff were quite sorry when it left.

One morning, a week or two later, the house-surgeon, looking out of the
window, saw the dog coming down the street.  When it came near he noticed
that it had a penny in its mouth.  A cat's-meat barrow was standing by
the kerb, and for a moment, as he passed it, the dog hesitated.

But his nobler nature asserted itself, and, walking straight up to the
hospital railings, and raising himself upon his hind legs, he dropped his
penny into the contribution box.

MacShaughnassy was much affected by this story.  He said it showed such a
beautiful trait in the dog's character.  The animal was a poor outcast,
vagrant thing, that had perhaps never possessed a penny before in all its
life, and might never have another.  He said that dog's penny seemed to
him to be a greater gift than the biggest cheque that the wealthiest
patron ever signed.

The other three were very eager now to get to work on the novel, but I
did not quite see the fairness of this.  I had one or two dog stories of
my own.

I knew a black-and-tan terrier years ago.  He lodged in the same house
with me.  He did not belong to any one.  He had discharged his owner (if,
indeed, he had ever permitted himself to possess one, which is doubtful,
having regard to his aggressively independent character), and was now
running himself entirely on his own account.  He appropriated the front
hall for his sleeping-apartment, and took his meals with the other
lodgers--whenever they happened to be having meals.

At five o'clock he would take an early morning snack with young Hollis,
an engineer's pupil, who had to get up at half-past four and make his own
coffee, so as to be down at the works by six.  At eight-thirty he would
breakfast in a more sensible fashion with Mr. Blair, on the first floor,
and on occasions would join Jack Gadbut, who was a late riser, in a
devilled kidney at eleven.

From then till about five, when I generally had a cup of tea and a chop,
he regularly disappeared.  Where he went and what he did between those
hours nobody ever knew.  Gadbut swore that twice he had met him coming
out of a stockbroker's office in Threadneedle Street, and, improbable
though the statement at first appeared, some colour of credibility began
to attach to it when we reflected upon the dog's inordinate passion for
acquiring and hoarding coppers.

This craving of his for wealth was really quite remarkable.  He was an
elderly dog, with a great sense of his own dignity; yet, on the promise
of a penny, I have seen him run round after his own tail until he didn't
know one end of himself from the other.

He used to teach himself tricks, and go from room to room in the evening,
performing them, and when he had completed his programme he would sit up
and beg.  All the fellows used to humour him.  He must have made pounds
in the course of the year.

Once, just outside our door, I saw him standing in a crowd, watching a
performing poodle attached to a hurdy-gurdy.  The poodle stood on his
head, and then, with his hind legs in the air, walked round on his front
paws.  The people laughed very much, and, when afterwards he came amongst
them with his wooden saucer in his mouth, they gave freely.

Our dog came in and immediately commenced to study.  In three days _he_
could stand on his head and walk round on his front legs, and the first
evening he did so he made sixpence.  It must have been terribly hard work
for him at his age, and subject to rheumatism as he was; but he would do
anything for money.  I believe he would have sold himself to the devil
for eightpence down.

He knew the value of money.  If you held out to him a penny in one hand
and a threepenny-bit in the other, he would snatch at the threepence, and
then break his heart because he could not get the penny in as well.  You
might safely have left him in the room with a leg of mutton, but it would
not have been wise to leave your purse about.

Now and then he spent a little, but not often.  He was desperately fond
of sponge-cakes, and occasionally, when he had had a good week, he would
indulge himself to the extent of one or two.  But he hated paying for
them, and always made a frantic and frequently successful effort to get
off with the cake and the penny also.  His plan of operations was simple.
He would walk into the shop with his penny in his mouth, well displayed,
and a sweet and lamblike expression in his eyes.  Taking his stand as
near to the cakes as he could get, and fixing his eyes affectionately
upon them, he would begin to whine, and the shopkeeper, thinking he was
dealing with an honest dog, would throw him one.

To get the cake he was obliged, of course, to drop the penny, and then
began a struggle between him and the shopkeeper for the possession of the
coin.  The man would try to pick it up.  The dog would put his foot upon
it, and growl savagely.  If he could finish the cake before the contest
was over, he would snap up the penny and bolt.  I have known him to come
home gorged with sponge-cakes, the original penny still in his mouth.

So notorious throughout the neighbourhood did this dishonest practice of
his become, that, after a time, the majority of the local tradespeople
refused to serve him at all.  Only the exceptionally quick and
able-bodied would attempt to do business with him.

Then he took his custom further afield, into districts where his
reputation had not yet penetrated.  And he would pick out shops kept by
nervous females or rheumatic old men.

They say that the love of money is the root of all evil.  It seemed to
have robbed him of every shred of principle.

It robbed him of his life in the end, and that came about in this way.  He
had been performing one evening in Gadbut's room, where a few of us were
sitting smoking and talking; and young Hollis, being in a generous mood,
had thrown him, as he thought, a sixpence.  The dog grabbed it, and
retired under the sofa.  This was an odd thing for him to do, and we
commented upon it.  Suddenly a thought occurred to Hollis, and he took
out his money and began counting it.

"By Jove," he exclaimed, "I've given that little beast
half-a-sovereign--here, Tiny!"

But Tiny only backed further underneath the sofa, and no mere verbal
invitation would induce him to stir.  So we adopted a more pressing plan,
and coaxed him out by the scruff of his neck.

He came, an inch at a time, growling viciously, and holding Hollis's half-
sovereign tight between his teeth.  We tried sweet reasonableness at
first.  We offered him a sixpence in exchange; he looked insulted, and
evidently considered the proposal as tantamount to our calling him a
fool.  We made it a shilling, then half-a-crown--he seemed only bored by
our persistence.

"I don't think you'll ever see this half-sovereign again, Hollis," said
Gadbut, laughing.  We all, with the exception of young Hollis, thought
the affair a very good joke.  He, on the contrary, seemed annoyed, and,
taking the dog from Gadbut, made an attempt to pull the coin out of its
mouth.

Tiny, true to his life-long principle of never parting if he could
possibly help it, held on like grim death, until, feeling that his little
earnings were slowly but surely going from him, he made one final
desperate snatch, and swallowed the money.  It stuck in his throat, and
he began to choke.

Then we became seriously alarmed for the dog.  He was an amusing chap,
and we did not want any accident to happen to him.  Hollis rushed into
his room and procured a long pair of pincers, and the rest of us held the
little miser while Hollis tried to relieve him of the cause of his
suffering.

But poor Tiny did not understand our intentions.  He still thought we
were seeking to rob him of his night's takings, and resisted vehemently.
His struggles fixed the coin firmer, and, in spite of our efforts, he
died--one more victim, among many, to the fierce fever for gold.

* * * * *

I dreamt a very curious dream about riches once, that made a great
impression upon me.  I thought that I and a friend--a very dear
friend--were living together in a strange old house.  I don't think
anybody else dwelt in the house but just we two.  One day, wandering
about this strange old rambling place, I discovered the hidden door of a
secret room, and in this room were many iron-bound chests, and when I
raised the heavy lids I saw that each chest was full of gold.

And, when I saw this, I stole out softly and closed the hidden door, and
drew the worn tapestries in front of it again, and crept back along the
dim corridor, looking behind me, fearfully.

And the friend that I had loved came towards me, and we walked together
with our hands clasped.  But I hated him.

And all day long I kept beside him, or followed him unseen, lest by
chance he should learn the secret of that hidden door; and at night I lay
awake watching him.

But one night I sleep, and, when I open my eyes, he is no longer near me.
I run swiftly up the narrow stairs and along the silent corridor.  The
tapestry is drawn aside, and the hidden door stands open, and in the room
beyond the friend that I loved is kneeling before an open chest, and the
glint of the gold is in my eyes.

His back is towards me, and I crawl forward inch by inch.  I have a knife
in my hand, with a strong, curved blade; and when I am near enough I kill
him as he kneels there.

His body falls against the door, and it shuts to with a clang, and I try
to open it, and cannot.  I beat my hands against its iron nails, and
scream, and the dead man grins at me.  The light streams in through the
chink beneath the massive door, and fades, and comes again, and fades
again, and I gnaw at the oaken lids of the iron-bound chests, for the
madness of hunger is climbing into my brain.

Then I awake, and find that I really am hungry, and remember that in
consequence of a headache I did not eat any dinner.  So I slip on a few
clothes, and go down to the kitchen on a foraging expedition.

It is said that dreams are momentary conglomerations of thought, centring
round the incident that awakens us, and, as with most scientific facts,
this is occasionally true.  There is one dream that, with slight
variations, is continually recurring to me.  Over and over again I dream
that I am suddenly called upon to act an important part in some piece at
the Lyceum.  That poor Mr. Irving should invariably be the victim seems
unfair, but really it is entirely his own fault.  It is he who persuades
and urges me.  I myself would much prefer to remain quietly in bed, and I
tell him so.  But he insists on my getting up at once and coming down to
the theatre.  I explain to him that I can't act a bit.  He seems to
consider this unimportant, and says, "Oh, that will be all right."  We
argue for a while, but he makes the matter quite a personal one, and to
oblige him and get him out of the bedroom I consent, though much against
my own judgment.  I generally dress the character in my nightshirt,
though on one occasion, for Banquo, I wore pyjamas, and I never remember
a single word of what I ought to say.  How I get through I do not know.
Irving comes up afterwards and congratulates me, but whether upon the
brilliancy of my performance, or upon my luck in getting off the stage
before a brickbat is thrown at me, I cannot say.

Whenever I dream this incident I invariably wake up to find that the
bedclothes are on the floor, and that I am shivering with cold; and it is
this shivering, I suppose, that causes me to dream I am wandering about
the Lyceum stage in nothing but my nightshirt.  But still I do not
understand why it should always be the Lyceum.

Another dream which I fancy I have dreamt more than once--or, if not, I
have dreamt that I dreamt it before, a thing one sometimes does--is one
in which I am walking down a very wide and very long road in the East End
of London.  It is a curious road to find there.  Omnibuses and trams pass
up and down, and it is crowded with stalls and barrows, beside which men
in greasy caps stand shouting; yet on each side it is bordered by a strip
of tropical forest.  The road, in fact, combines the advantages of Kew
and Whitechapel.

Some one is with me, but I cannot see him, and we walk through the
forest, pushing our way among the tangled vines that cling about our
feet, and every now and then, between the giant tree-trunks, we catch
glimpses of the noisy street.

At the end of this road there is a narrow turning, and when I come to it
I am afraid, though I do not know why I am afraid.  It leads to a house
that I once lived in when a child, and now there is some one waiting
there who has something to tell me.

I turn to run away.  A Blackwall 'bus is passing, and I try to overtake
it.  But the horses turn into skeletons and gallop away from me, and my
feet are like lead, and the thing that is with me, and that I cannot see,
seizes me by the arm and drags me back.

It forces me along, and into the house, and the door slams to behind us,
and the sound echoes through the lifeless rooms.  I recognise the rooms;
I laughed and cried in them long ago.  Nothing is changed.  The chairs
stand in their places, empty.  My mother's knitting lies upon the
hearthrug, where the kitten, I remember, dragged it, somewhere back in
the sixties.

I go up into my own little attic.  My cot stands in the corner, and my
bricks lie tumbled out upon the floor (I was always an untidy child).  An
old man enters--an old, bent, withered man--holding a lamp above his
head, and I look at his face, and it is my own face.  And another enters,
and he also is myself.  Then more and more, till the room is thronged
with faces, and the stair-way beyond, and all the silent house.  Some of
the faces are old and others young, and some are fair and smile at me,
and many are foul and leer at me.  And every face is my own face, but no
two of them are alike.

I do not know why the sight of myself should alarm me so, but I rush from
the house in terror, and the faces follow me; and I run faster and
faster, but I know that I shall never leave them behind me.

* * * * *

As a rule one is the hero of one's own dreams, but at times I have dreamt
a dream entirely in the third person--a dream with the incidents of which
I have had no connection whatever, except as an unseen and impotent
spectator.  One of these I have often thought about since, wondering if
it could not be worked up into a story.  But, perhaps, it would be too
painful a theme.

I dreamt I saw a woman's face among a throng.  It is an evil face, but
there is a strange beauty in it.  The flickering gleams thrown by street
lamps flash down upon it, showing the wonder of its evil fairness.  Then
the lights go out.

I see it next in a place that is very far away, and it is even more
beautiful than before, for the evil has gone out of it.  Another face is
looking down into it, a bright, pure face.  The faces meet and kiss, and,
as his lips touch hers, the blood mounts to her cheeks and brow.  I see
the two faces again.  But I cannot tell where they are or how long a time
has passed.  The man's face has grown a little older, but it is still
young and fair, and when the woman's eyes rest upon it there comes a
glory into her face so that it is like the face of an angel.  But at
times the woman is alone, and then I see the old evil look struggling
back.

Then I see clearer.  I see the room in which they live.  It is very poor.
An old-fashioned piano stands in one corner, and beside it is a table on
which lie scattered a tumbled mass of papers round an ink-stand.  An
empty chair waits before the table.  The woman sits by the open window.

From far below there rises the sound of a great city.  Its lights throw
up faint beams into the dark room.  The smell of its streets is in the
woman's nostrils.

Every now and again she looks towards the door and listens: then turns to
the open window.  And I notice that each time she looks towards the door
the evil in her face shrinks back; but each time she turns to the window
it grows more fierce and sullen.

Suddenly she starts up, and there is a terror in her eyes that frightens
me as I dream, and I see great beads of sweat upon her brow.  Then, very
slowly, her face changes, and I see again the evil creature of the night.
She wraps around her an old cloak, and creeps out.  I hear her footsteps
going down the stairs.  They grow fainter and fainter.  I hear a door
open.  The roar of the streets rushes up into the house, and the woman's
footsteps are swallowed up.

Time drifts onward through my dream.  Scenes change, take shape, and
fade; but all is vague and undefined, until, out of the dimness, there
fashions itself a long, deserted street.  The lights make glistening
circles on the wet pavement.  A figure, dressed in gaudy rags, slinks by,
keeping close against the wall.  Its back is towards me, and I do not see
its face.  Another figure glides from out the shadows.  I look upon its
face, and I see it is the face that the woman's eyes gazed up into and
worshipped long ago, when my dream was just begun.  But the fairness and
the purity are gone from it, and it is old and evil, as the woman's when
I looked upon her last.  The figure in the gaudy rags moves slowly on.
The second figure follows it, and overtakes it.  The two pause, and speak
to one another as they draw near.  The street is very dark where they
have met, and the figure in the gaudy rags keeps its face still turned
aside.  They walk together in silence, till they come to where a flaring
gas-lamp hangs before a tavern; and there the woman turns, and I see that
it is the woman of my dream.  And she and the man look into each other's
eyes once more.

* * * * *

In another dream that I remember, an angel (or a devil, I am not quite
sure which) has come to a man and told him that so long as he loves no
living human thing--so long as he never suffers himself to feel one touch
of tenderness towards wife or child, towards kith or kin, towards
stranger or towards friend, so long will he succeed and prosper in his
dealings--so long will all this world's affairs go well with him; and he
will grow each day richer and greater and more powerful.  But if ever he
let one kindly thought for living thing come into his heart, in that
moment all his plans and schemes will topple down about his ears; and
from that hour his name will be despised by men, and then forgotten.

And the man treasures up these words, for he is an ambitious man, and
wealth and fame and power are the sweetest things in all the world to
him.  A woman loves him and dies, thirsting for a loving look from him;
children's footsteps creep into his life and steal away again, old faces
fade and new ones come and go.

But never a kindly touch of his hand rests on any living thing; never a
kindly word comes from his lips; never a kindly thought springs from his
heart.  And in all his doings fortune favours him.

The years pass by, and at last there is left to him only one thing that
he need fear--a child's small, wistful face.  The child loves him, as the
woman, long ago, had loved him, and her eyes follow him with a hungry,
beseeching look.  But he sets his teeth, and turns away from her.

The little face grows thin, and one day they come to him where he sits
before the keyboard of his many enterprises, and tell him she is dying.
He comes and stands beside the bed, and the child's eyes open and turn
towards him; and, as he draws nearer, her little arms stretch out towards
him, pleading dumbly.  But the man's face never changes, and the little
arms fall feebly back upon the tumbled coverlet, and the wistful eyes
grow still, and a woman steps softly forward, and draws the lids down
over them; then the man goes back to his plans and schemes.

But in the night, when the great house is silent, he steals up to the
room where the child still lies, and pushes back the white, uneven sheet.

"Dead--dead," he mutters.  Then he takes the tiny corpse up in his arms,
and holds it tight against his breast, and kisses the cold lips, and the
cold cheeks, and the little, cold, stiff hands.

And at that point my story becomes impossible, for I dream that the dead
child lies always beneath the sheet in that quiet room, and that the
little face never changes, nor the limbs decay.

I puzzle about this for an instant, but soon forget to wonder; for when
the Dream Fairy tells us tales we are only as little children, sitting
round with open eyes, believing all, though marvelling that such things
should be.

Each night, when all else in the house sleeps, the door of that room
opens noiselessly, and the man enters and closes it behind him.  Each
night he draws away the white sheet, and takes the small dead body in his
arms; and through the dark hours he paces softly to and fro, holding it
close against his breast, kissing it and crooning to it, like a mother to
her sleeping baby.

When the first ray of dawn peeps into the room, he lays the dead child
back again, and smooths the sheet above her, and steals away.

And he succeeds and prospers in all things, and each day he grows richer
and greater and more powerful.




CHAPTER III


We had much trouble with our heroine.  Brown wanted her ugly.  Brown's
chief ambition in life is to be original, and his method of obtaining the
original is to take the unoriginal and turn it upside down.

If Brown were given a little planet of his own to do as he liked with, he
would call day, night, and summer, winter.  He would make all his men and
women walk on their heads and shake hands with their feet, his trees
would grow with their roots in the air, and the old cock would lay all
the eggs while the hens sat on the fence and crowed.  Then he would step
back and say, "See what an original world I have created, entirely my own
idea!"

There are many other people besides Brown whose notion of originality
would seem to be precisely similar.

I know a little girl, the descendant of a long line of politicians.  The
hereditary instinct is so strongly developed in her that she is almost
incapable of thinking for herself.  Instead, she copies in everything her
elder sister, who takes more after the mother.  If her sister has two
helpings of rice pudding for supper, then she has two helpings of rice
pudding.  If her sister isn't hungry and doesn't want any supper at all,
then she goes to bed without any supper.

This lack of character in the child troubles her mother, who is not an
admirer of the political virtues, and one evening, taking the little one
on her lap, she talked seriously to her.

"Do try to think for yourself," said she.  "Don't always do just what
Jessie does, that's silly.  Have an idea of your own now and then.  Be a
little original."

The child promised she'd try, and went to bed thoughtful.

Next morning, for breakfast, a dish of kippers and a dish of kidneys were
placed on the table, side by side.  Now the child loved kippers with an
affection that amounted almost to passion, while she loathed kidneys
worse than powders.  It was the one subject on which she did know her own
mind.

"A kidney or a kipper for you, Jessie?" asked the mother, addressing the
elder child first.

Jessie hesitated for a moment, while her sister sat regarding her in an
agony of suspense.

"Kipper, please, ma," Jessie answered at last, and the younger child
turned her head away to hide the tears.

"You'll have a kipper, of course, Trixy?" said the mother, who had
noticed nothing.

"No, thank you, ma," said the small heroine, stifling a sob, and speaking
in a dry, tremulous voice, "I'll have a kidney."

"But I thought you couldn't bear kidneys," exclaimed her mother,
surprised.

"No, ma, I don't like 'em much."

"And you're so fond of kippers!"

"Yes, ma."

"Well, then, why on earth don't you have one?"

"'Cos Jessie's going to have one, and you told me to be original," and
here the poor mite, reflecting upon the price her originality was going
to cost her, burst into tears.

* * * * *

The other three of us refused to sacrifice ourselves upon the altar of
Brown's originality.  We decided to be content with the customary
beautiful girl.

"Good or bad?" queried Brown.

"Bad," responded MacShaughnassy emphatically.  "What do you say,
Jephson?"

"Well," replied Jephson, taking the pipe from between his lips, and
speaking in that soothingly melancholy tone of voice that he never
varies, whether telling a joke about a wedding or an anecdote relating to
a funeral, "not altogether bad.  Bad, with good instincts, the good
instincts well under control."

"I wonder why it is," murmured MacShaughnassy reflectively, "that bad
people are so much more interesting than good."

"I don't think the reason is very difficult to find," answered Jephson.
"There's more uncertainty about them.  They keep you more on the alert.
It's like the difference between riding a well-broken, steady-going hack
and a lively young colt with ideas of his own.  The one is comfortable to
travel on, but the other provides you with more exercise.  If you start
off with a thoroughly good woman for your heroine you give your story
away in the first chapter.  Everybody knows precisely how she will behave
under every conceivable combination of circumstances in which you can
place her.  On every occasion she will do the same thing--that is the
right thing.

"With a bad heroine, on the other hand, you can never be quite sure what
is going to happen.  Out of the fifty or so courses open to her, she may
take the right one, or she may take one of the forty-nine wrong ones, and
you watch her with curiosity to see which it will be."

"But surely there are plenty of good heroines who are interesting," I
said.

"At intervals--when they do something wrong," answered Jephson.  "A
consistently irreproachable heroine is as irritating as Socrates must
have been to Xantippe, or as the model boy at school is to all the other
lads.  Take the stock heroine of the eighteenth-century romance.  She
never met her lover except for the purpose of telling him that she could
not be his, and she generally wept steadily throughout the interview.  She
never forgot to turn pale at the sight of blood, nor to faint in his arms
at the most inconvenient moment possible.  She was determined never to
marry without her father's consent, and was equally resolved never to
marry anybody but the one particular person she was convinced he would
never agree to her marrying.  She was an excellent young woman, and
nearly as uninteresting as a celebrity at home."

"Ah, but you're not talking about good women now," I observed.  "You're
talking about some silly person's idea of a good woman."

"I quite admit it," replied Jephson.  "Nor, indeed, am I prepared to say
what is a good woman.  I consider the subject too deep and too
complicated for any mere human being to give judgment upon.  But I _am_
talking of the women who conformed to the popular idea of maidenly
goodness in the age when these books were written.  You must remember
goodness is not a known quantity.  It varies with every age and every
locality, and it is, generally speaking, your 'silly persons' who are
responsible for its varying standards.  In Japan, a 'good' girl would be
a girl who would sell her honour in order to afford little luxuries to
her aged parents.  In certain hospitable islands of the torrid zone the
'good' wife goes to lengths that we should deem altogether unnecessary in
making her husband's guest feel himself at home.  In ancient Hebraic
days, Jael was accounted a good woman for murdering a sleeping man, and
Sarai stood in no danger of losing the respect of her little world when
she led Hagar unto Abraham.  In eighteenth-century England, supernatural
stupidity and dulness of a degree that must have been difficult to
attain, were held to be feminine virtues--indeed, they are so still--and
authors, who are always among the most servile followers of public
opinion, fashioned their puppets accordingly.  Nowadays 'slumming' is the
most applauded virtue, and so all our best heroines go slumming, and are
'good to the poor.'"

"How useful 'the poor' are," remarked MacShaughnassy, somewhat abruptly,
placing his feet on the mantelpiece, and tilting his chair back till it
stood at an angle that caused us to rivet our attention upon it with
hopeful interest.  "I don't think we scribbling fellows ever fully grasp
how much we owe to 'the poor.'  Where would our angelic heroines and our
noble-hearted heroes be if it were not for 'the poor'?  We want to show
that the dear girl is as good as she is beautiful.  What do we do?  We
put a basket full of chickens and bottles of wine on her arm, a fetching
little sun-bonnet on her head, and send her round among the poor.  How do
we prove that our apparent scamp of a hero is really a noble young man at
heart?  Why, by explaining that he is good to the poor.

"They are as useful in real life as they are in Bookland.  What is it
consoles the tradesman when the actor, earning eighty pounds a week,
cannot pay his debts?  Why, reading in the theatrical newspapers gushing
accounts of the dear fellow's invariable generosity to the poor.  What is
it stills the small but irritating voice of conscience when we have
successfully accomplished some extra big feat of swindling?  Why, the
noble resolve to give ten per cent of the net profits to the poor.

"What does a man do when he finds himself growing old, and feels that it
is time for him to think seriously about securing his position in the
next world?  Why, he becomes suddenly good to the poor.  If the poor were
not there for him to be good to, what could he do?  He would be unable to
reform at all.  It's a great comfort to think that the poor will always
be with us.  They are the ladder by which we climb into heaven."

There was silence for a few moments, while MacShaughnassy puffed away
vigorously, and almost savagely, at his pipe, and then Brown said: "I can
tell you rather a quaint incident, bearing very aptly on the subject.  A
cousin of mine was a land-agent in a small country town, and among the
houses on his list was a fine old mansion that had remained vacant for
many years.  He had despaired of ever selling it, when one day an elderly
lady, very richly dressed, drove up to the office and made inquiries
about it.  She said she had come across it accidentally while travelling
through that part of the country the previous autumn, and had been much
struck by its beauty and picturesqueness.  She added she was looking out
for some quiet spot where she could settle down and peacefully pass the
remainder of her days, and thought this place might possibly prove to be
the very thing for her.

"My cousin, delighted with the chance of a purchaser, at once drove her
across to the estate, which was about eight miles distant from the town,
and they went over it together.  My cousin waxed eloquent upon the
subject of its advantages.  He dwelt upon its quiet and seclusion, its
proximity--but not too close proximity--to the church, its convenient
distance from the village.

"Everything pointed to a satisfactory conclusion of the business.  The
lady was charmed with the situation and the surroundings, and delighted
with the house and grounds.  She considered the price moderate.

"'And now, Mr. Brown,' said she, as they stood by the lodge gate, 'tell
me, what class of poor have you got round about?'

"'Poor?' answered my cousin; 'there are no poor.'

"'No poor!' exclaimed the lady.  'No poor people in the village, or
anywhere near?'

"'You won't find a poor person within five miles of the estate,' he
replied proudly.  'You see, my dear madam, this is a thinly populated and
exceedingly prosperous county: this particular district especially so.
There is not a family in it that is not, comparatively speaking, well-to-
do.'

"'I'm sorry to hear that,' said the lady, in a tone of disappointment.
'The place would have suited me so admirably but for that.'

"'But surely, madam,' cried my cousin, to whom a demand for poor persons
was an entirely new idea, 'you don't mean to say that you _want_ poor
people!  Why, we've always considered it one of the chief attractions of
the property--nothing to shock the eye or wound the susceptibilities of
the most tender-hearted occupant.'

"'My dear Mr. Brown,' replied the lady, 'I will be perfectly frank with
you.  I am becoming an old woman, and my past life has not, perhaps, been
altogether too well spent.  It is my desire to atone for the--er--follies
of my youth by an old age of well-doing, and to that end it is essential
that I should be surrounded by a certain number of deserving poor.  I had
hoped to find in this charming neighbourhood of yours the customary
proportion of poverty and misery, in which case I should have taken the
house without hesitation.  As it is, I must seek elsewhere.'

"My cousin was perplexed, and sad.  'There are plenty of poor people in
the town,' he said, 'many of them most interesting cases, and you could
have the entire care of them all.  There'd be no opposition whatever, I'm
positive.'

"'Thank you,' replied the lady, 'but I really couldn't go as far as the
town.  They must be within easy driving distance or they are no good.'

"My cousin cudgelled his brains again.  He did not intend to let a
purchaser slip through his fingers if he could help it.  At last a bright
thought flashed into his mind.  'I'll tell you what we could do,' he
said.  'There's a piece of waste land the other end of the village that
we've never been able to do much with, in consequence of its being so
swampy.  If you liked, we could run you up a dozen cottages on that,
cheap--it would be all the better their being a bit ramshackle and
unhealthy--and get some poor people for you, and put into them.'

"The lady reflected upon the idea, and it struck her as a good one.

"'You see,' continued my cousin, pushing his advantage, 'by adopting this
method you would be able to select your own poor.  We would get you some
nice, clean, grateful poor, and make the thing pleasant for you.'

"It ended in the lady's accepting my cousin's offer, and giving him a
list of the poor people she would like to have.  She selected one
bedridden old woman (Church of England preferred); one paralytic old man;
one blind girl who would want to be read aloud to; one poor atheist,
willing to be converted; two cripples; one drunken father who would
consent to be talked to seriously; one disagreeable old fellow, needing
much patience; two large families, and four ordinary assorted couples.

"My cousin experienced some difficulty in securing the drunken father.
Most of the drunken fathers he interviewed upon the subject had a rooted
objection to being talked to at all.  After a long search, however, he
discovered a mild little man, who, upon the lady's requirements and
charitable intentions being explained to him, undertook to qualify
himself for the vacancy by getting intoxicated at least once a week.  He
said he could not promise more than once a week at first, he
unfortunately possessing a strong natural distaste for all alcoholic
liquors, which it would be necessary for him to overcome.  As he got more
used to them, he would do better.

"Over the disagreeable old man, my cousin also had trouble.  It was hard
to hit the right degree of disagreeableness.  Some of them were so very
unpleasant.  He eventually made choice of a decayed cab-driver with
advanced Radical opinions, who insisted on a three years' contract.

"The plan worked exceedingly well, and does so, my cousin tells me, to
this day.  The drunken father has completely conquered his dislike to
strong drink.  He has not been sober now for over three weeks, and has
lately taken to knocking his wife about.  The disagreeable fellow is most
conscientious in fulfilling his part of the bargain, and makes himself a
perfect curse to the whole village.  The others have dropped into their
respective positions and are working well.  The lady visits them all
every afternoon, and is most charitable.  They call her Lady Bountiful,
and everybody blesses her."

Brown rose as he finished speaking, and mixed himself a glass of whisky
and water with the self-satisfied air of a benevolent man about to reward
somebody for having done a good deed; and MacShaughnassy lifted up his
voice and talked.

"I know a story bearing on the subject, too," he said.  "It happened in a
tiny Yorkshire village--a peaceful, respectable spot, where folks found
life a bit slow.  One day, however, a new curate arrived, and that woke
things up considerably.  He was a nice young man, and, having a large
private income of his own, was altogether a most desirable catch.  Every
unmarried female in the place went for him with one accord.

"But ordinary feminine blandishments appeared to have no effect upon him.
He was a seriously inclined young man, and once, in the course of a
casual conversation upon the subject of love, he was heard to say that he
himself should never be attracted by mere beauty and charm.  What would
appeal to him, he said, would be a woman's goodness--her charity and
kindliness to the poor.

"Well, that set the petticoats all thinking.  They saw that in studying
fashion plates and practising expressions they had been going upon the
wrong tack.  The card for them to play was 'the poor.'  But here a
serious difficulty arose.  There was only one poor person in the whole
parish, a cantankerous old fellow who lived in a tumble-down cottage at
the back of the church, and fifteen able-bodied women (eleven girls,
three old maids, and a widow) wanted to be 'good' to him.

"Miss Simmonds, one of the old maids, got hold of him first, and
commenced feeding him twice a day with beef-tea; and then the widow
boarded him with port wine and oysters.  Later in the week others of the
party drifted in upon him, and wanted to cram him with jelly and
chickens.

"The old man couldn't understand it.  He was accustomed to a small sack
of coals now and then, accompanied by a long lecture on his sins, and an
occasional bottle of dandelion tea.  This sudden spurt on the part of
Providence puzzled him.  He said nothing, however, but continued to take
in as much of everything as he could hold.  At the end of a month he was
too fat to get through his own back door.

"The competition among the women-folk grew keener every day, and at last
the old man began to give himself airs, and to make the place hard for
them.  He made them clean his cottage out, and cook his meals, and when
he was tired of having them about the house, he set them to work in the
garden.

"They grumbled a good deal, and there was a talk at one time of a sort of
a strike, but what could they do?  He was the only pauper for miles
round, and knew it.  He had the monopoly, and, like all monopolises, he
abused his position.

"He made them run errands.  He sent them out to buy his 'baccy,' at their
own expense.  On one occasion he sent Miss Simmonds out with a jug to get
his supper beer.  She indignantly refused at first, but he told her that
if she gave him any of her stuck-up airs out she would go, and never come
into his house again.  If she wouldn't do it there were plenty of others
who would.  She knew it and went.

"They had been in the habit of reading to him--good books with an
elevating tendency.  But now he put his foot down upon that sort of
thing.  He said he didn't want Sunday-school rubbish at his time of life.
What he liked was something spicy.  And he made them read him French
novels and seafaring tales, containing realistic language.  And they
didn't have to skip anything either, or he'd know the reason why.

"He said he liked music, so a few of them clubbed together and bought him
a harmonium.  Their idea was that they would sing hymns and play high-
class melodies, but it wasn't his.  His idea was--'Keeping up the old
girl's birthday' and 'She winked the other eye,' with chorus and skirt
dance, and that's what they sang.

"To what lengths his tyranny would have gone it is difficult to say, had
not an event happened that brought his power to a premature collapse.
This was the curate's sudden and somewhat unexpected marriage with a very
beautiful burlesque actress who had lately been performing in a
neighbouring town.  He gave up the Church on his engagement, in
consequence of his _fiancee's_ objection to becoming a minister's wife.
She said she could never 'tumble to' the district visiting.

"With the curate's wedding the old pauper's brief career of prosperity
ended.  They packed him off to the workhouse after that, and made him
break stones."

* * * * *

At the end of the telling of his tale, MacShaughnassy lifted his feet off
the mantelpiece, and set to work to wake up his legs; and Jephson took a
hand, and began to spin us stories.

But none of us felt inclined to laugh at Jephson's stories, for they
dealt not with the goodness of the rich to the poor, which is a virtue
yielding quick and highly satisfactory returns, but with the goodness of
the poor to the poor, a somewhat less remunerative investment and a
different matter altogether.

For the poor themselves--I do not mean the noisy professional poor, but
the silent, fighting poor--one is bound to feel a genuine respect.  One
honours them, as one honours a wounded soldier.

In the perpetual warfare between Humanity and Nature, the poor stand
always in the van.  They die in the ditches, and we march over their
bodies with the flags flying and the drums playing.

One cannot think of them without an uncomfortable feeling that one ought
to be a little bit ashamed of living in security and ease, leaving them
to take all the hard blows.  It is as if one were always skulking in the
tents, while one's comrades were fighting and dying in the front.

They bleed and fall in silence there.  Nature with her terrible club,
"Survival of the Fittest"; and Civilisation with her cruel sword, "Supply
and Demand," beat them back, and they give way inch by inch, fighting to
the end.  But it is in a dumb, sullen way, that is not sufficiently
picturesque to be heroic.

I remember seeing an old bull-dog, one Saturday night, lying on the
doorstep of a small shop in the New Cut.  He lay there very quiet, and
seemed a bit sleepy; and, as he looked savage, nobody disturbed him.
People stepped in and out over him, and occasionally in doing so, one
would accidentally kick him, and then he would breathe a little harder
and quicker.

At last a passer-by, feeling something wet beneath his feet, looked down,
and found that he was standing in a pool of blood, and, looking to see
where it came from, found that it flowed in a thick, dark stream from the
step on which the dog was lying.

Then he stooped down and examined the dog, and the dog opened its eyes
sleepily and looked at him, gave a grin which may have implied pleasure,
or may have implied irritation at being disturbed, and died.

A crowd collected, and they turned the dead body of the dog over on its
side, and saw a fearful gash in the groin, out of which oozed blood, and
other things.  The proprietor of the shop said the animal had been there
for over an hour.

I have known the poor to die in that same grim, silent way--not the poor
that you, my delicately-gloved Lady Bountiful and my very excellent Sir
Simon DoGood, know, or that you would care to know; not the poor who
march in processions with banners and collection-boxes; not the poor that
clamour round your soup kitchens and sing hymns at your tea meetings; but
the poor that you don't know are poor until the tale is told at the
coroner's inquest--the silent, proud poor who wake each morning to
wrestle with Death till night-time, and who, when at last he overcomes
them, and, forcing them down on the rotting floor of the dim attic,
strangles them, still die with their teeth tight shut.

There was a boy I came to know when I was living in the East End of
London.  He was not a nice boy by any means.  He was not quite so clean
as are the good boys in the religious magazines, and I have known a
sailor to stop him in the street and reprove him for using indelicate
language.

He and his mother and the baby, a sickly infant of about five months old,
lived in a cellar down a turning off Three Colt Street.  I am not quite
sure what had become of the father.  I rather think he had been
"converted," and had gone off round the country on a preaching tour.  The
lad earned six shillings a week as an errand-boy; and the mother stitched
trousers, and on days when she was feeling strong and energetic would
often make as much as tenpence, or even a shilling.  Unfortunately, there
were days when the four bare walls would chase each other round and
round, and the candle seem a faint speck of light, a very long way off;
and the frequency of these caused the family income for the week to
occasionally fall somewhat low.

One night the walls danced round quicker and quicker till they danced
away altogether, and the candle shot up through the ceiling and became a
star and the woman knew that it was time to put away her sewing.

"Jim," she said: she spoke very low, and the boy had to bend over her to
hear, "if you poke about in the middle of the mattress you'll find a
couple of pounds.  I saved them up a long while ago.  That will pay for
burying me.  And, Jim, you'll take care of the kid.  You won't let it go
to the parish."

Jim promised.

"Say 'S'welp me Gawd,' Jim."

"S'welp me Gawd, mother."

Then the woman, having arranged her worldly affairs, lay back ready, and
Death struck.

Jim kept his oath.  He found the money, and buried his mother; and then,
putting his household goods on a barrow, moved into cheaper
apartments--half an old shed, for which he paid two shillings a week.

For eighteen months he and the baby lived there.  He left the child at a
nursery every morning, fetching it away each evening on his return from
work, and for that he paid fourpence a day, which included a limited
supply of milk.  How he managed to keep himself and more than half keep
the child on the remaining two shillings I cannot say.  I only know that
he did it, and that not a soul ever helped him or knew that there was
help wanted.  He nursed the child, often pacing the room with it for
hours, washed it, occasionally, and took it out for an airing every
Sunday.

Notwithstanding all which care, the little beggar, at the end of the time
above mentioned, "pegged out," to use Jimmy's own words.

The coroner was very severe on Jim.  "If you had taken proper steps," he
said, "this child's life might have been preserved."  (He seemed to think
it would have been better if the child's life had been preserved.
Coroners have quaint ideas!)  "Why didn't you apply to the relieving
officer?"

"'Cos I didn't want no relief," replied Jim sullenly.  "I promised my
mother it should never go on the parish, and it didn't."

The incident occurred, very luckily, during the dead season, and the
evening papers took the case up, and made rather a good thing out of it.
Jim became quite a hero, I remember.  Kind-hearted people wrote, urging
that somebody--the ground landlord, or the Government, or some one of
that sort--ought to do something for him.  And everybody abused the local
vestry.  I really think some benefit to Jim might have come out of it all
if only the excitement had lasted a little longer.  Unfortunately,
however, just at its height a spicy divorce case cropped up, and Jim was
crowded out and forgotten.

I told the boys this story of mine, after Jephson had done telling his,
and, when I had finished, we found it was nearly one o'clock.  So, of
course, it was too late to do any more work to the novel that evening.




CHAPTER IV


We held our next business meeting on my houseboat.  Brown was opposed at
first to my going down to this houseboat at all.  He thought that none of
us should leave town while the novel was still on hand.

MacShaughnassy, on the contrary, was of opinion that we should work
better on a houseboat.  Speaking for himself, he said he never felt more
like writing a really great work than when lying in a hammock among
whispering leaves, with the deep blue sky above him, and a tumbler of
iced claret cup within easy reach of his hand.  Failing a hammock, he
found a deck chair a great incentive to mental labour.  In the interests
of the novel, he strongly recommended me to take down with me at least
one comfortable deck chair, and plenty of lemons.

I could not myself see any reason why we should not be able to think as
well on a houseboat as anywhere else, and accordingly it was settled that
I should go down and establish myself upon the thing, and that the others
should visit me there from time to time, when we would sit round and
toil.

This houseboat was Ethelbertha's idea.  We had spent a day, the summer
before, on one belonging to a friend of mine, and she had been enraptured
with the life.  Everything was on such a delightfully tiny scale.  You
lived in a tiny little room; you slept on a tiny little bed, in a tiny,
tiny little bedroom; and you cooked your little dinner by a tiny little
fire, in the tiniest little kitchen that ever you did see.  "Oh, it must
be lovely, living on a houseboat," said Ethelbertha, with a gasp of
ecstasy; "it must be like living in a doll's house."

Ethelbertha was very young--ridiculously young, as I think I have
mentioned before--in those days of which I am writing, and the love of
dolls, and of the gorgeous dresses that dolls wear, and of the
many-windowed but inconveniently arranged houses that dolls inhabit--or
are supposed to inhabit, for as a rule they seem to prefer sitting on the
roof with their legs dangling down over the front door, which has always
appeared to me to be unladylike: but then, of course, I am no authority
on doll etiquette--had not yet, I think, quite departed from her.  Nay,
am I not sure that it had not?  Do I not remember, years later, peeping
into a certain room, the walls of which are covered with works of art of
a character calculated to send any aesthetic person mad, and seeing her,
sitting on the floor, before a red brick mansion, containing two rooms
and a kitchen; and are not her hands trembling with delight as she
arranges the three real tin plates upon the dresser?  And does she not
knock at the real brass knocker upon the real front door until it comes
off, and I have to sit down beside her on the floor and screw it on
again?

Perhaps, however, it is unwise for me to recall these things, and bring
them forward thus in evidence against her, for cannot she in turn laugh
at me?  Did not I also assist in the arrangement and appointment of that
house beautiful?  We differed on the matter of the drawing-room carpet, I
recollect.  Ethelbertha fancied a dark blue velvet, but I felt sure,
taking the wall-paper into consideration, that some shade of terra-cotta
would harmonise best.  She agreed with me in the end, and we manufactured
one out of an old chest protector.  It had a really charming effect, and
gave a delightfully warm tone to the room.  The blue velvet we put in the
kitchen.  I deemed this extravagance, but Ethelbertha said that servants
thought a lot of a good carpet, and that it paid to humour them in little
things, when practicable.

The bedroom had one big bed and a cot in it; but I could not see where
the girl was going to sleep.  The architect had overlooked her
altogether: that is so like an architect.  The house also suffered from
the inconvenience common to residences of its class, of possessing no
stairs, so that to move from one room to another it was necessary to
burst your way up through the ceiling, or else to come outside and climb
in through a window; either of which methods must be fatiguing when you
come to do it often.

Apart from these drawbacks, however, the house was one that any doll
agent would have been justified in describing as a "most desirable family
residence"; and it had been furnished with a lavishness that bordered on
positive ostentation.  In the bedroom there was a washing-stand, and on
the washing-stand there stood a jug and basin, and in the jug there was
real water.  But all this was as nothing.  I have known mere ordinary,
middle-class dolls' houses in which you might find washing-stands and
jugs and basins and real water--ay, and even soap.  But in this abode of
luxury there was a real towel; so that a body could not only wash
himself, but wipe himself afterwards, and that is a sensation that, as
all dolls know, can be enjoyed only in the very first-class
establishments.

Then, in the drawing-room, there was a clock, which would tick just so
long as you continued to shake it (it never seemed to get tired); also a
picture and a piano, and a book upon the table, and a vase of flowers
that would upset the moment you touched it, just like a real vase of
flowers.  Oh, there was style about this room, I can tell you.

But the glory of the house was its kitchen.  There were all things that
heart could desire in this kitchen, saucepans with lids that took on and
off, a flat-iron and a rolling-pin.  A dinner service for three occupied
about half the room, and what space was left was filled up by the stove--a
_real_ stove!  Think of it, oh ye owners of dolls' houses, a stove in
which you could burn real bits of coal, and on which you could boil real
bits of potato for dinner--except when people said you mustn't, because
it was dangerous, and took the grate away from you, and blew out the
fire, a thing that hampers a cook.

I never saw a house more complete in all its details.  Nothing had been
overlooked, not even the family.  It lay on its back, just outside the
front door, proud but calm, waiting to be put into possession.  It was
not an extensive family.  It consisted of four--papa, and mamma, and
baby, and the hired girl; just the family for a beginner.

It was a well-dressed family too--not merely with grand clothes outside,
covering a shameful condition of things beneath, such as, alas! is too
often the case in doll society, but with every article necessary and
proper to a lady or gentleman, down to items that I could not mention.
And all these garments, you must know, could be unfastened and taken off.
I have known dolls--stylish enough dolls, to look at, some of them--who
have been content to go about with their clothes gummed on to them, and,
in some cases, nailed on with tacks, which I take to be a slovenly and
unhealthy habit.  But this family could be undressed in five minutes,
without the aid of either hot water or a chisel.

Not that it was advisable from an artistic point of view that any of them
should.  They had not the figure that looks well in its natural
state--none of them.  There was a want of fulness about them all.
Besides, without their clothes, it might have been difficult to
distinguish the baby from the papa, or the maid from the mistress, and
thus domestic complications might have arisen.

When all was ready for their reception we established them in their home.
We put as much of the baby to bed as the cot would hold, and made the
papa and mamma comfortable in the drawing-room, where they sat on the
floor and stared thoughtfully at each other across the table.  (They had
to sit on the floor because the chairs were not big enough.)  The girl we
placed in the kitchen, where she leant against the dresser in an attitude
suggestive of drink, embracing the broom we had given her with maudlin
affection.  Then we lifted up the house with care, and carried it
cautiously into another room, and with the deftness of experienced
conspirators placed it at the foot of a small bed, on the south-west
corner of which an absurdly small somebody had hung an absurdly small
stocking.

To return to our own doll's house, Ethelbertha and I, discussing the
subject during our return journey in the train, resolved that, next year,
we ourselves would possess a houseboat, a smaller houseboat, if possible,
than even the one we had just seen.  It should have art-muslin curtains
and a flag, and the flowers about it should be wild roses and forget-me-
nots.  I could work all the morning on the roof, with an awning over me
to keep off the sun, while Ethelbertha trimmed the roses and made cakes
for tea; and in the evenings we would sit out on the little deck, and
Ethelbertha would play the guitar (she would begin learning it at once),
or we could sit quiet and listen to the nightingales.

For, when you are very, very young you dream that the summer is all sunny
days and moonlight nights, that the wind blows always softly from the
west, and that roses will thrive anywhere.  But, as you grow older, you
grow tired of waiting for the gray sky to break.  So you close the door
and come in, and crouch over the fire, wondering why the winds blow ever
from the east: and you have given up trying to rear roses.

I knew a little cottage girl who saved up her money for months and months
so as to buy a new frock in which to go to a flower-show.  But the day of
the flower-show was a wet day, so she wore an old frock instead.  And all
the fete days for quite a long while were wet days, and she feared she
would never have a chance of wearing her pretty white dress.  But at last
there came a fete day morning that was bright and sunny, and then the
little girl clapped her hands and ran upstairs, and took her new frock
(which had been her "new frock" for so long a time that it was now the
oldest frock she had) from the box where it lay neatly folded between
lavender and thyme, and held it up, and laughed to think how nice she
would look in it.

But when she went to put it on, she found that she had out-grown it, and
that it was too small for her every way.  So she had to wear a common old
frock after all.

Things happen that way, you know, in this world.  There were a boy and
girl once who loved each other very dearly.  But they were both poor, so
they agreed to wait till he had made enough money for them to live
comfortably upon, and then they would marry and be happy.  It took him a
long while to make, because making money is very slow work, and he
wanted, while he was about it, to make enough for them to be very happy
upon indeed.  He accomplished the task eventually, however, and came back
home a wealthy man.

Then they met again in the poorly-furnished parlour where they had
parted.  But they did not sit as near to each other as of old.  For she
had lived alone so long that she had grown old-maidish, and she was
feeling vexed with him for having dirtied the carpet with his muddy
boots.  And he had worked so long earning money that he had grown hard
and cold like the money itself, and was trying to think of something
affectionate to say to her.

So for a while they sat, one each side of the paper "fire-stove
ornament," both wondering why they had shed such scalding tears on that
day they had kissed each other good-bye; then said "good-bye" again, and
were glad.

There is another tale with much the same moral that I learnt at school
out of a copy-book.  If I remember rightly, it runs somewhat like this:--

Once upon a time there lived a wise grasshopper and a foolish ant.  All
through the pleasant summer weather the grasshopper sported and played,
gambolling with his fellows in and out among the sun-beams, dining
sumptuously each day on leaves and dew-drops, never troubling about the
morrow, singing ever his one peaceful, droning song.

But there came the cruel winter, and the grasshopper, looking around, saw
that his friends, the flowers, lay dead, and knew thereby that his own
little span was drawing near its close.

Then he felt glad that he had been so happy, and had not wasted his life.
"It has been very short," said he to himself; "but it has been very
pleasant, and I think I have made the best use of it.  I have drunk in
the sunshine, I have lain on the soft, warm air, I have played merry
games in the waving grass, I have tasted the juice of the sweet green
leaves.  I have done what I could.  I have spread my wings, I have sung
my song.  Now I will thank God for the sunny days that are passed, and
die."

Saying which, he crawled under a brown leaf, and met his fate in the way
that all brave grasshoppers should; and a little bird that was passing by
picked him up tenderly and buried him.

Now when the foolish ant saw this, she was greatly puffed up with
Pharisaical conceit.  "How thankful I ought to be," said she, "that I am
industrious and prudent, and not like this poor grasshopper.  While he
was flitting about from flower to flower, enjoying himself, I was hard at
work, putting by against the winter.  Now he is dead, while I am about to
make myself cosy in my warm home, and eat all the good things that I have
been saving up."

But, as she spoke, the gardener came along with his spade, and levelled
the hill where she dwelt to the ground, and left her lying dead amidst
the ruins.

Then the same kind little bird that had buried the grasshopper came and
picked her out and buried her also; and afterwards he composed and sang a
song, the burthen of which was, "Gather ye rosebuds while ye may."  It
was a very pretty song, and a very wise song, and a man who lived in
those days, and to whom the birds, loving him and feeling that he was
almost one of themselves, had taught their language, fortunately
overheard it and wrote it down, so that all may read it to this day.

Unhappily for us, however, Fate is a harsh governess, who has no sympathy
with our desire for rosebuds.  "Don't stop to pick flowers now, my dear,"
she cries, in her sharp, cross tones, as she seizes our arm and jerks us
back into the roadway; "we haven't time to-day.  We will come back again
to-morrow, and you shall pick them then."

And we have to follow her, knowing, if we are experienced children, that
the chances are that we shall never come that way to-morrow; or that, if
we do, the roses will be dead.

Fate would not hear of our having a houseboat that summer,--which was an
exceptionally fine summer,--but promised us that if we were good and
saved up our money, we should have one next year; and Ethelbertha and I,
being simple-minded, inexperienced children, were content with the
promise, and had faith in its satisfactory fulfilment.

As soon as we reached home we informed Amenda of our plan.  The moment
the girl opened the door, Ethelbertha burst out with:--"Oh! can you swim,
Amenda?"

"No, mum," answered Amenda, with entire absence of curiosity as to why
such a question had been addressed to her, "I never knew but one girl as
could, and she got drowned."

"Well, you'll have to make haste and learn, then," continued Ethelbertha,
"because you won't be able to walk out with your young man, you'll have
to swim out.  We're not going to live in a house any more.  We're going
to live on a boat in the middle of the river."

Ethelbertha's chief object in life at this period was to surprise and
shock Amenda, and her chief sorrow that she had never succeeded in doing
so.  She had hoped great things from this announcement, but the girl
remained unmoved.  "Oh, are you, mum," she replied; and went on to speak
of other matters.

I believe the result would have been the same if we had told her we were
going to live in a balloon.

I do not know how it was, I am sure.  Amenda was always most respectful
in her manner.  But she had a knack of making Ethelbertha and myself feel
that we were a couple of children, playing at being grown up and married,
and that she was humouring us.

Amenda stayed with us for nearly five years--until the milkman, having
saved up sufficient to buy a "walk" of his own, had become
practicable--but her attitude towards us never changed.  Even when we
came to be really important married people, the proprietors of a
"family," it was evident that she merely considered we had gone a step
further in the game, and were playing now at being fathers and mothers.

By some subtle process she contrived to imbue the baby also with this
idea.  The child never seemed to me to take either of us quite seriously.
She would play with us, or join with us in light conversation; but when
it came to the serious affairs of life, such as bathing or feeding, she
preferred her nurse.

Ethelbertha attempted to take her out in the perambulator one morning,
but the child would not hear of it for a moment.

"It's all right, baby dear," explained Ethelbertha soothingly.  "Baby's
going out with mamma this morning."

"Oh no, baby ain't," was baby's rejoinder, in effect if not in words.
"Baby don't take a hand in experiments--not this baby.  I don't want to
be upset or run over."

Poor Ethel!  I shall never forget how heart-broken she was.  It was the
want of confidence that wounded her.

But these are reminiscences of other days, having no connection with the
days of which I am--or should be--writing; and to wander from one matter
to another is, in a teller of tales, a grievous sin, and a growing custom
much to be condemned.  Therefore I will close my eyes to all other
memories, and endeavour to see only that little white and green houseboat
by the ferry, which was the scene of our future collaborations.

Houseboats then were not built to the scale of Mississippi steamers, but
this boat was a small one, even for that primitive age.  The man from
whom we hired it described it as "compact."  The man to whom, at the end
of the first month, we tried to sub-let it, characterised it as "poky."
In our letters we traversed this definition.  In our hearts we agreed
with it.

At first, however, its size--or, rather, its lack of size--was one of its
chief charms in Ethelbertha's eyes.  The fact that if you got out of bed
carelessly you were certain to knock your head against the ceiling, and
that it was utterly impossible for any man to put on his trousers except
in the saloon, she regarded as a capital joke.

That she herself had to take a looking-glass and go upon the roof to do
her back hair, she thought less amusing.

Amenda accepted her new surroundings with her usual philosophic
indifference.  On being informed that what she had mistaken for a linen-
press was her bedroom, she remarked that there was one advantage about
it, and that was, that she could not tumble out of bed, seeing there was
nowhere to tumble; and, on being shown the kitchen, she observed that she
should like it for two things--one was that she could sit in the middle
and reach everything without getting up; the other, that nobody else
could come into the apartment while she was there.

"You see, Amenda," explained Ethelbertha apologetically, "we shall really
live outside."

"Yes, mum," answered Amenda, "I should say that would be the best place
to do it."

If only we could have lived more outside, the life might have been
pleasant enough, but the weather rendered it impossible, six days out of
the seven, for us to do more than look out of the window and feel
thankful that we had a roof over our heads.

I have known wet summers before and since.  I have learnt by many bitter
experiences the danger and foolishness of leaving the shelter of London
any time between the first of May and the thirty-first of October.
Indeed, the country is always associate in my mind with recollections of
long, weary days passed in the pitiless rain, and sad evenings spent in
other people's clothes.  But never have I known, and never, I pray night
and morning, may I know again, such a summer as the one we lived through
(though none of us expected to) on that confounded houseboat.

In the morning we would be awakened by the rain's forcing its way through
the window and wetting the bed, and would get up and mop out the saloon.
After breakfast I would try to work, but the beating of the hail upon the
roof just over my head would drive every idea out of my brain, and, after
a wasted hour or two, I would fling down my pen and hunt up Ethelbertha,
and we would put on our mackintoshes and take our umbrellas and go out
for a row.  At mid-day we would return and put on some dry clothes, and
sit down to dinner.

In the afternoon the storm generally freshened up a bit, and we were kept
pretty busy rushing about with towels and cloths, trying to prevent the
water from coming into the rooms and swamping us.  During tea-time the
saloon was usually illuminated by forked lightning.  The evenings we
spent in baling out the boat, after which we took it in turns to go into
the kitchen and warm ourselves.  At eight we supped, and from then until
it was time to go to bed we sat wrapped up in rugs, listening to the
roaring of the thunder, and the howling of the wind, and the lashing of
the waves, and wondering whether the boat would hold out through the
night.

Friends would come down to spend the day with us--elderly, irritable
people, fond of warmth and comfort; people who did not, as a rule, hanker
after jaunts, even under the most favourable conditions; but who had been
persuaded by our silly talk that a day on the river would be to them like
a Saturday to Monday in Paradise.

They would arrive soaked; and we would shut them up in different bunks,
and leave them to strip themselves and put on things of Ethelbertha's or
of mine.  But Ethel and I, in those days, were slim, so that stout,
middle-aged people in our clothes neither looked well nor felt happy.

Upon their emerging we would take them into the saloon and try to
entertain them by telling them what we had intended to do with them had
the day been fine.  But their answers were short, and occasionally
snappy, and after a while the conversation would flag, and we would sit
round reading last week's newspapers and coughing.

The moment their own clothes were dry (we lived in a perpetual atmosphere
of steaming clothes) they would insist upon leaving us, which seemed to
me discourteous after all that we had done for them, and would dress
themselves once more and start off home, and get wet again before they
got there.

We would generally receive a letter a few days afterwards, written by
some relative, informing us that both patients were doing as well as
could be expected, and promising to send us a card for the funeral in
case of a relapse.

Our chief recreation, our sole consolation, during the long weeks of our
imprisonment, was to watch from our windows the pleasure-seekers passing
by in small open boats, and to reflect what an awful day they had had, or
were going to have, as the case might be.

In the forenoon they would head up stream--young men with their
sweethearts; nephews taking out their rich old aunts; husbands and wives
(some of them pairs, some of them odd ones); stylish-looking girls with
cousins; energetic-looking men with dogs; high-class silent parties; low-
class noisy parties; quarrelsome family parties--boatload after boatload
they went by, wet, but still hopeful, pointing out bits of blue sky to
each other.

In the evening they would return, drenched and gloomy, saying
disagreeable things to one another.

One couple, and one couple only, out of the many hundreds that passed
under our review, came back from the ordeal with pleasant faces.  He was
rowing hard and singing, with a handkerchief tied round his head to keep
his hat on, and she was laughing at him, while trying to hold up an
umbrella with one hand and steer with the other.

There are but two explanations to account for people being jolly on the
river in the rain.  The one I dismissed as being both uncharitable and
improbable.  The other was creditable to the human race, and, adopting
it, I took off my cap to this damp but cheerful pair as they went by.
They answered with a wave of the hand, and I stood looking after them
till they disappeared in the mist.

I am inclined to think that those young people, if they be still alive,
are happy.  Maybe, fortune has been kind to them, or maybe she has not,
but in either event they are, I am inclined to think, happier than are
most people.

Now and again, the daily tornado would rage with such fury as to defeat
its own purpose by prematurely exhausting itself.  On these rare
occasions we would sit out on the deck, and enjoy the unwonted luxury of
fresh air.

I remember well those few pleasant evenings: the river, luminous with the
drowned light, the dark banks where the night lurked, the storm-tossed
sky, jewelled here and there with stars.

It was delightful not to hear for an hour or so the sullen thrashing of
the rain; but to listen to the leaping of the fishes, the soft swirl
raised by some water-rat, swimming stealthily among the rushes, the
restless twitterings of the few still wakeful birds.

An old corncrake lived near to us, and the way he used to disturb all the
other birds, and keep them from going to sleep, was shameful.  Amenda,
who was town-bred, mistook him at first for one of those cheap alarm
clocks, and wondered who was winding him up, and why they went on doing
it all night; and, above all, why they didn't oil him.

He would begin his unhallowed performance about dusk, just as every
respectable bird was preparing to settle down for the night.  A family of
thrushes had their nest a few yards from his stand, and they used to get
perfectly furious with him.

"There's that fool at it again," the female thrush would say; "why can't
he do it in the daytime if he must do it at all?"  (She spoke, of course,
in twitters, but I am confident the above is a correct translation.)

After a while, the young thrushes would wake up and begin chirping, and
then the mother would get madder than ever.

"Can't you say something to him?" she would cry indignantly to her
husband.  "How do you think the children can get to sleep, poor things,
with that hideous row going on all night?  Might just as well be living
in a saw-mill."

Thus adjured, the male thrush would put his head over the nest, and call
out in a nervous, apologetic manner:--

"I say, you know, you there, I wish you wouldn't mind being quiet a bit.
My wife says she can't get the children to sleep.  It's too bad, you
know, 'pon my word it is."

"Gor on," the corncrake would answer surlily.  "You keep your wife
herself quiet; that's enough for you to do."  And on he would go again
worse than before.

Then a mother blackbird, from a little further off, would join in the
fray.

"Ah, it's a good hiding he wants, not a talking to.  And if I was a cock,
I'd give it him."  (This remark would be made in a tone of withering
contempt, and would appear to bear reference to some previous
discussion.)

"You're quite right, ma'am," Mrs. Thrush would reply.  "That's what I
tell my husband, but" (with rising inflection, so that every lady in the
plantation might hear) "_he_ wouldn't move himself, bless you--no, not if
I and the children were to die before his eyes for want of sleep."

"Ah, he ain't the only one, my dear," the blackbird would pipe back,
"they're all alike"; then, in a voice more of sorrow than of anger:--"but
there, it ain't their fault, I suppose, poor things.  If you ain't got
the spirit of a bird you can't help yourself."

I would strain my ears at this point to hear if the male blackbird was
moved at all by these taunts, but the only sound I could ever detect
coming from his neighbourhood was that of palpably exaggerated snoring.

By this time the whole glade would be awake, expressing views concerning
that corncrake that would have wounded a less callous nature.

"Blow me tight, Bill," some vulgar little hedge-sparrow would chirp out,
in the midst of the hubbub, "if I don't believe the gent thinks 'e's a-
singing."

"'Tain't 'is fault," Bill would reply, with mock sympathy.  "Somebody's
put a penny in the slot, and 'e can't stop 'isself."

Irritated by the laugh that this would call forth from the younger birds,
the corncrake would exert himself to be more objectionable than ever,
and, as a means to this end, would commence giving his marvellous
imitation of the sharpening of a rusty saw by a steel file.

But at this an old crow, not to be trifled with, would cry out angrily:--

"Stop that, now.  If I come down to you I'll peck your cranky head off, I
will."

And then would follow silence for a quarter of an hour, after which the
whole thing would begin again.




CHAPTER V


Brown and MacShaughnassy came down together on the Saturday afternoon;
and, as soon as they had dried themselves, and had had some tea, we
settled down to work.

Jephson had written that he would not be able to be with us until late in
the evening, and Brown proposed that we should occupy ourselves until his
arrival with plots.

"Let each of us," said he, "sketch out a plot.  Afterwards we can compare
them, and select the best."

This we proceeded to do.  The plots themselves I forget, but I remember
that at the subsequent judging each man selected his own, and became so
indignant at the bitter criticism to which it was subjected by the other
two, that he tore it up; and, for the next half-hour, we sat and smoked
in silence.

When I was very young I yearned to know other people's opinion of me and
all my works; now, my chief aim is to avoid hearing it.  In those days,
had any one told me there was half a line about myself in a newspaper, I
should have tramped London to obtain that publication.  Now, when I see a
column headed with my name, I hurriedly fold up the paper and put it away
from me, subduing my natural curiosity to read it by saying to myself,
"Why should you?  It will only upset you for the day."

In my cubhood I possessed a friend.  Other friends have come into my life
since--very dear and precious friends--but they have none of them been to
me quite what this friend was.  Because he was my first friend, and we
lived together in a world that was much bigger than this world--more full
of joy and of grief; and, in that world, we loved and hated deeper than
we love and hate in this smaller world that I have come to dwell in
since.

He also had the very young man's craving to be criticised, and we made it
our custom to oblige each other.  We did not know then that what we
meant, when we asked for "criticism," was encouragement.  We thought that
we were strong--one does at the beginning of the battle, and that we
could bear to hear the truth.

Accordingly, each one pointed out to the other one his errors, and this
task kept us both so busy that we had never time to say a word of praise
to one another.  That we each had a high opinion of the other's talents I
am convinced, but our heads were full of silly saws.  We said to
ourselves: "There are many who will praise a man; it is only his friend
who will tell him of his faults."  Also, we said: "No man sees his own
shortcomings, but when these are pointed out to him by another he is
grateful, and proceeds to mend them."

As we came to know the world better, we learnt the fallacy of these
ideas.  But then it was too late, for the mischief had been done.

When one of us had written anything, he would read it to the other, and
when he had finished he would say, "Now, tell me what you think of
it--frankly and as a friend."

Those were his words.  But his thoughts, though he may not have known
them, were:--

"Tell me it is clever and good, my friend, even if you do not think so.
The world is very cruel to those that have not yet conquered it, and,
though we keep a careless face, our young hearts are scored with
wrinkles.  Often we grow weary and faint-hearted.  Is it not so, my
friend?  No one has faith in us, and in our dark hours we doubt
ourselves.  You are my comrade.  You know what of myself I have put into
this thing that to others will be but an idle half-hour's reading.  Tell
me it is good, my friend.  Put a little heart into me, I pray you."

But the other, full of the lust of criticism, which is civilisation's
substitute for cruelty, would answer more in frankness than in
friendship.  Then he who had written would flush angrily, and scornful
words would pass.

One evening, he read me a play he had written.  There was much that was
good in it, but there were also faults (there are in some plays), and
these I seized upon and made merry over.  I could hardly have dealt out
to the piece more unnecessary bitterness had I been a professional
critic.

As soon as I paused from my sport he rose, and, taking his manuscript
from the table, tore it in two, and flung it in the fire--he was but a
very young man, you must remember--and then, standing before me with a
white face, told me, unsolicited, his opinion of me and of my art.  After
which double event, it is perhaps needless to say that we parted in hot
anger.

I did not see him again for years.  The streets of life are very crowded,
and if we loose each other's hands we are soon hustled far apart.  When I
did next meet him it was by accident.

I had left the Whitehall Rooms after a public dinner, and, glad of the
cool night air, was strolling home by the Embankment.  A man, slouching
along under the trees, paused as I overtook him.

"You couldn't oblige me with a light, could you, guv'nor?" he said.  The
voice sounded strange, coming from the figure that it did.

I struck a match, and held it out to him, shaded by my hands.  As the
faint light illumined his face, I started back, and let the match fall:--

"Harry!"

He answered with a short dry laugh.  "I didn't know it was you," he said,
"or I shouldn't have stopped you."

"How has it come to this, old fellow?" I asked, laying my hand upon his
shoulder.  His coat was unpleasantly greasy, and I drew my hand away
again as quickly as I could, and tried to wipe it covertly upon my
handkerchief.

"Oh, it's a long, story," he answered carelessly, "and too conventional
to be worth telling.  Some of us go up, you know.  Some of us go down.
You're doing pretty well, I hear."

"I suppose so," I replied; "I've climbed a few feet up a greasy pole, and
am trying to stick there.  But it is of you I want to talk.  Can't I do
anything for you?"

We were passing under a gas-lamp at the moment.  He thrust his face
forward close to mine, and the light fell full and pitilessly upon it.

"Do I look like a man you could do anything for?" he said.

We walked on in silence side by side, I casting about for words that
might seize hold of him.

"You needn't worry about me," he continued after a while, "I'm
comfortable enough.  We take life easily down here where I am.  We've no
disappointments."

"Why did you give up like a weak coward?" I burst out angrily.  "You had
talent.  You would have won with ordinary perseverance."

"Maybe," he replied, in the same even tone of indifference.  "I suppose I
hadn't the grit.  I think if somebody had believed in me it might have
helped me.  But nobody did, and at last I lost belief in myself.  And
when a man loses that, he's like a balloon with the gas let out."

I listened to his words in indignation and astonishment.  "Nobody
believed in you!" I repeated.  "Why, _I_ always believed in you, you know
that I--"

Then I paused, remembering our "candid criticism" of one another.

"Did you?" he replied quietly, "I never heard you say so.  Good-night."

In the course of our Strandward walking we had come to the neighbourhood
of the Savoy, and, as he spoke, he disappeared down one of the dark
turnings thereabouts.

I hastened after him, calling him by name, but though I heard his quick
steps before me for a little way, they were soon swallowed up in the
sound of other steps, and, when I reached the square in which the chapel
stands, I had lost all trace of him.

A policeman was standing by the churchyard railings, and of him I made
inquiries.

"What sort of a gent was he, sir?" questioned the man.

"A tall thin gentleman, very shabbily dressed--might be mistaken for a
tramp."

"Ah, there's a good many of that sort living in this town," replied the
man.  "I'm afraid you'll have some difficulty in finding him."

Thus for a second time had I heard his footsteps die away, knowing I
should never listen for their drawing near again.

I wondered as I walked on--I have wondered before and since--whether Art,
even with a capital A, is quite worth all the suffering that is inflicted
in her behalf--whether she and we are better for all the scorning and the
sneering, all the envying and the hating, that is done in her name.

Jephson arrived about nine o'clock in the ferry-boat.  We were made
acquainted with this fact by having our heads bumped against the sides of
the saloon.

Somebody or other always had their head bumped whenever the ferry-boat
arrived.  It was a heavy and cumbersome machine, and the ferry-boy was
not a good punter.  He admitted this frankly, which was creditable of
him.  But he made no attempt to improve himself; that is, where he was
wrong.  His method was to arrange the punt before starting in a line with
the point towards which he wished to proceed, and then to push hard,
without ever looking behind him, until something suddenly stopped him.
This was sometimes the bank, sometimes another boat, occasionally a
steamer, from six to a dozen times a day our riparian dwelling.  That he
never succeeded in staving the houseboat in speaks highly for the man who
built her.

One day he came down upon us with a tremendous crash.  Amenda was walking
along the passage at the moment, and the result to her was that she
received a violent blow first on the left side of her head and then on
the right.

She was accustomed to accept one bump as a matter of course, and to
regard it as an intimation from the boy that he had come; but this double
knock annoyed her: so much "style" was out of place in a mere ferry-boy.
Accordingly she went out to him in a state of high indignation.

"What do you think you are?" she cried, balancing accounts by boxing his
ears first on one side and then on the other, "a torpedo!  What are you
doing here at all?  What do you want?"

"I don't want nothin'," explained the boy, rubbing his head; "I've
brought a gent down."

"A gent?" said Amenda, looking round, but seeing no one.  "What gent?"

"A stout gent in a straw 'at," answered the boy, staring round him
bewilderedly.

"Well, where is he?" asked Amenda.

"I dunno," replied the boy, in an awed voice; "'e was a-standin' there,
at the other end of the punt, a-smokin' a cigar."

Just then a head appeared above the water, and a spent but infuriated
swimmer struggled up between the houseboat and the bank.

"Oh, there 'e is!" cried the boy delightedly, evidently much relieved at
this satisfactory solution of the mystery; "'e must ha' tumbled off the
punt."

"You're quite right, my lad, that's just what he did do, and there's your
fee for assisting him to do it."  Saying which, my dripping friend, who
had now scrambled upon deck, leant over, and following Amenda's excellent
example, expressed his feelings upon the boy's head.

There was one comforting reflection about the transaction as a whole, and
that was that the ferry-boy had at last received a fit and proper reward
for his services.  I had often felt inclined to give him something
myself.  I think he was, without exception, the most clumsy and stupid
boy I have ever come across; and that is saying a good deal.

His mother undertook that for three-and-sixpence a week he should "make
himself generally useful" to us for a couple of hours every morning.

Those were the old lady's very words, and I repeated them to Amenda when
I introduced the boy to her.

"This is James, Amenda," I said; "he will come down here every morning at
seven, and bring us our milk and the letters, and from then till nine he
will make himself generally useful."

Amenda took stock of him.

"It will be a change of occupation for him, sir, I should say, by the
look of him," she remarked.

After that, whenever some more than usually stirring crash or
blood-curdling bump would cause us to leap from our seats and cry: "What
on earth has happened?"  Amenda would reply: "Oh, it's only James, mum,
making himself generally useful."

Whatever he lifted he let fall; whatever he touched he upset; whatever he
came near--that was not a fixture--he knocked over; if it was a fixture,
it knocked _him_ over.  This was not carelessness: it seemed to be a
natural gift.  Never in his life, I am convinced, had he carried a
bucketful of anything anywhere without tumbling over it before he got
there.  One of his duties was to water the flowers on the roof.
Fortunately--for the flowers--Nature, that summer, stood drinks with a
lavishness sufficient to satisfy the most confirmed vegetable toper:
otherwise every plant on our boat would have died from drought.  Never
one drop of water did they receive from him.  He was for ever taking them
water, but he never arrived there with it.  As a rule he upset the pail
before he got it on to the boat at all, and this was the best thing that
could happen, because then the water simply went back into the river, and
did no harm to any one.  Sometimes, however, he would succeed in landing
it, and then the chances were he would spill it over the deck or into the
passage.  Now and again, he would get half-way up the ladder before the
accident occurred.  Twice he nearly reached the top; and once he actually
did gain the roof.  What happened there on that memorable occasion will
never be known.  The boy himself, when picked up, could explain nothing.
It is supposed that he lost his head with the pride of the achievement,
and essayed feats that neither his previous training nor his natural
abilities justified him in attempting.  However that may be, the fact
remains that the main body of the water came down the kitchen chimney;
and that the boy and the empty pail arrived together on deck before they
knew they had started.

When he could find nothing else to damage, he would go out of his way to
upset himself.  He could not be sure of stepping from his own punt on to
the boat with safety.  As often as not, he would catch his foot in the
chain or the punt-pole, and arrive on his chest.

Amenda used to condole with him.  "Your mother ought to be ashamed of
herself," I heard her telling him one morning; "she could never have
taught you to walk.  What you want is a go-cart."

He was a willing lad, but his stupidity was super-natural.  A comet
appeared in the sky that year, and everybody was talking about it.  One
day he said to me:--

"There's a comet coming, ain't there, sir?"  He talked about it as though
it were a circus.

"Coming!" I answered, "it's come.  Haven't you seen it?"

"No, sir."

"Oh, well, you have a look for it to-night.  It's worth seeing."

"Yees, sir, I should like to see it.  It's got a tail, ain't it, sir?"

"Yes, a very fine tail."

"Yees, sir, they said it 'ad a tail.  Where do you go to see it, sir?"

"Go!  You don't want to go anywhere.  You'll see it in your own garden at
ten o'clock."

He thanked me, and, tumbling over a sack of potatoes, plunged head
foremost into his punt and departed.

Next morning, I asked him if he had seen the comet.

"No, sir, I couldn't see it anywhere."

"Did you look?"

"Yees, sir.  I looked a long time."

"How on earth did you manage to miss it then?" I exclaimed.  "It was a
clear enough night.  Where did you look?"

"In our garden, sir.  Where you told me."

"Whereabouts in the garden?" chimed in Amenda, who happened to be
standing by; "under the gooseberry bushes?"

"Yees--everywhere."

That is what he had done: he had taken the stable lantern and searched
the garden for it.

But the day when he broke even his own record for foolishness happened
about three weeks later.  MacShaughnassy was staying with us at the time,
and on the Friday evening he mixed us a salad, according to a recipe
given him by his aunt.  On the Saturday morning, everybody was, of
course, very ill.  Everybody always is very ill after partaking of any
dish prepared by MacShaughnassy.  Some people attempt to explain this
fact by talking glibly of "cause and effect."  MacShaughnassy maintains
that it is simply coincidence.

"How do you know," he says, "that you wouldn't have been ill if you
hadn't eaten any?  You're queer enough now, any one can see, and I'm very
sorry for you; but, for all that you can tell, if you hadn't eaten any of
that stuff you might have been very much worse--perhaps dead.  In all
probability, it has saved your life."  And for the rest of the day, he
assumes towards you the attitude of a man who has dragged you from the
grave.

The moment Jimmy arrived I seized hold of him.

"Jimmy," I said, "you must rush off to the chemist's immediately.  Don't
stop for anything.  Tell him to give you something for colic--the result
of vegetable poisoning.  It must be something very strong, and enough for
four.  Don't forget, something to counteract the effects of vegetable
poisoning.  Hurry up, or it may be too late."

My excitement communicated itself to the boy.  He tumbled back into his
punt, and pushed off vigorously.  I watched him land, and disappear in
the direction of the village.

Half an hour passed, but Jimmy did not return.  No one felt sufficiently
energetic to go after him.  We had only just strength enough to sit still
and feebly abuse him.  At the end of an hour we were all feeling very
much better.  At the end of an hour and a half we were glad he had not
returned when he ought to have, and were only curious as to what had
become of him.

In the evening, strolling through the village, we saw him sitting by the
open door of his mother's cottage, with a shawl wrapped round him.  He
was looking worn and ill.

"Why, Jimmy," I said, "what's the matter?  Why didn't you come back this
morning?"

"I couldn't, sir," Jimmy answered, "I was so queer.  Mother made me go to
bed."

"You seemed all right in the morning," I said; "what's made you queer?"

"What Mr. Jones give me, sir: it upset me awful."

A light broke in upon me.

"What did you say, Jimmy, when you got to Mr. Jones's shop?" I asked.

"I told 'im what you said, sir, that 'e was to give me something to
counteract the effects of vegetable poisoning.  And that it was to be
very strong, and enough for four."

"And what did he say?"

"'E said that was only your nonsense, sir, and that I'd better have
enough for one to begin with; and then 'e asked me if I'd been eating
green apples again."

"And you told him?"

"Yees, sir, I told 'im I'd 'ad a few, and 'e said it served me right, and
that 'e 'oped it would be a warning to me.  And then 'e put something
fizzy in a glass and told me to drink it."

"And you drank it?"

"Yees, sir."

"It never occurred to you, Jimmy, that there was nothing the matter with
you--that you were never feeling better in your life, and that you did
not require any medicine?"

"No, sir."

"Did one single scintilla of thought of any kind occur to you in
connection with the matter, Jimmy, from beginning to end?"

"No, sir."

People who never met Jimmy disbelieve this story.  They argue that its
premises are in disaccord with the known laws governing human nature,
that its details do not square with the average of probability.  People
who have seen and conversed with Jimmy accept it with simple faith.

The advent of Jephson--which I trust the reader has not entirely
forgotten--cheered us up considerably.  Jephson was always at his best
when all other things were at their worst.  It was not that he struggled
in Mark Tapley fashion to appear most cheerful when most depressed; it
was that petty misfortunes and mishaps genuinely amused and inspirited
him.  Most of us can recall our unpleasant experiences with amused
affection; Jephson possessed the robuster philosophy that enabled him to
enjoy his during their actual progress.  He arrived drenched to the skin,
chuckling hugely at the idea of having come down on a visit to a
houseboat in such weather.

Under his warming influence, the hard lines on our faces thawed, and by
supper time we were, as all Englishmen and women who wish to enjoy life
should be, independent of the weather.

Later on, as if disheartened by our indifference, the rain ceased, and we
took our chairs out on the deck, and sat watching the lightning, which
still played incessantly.  Then, not unnaturally, the talk drifted into a
sombre channel, and we began recounting stories, dealing with the gloomy
and mysterious side of life.

Some of these were worth remembering, and some were not.  The one that
left the strongest impression on my mind was a tale that Jephson told us.

I had been relating a somewhat curious experience of my own.  I met a man
in the Strand one day that I knew very well, as I thought, though I had
not seen him for years.  We walked together to Charing Cross, and there
we shook hands and parted.  Next morning, I spoke of this meeting to a
mutual friend, and then I learnt, for the first time, that the man had
died six months before.

The natural inference was that I had mistaken one man for another, an
error that, not having a good memory for faces, I frequently fall into.
What was remarkable about the matter, however, was that throughout our
walk I had conversed with the man under the impression that he was that
other dead man, and, whether by coincidence or not, his replies had never
once suggested to me my mistake.

As soon as I finished, Jephson, who had been listening very thoughtfully,
asked me if I believed in spiritualism "to its fullest extent."

"That is rather a large question," I answered.  "What do you mean by
'spiritualism to its fullest extent'?"

"Well, do you believe that the spirits of the dead have not only the
power of revisiting this earth at their will, but that, when here, they
have the power of action, or rather, of exciting to action?  Let me put a
definite case.  A spiritualist friend of mine, a sensible and by no means
imaginative man, once told me that a table, through the medium of which
the spirit of a friend had been in the habit of communicating with him,
came slowly across the room towards him, of its own accord, one night as
he sat alone, and pinioned him against the wall.  Now can any of you
believe that, or can't you?"

"I could," Brown took it upon himself to reply; "but, before doing so, I
should wish for an introduction to the friend who told you the story.
Speaking generally," he continued, "it seems to me that the difference
between what we call the natural and the supernatural is merely the
difference between frequency and rarity of occurrence.  Having regard to
the phenomena we are compelled to admit, I think it illogical to
disbelieve anything we are unable to disprove."

"For my part," remarked MacShaughnassy, "I can believe in the ability of
our spirit friends to give the quaint entertainments credited to them
much easier than I can in their desire to do so."

"You mean," added Jephson, "that you cannot understand why a spirit, not
compelled as we are by the exigencies of society, should care to spend
its evenings carrying on a laboured and childish conversation with a room
full of abnormally uninteresting people."

"That is precisely what I cannot understand," MacShaughnassy agreed.

"Nor I, either," said Jephson.  "But I was thinking of something very
different altogether.  Suppose a man died with the dearest wish of his
heart unfulfilled, do you believe that his spirit might have power to
return to earth and complete the interrupted work?"

"Well," answered MacShaughnassy, "if one admits the possibility of
spirits retaining any interest in the affairs of this world at all, it is
certainly more reasonable to imagine them engaged upon a task such as you
suggest, than to believe that they occupy themselves with the performance
of mere drawing-room tricks.  But what are you leading up to?"

"Why, to this," replied Jephson, seating himself straddle-legged across
his chair, and leaning his arms upon the back.  "I was told a story this
morning at the hospital by an old French doctor.  The actual facts are
few and simple; all that is known can be read in the Paris police records
of sixty-two years ago.

"The most important part of the case, however, is the part that is not
known, and that never will be known.

"The story begins with a great wrong done by one man unto another man.
What the wrong was I do not know.  I am inclined to think, however, it
was connected with a woman.  I think that, because he who had been
wronged hated him who had wronged him with a hate such as does not often
burn in a man's brain, unless it be fanned by the memory of a woman's
breath.

"Still that is only conjecture, and the point is immaterial.  The man who
had done the wrong fled, and the other man followed him.  It became a
point-to-point race, the first man having the advantage of a day's start.
The course was the whole world, and the stakes were the first man's life.

"Travellers were few and far between in those days, and this made the
trail easy to follow.  The first man, never knowing how far or how near
the other was behind him, and hoping now and again that he might have
baffled him, would rest for a while.  The second man, knowing always just
how far the first one was before him, never paused, and thus each day the
man who was spurred by Hate drew nearer to the man who was spurred by
Fear.

"At this town the answer to the never-varied question would be:--

"'At seven o'clock last evening, M'sieur.'

"'Seven--ah; eighteen hours.  Give me something to eat, quick, while the
horses are being put to.'

"At the next the calculation would be sixteen hours.

"Passing a lonely chalet, Monsieur puts his head out of the window:--

"'How long since a carriage passed this way, with a tall, fair man
inside?'

"'Such a one passed early this morning, M'sieur.'

"'Thanks, drive on, a hundred francs apiece if you are through the pass
before daybreak.'

"'And what for dead horses, M'sieur?'

"'Twice their value when living.'

"One day the man who was ridden by Fear looked up, and saw before him the
open door of a cathedral, and, passing in, knelt down and prayed.  He
prayed long and fervently, for men, when they are in sore straits, clutch
eagerly at the straws of faith.  He prayed that he might be forgiven his
sin, and, more important still, that he might be pardoned the
consequences of his sin, and be delivered from his adversary; and a few
chairs from him, facing him, knelt his enemy, praying also.

"But the second man's prayer, being a thanksgiving merely, was short, so
that when the first man raised his eyes, he saw the face of his enemy
gazing at him across the chair-tops, with a mocking smile upon it.

"He made no attempt to rise, but remained kneeling, fascinated by the
look of joy that shone out of the other man's eyes.  And the other man
moved the high-backed chairs one by one, and came towards him softly.

"Then, just as the man who had been wronged stood beside the man who had
wronged him, full of gladness that his opportunity had come, there burst
from the cathedral tower a sudden clash of bells, and the man, whose
opportunity had come, broke his heart and fell back dead, with that
mocking smile still playing round his mouth.

"And so he lay there.

"Then the man who had done the wrong rose up and passed out, praising
God.

"What became of the body of the other man is not known.  It was the body
of a stranger who had died suddenly in the cathedral.  There was none to
identify it, none to claim it.

"Years passed away, and the survivor in the tragedy became a worthy and
useful citizen, and a noted man of science.

"In his laboratory were many objects necessary to him in his researches,
and, prominent among them, stood in a certain corner a human skeleton.  It
was a very old and much-mended skeleton, and one day the long-expected
end arrived, and it tumbled to pieces.

"Thus it became necessary to purchase another.

"The man of science visited a dealer he well knew--a little parchment-
faced old man who kept a dingy shop, where nothing was ever sold, within
the shadow of the towers of Notre Dame.

"The little parchment-faced old man had just the very thing that Monsieur
wanted--a singularly fine and well-proportioned 'study.'  It should be
sent round and set up in Monsieur's laboratory that very afternoon.

"The dealer was as good as his word.  When Monsieur entered his
laboratory that evening, the thing was in its place.

"Monsieur seated himself in his high-backed chair, and tried to collect
his thoughts.  But Monsieur's thoughts were unruly, and inclined to
wander, and to wander always in one direction.

"Monsieur opened a large volume and commenced to read.  He read of a man
who had wronged another and fled from him, the other man following.
Finding himself reading this, he closed the book angrily, and went and
stood by the window and looked out.  He saw before him the sun-pierced
nave of a great cathedral, and on the stones lay a dead man with a
mocking smile upon his face.

"Cursing himself for a fool, he turned away with a laugh.  But his laugh
was short-lived, for it seemed to him that something else in the room was
laughing also.  Struck suddenly still, with his feet glued to the ground,
he stood listening for a while: then sought with starting eyes the corner
from where the sound had seemed to come.  But the white thing standing
there was only grinning.

"Monsieur wiped the damp sweat from his head and hands, and stole out.

"For a couple of days he did not enter the room again.  On the third,
telling himself that his fears were those of a hysterical girl, he opened
the door and went in.  To shame himself, he took his lamp in his hand,
and crossing over to the far corner where the skeleton stood, examined
it.  A set of bones bought for three hundred francs.  Was he a child, to
be scared by such a bogey!

"He held his lamp up in front of the thing's grinning head.  The flame of
the lamp flickered as though a faint breath had passed over it.

"The man explained this to himself by saying that the walls of the house
were old and cracked, and that the wind might creep in anywhere.  He
repeated this explanation to himself as he recrossed the room, walking
backwards, with his eyes fixed on the thing.  When he reached his desk,
he sat down and gripped the arms of his chair till his fingers turned
white.

"He tried to work, but the empty sockets in that grinning head seemed to
be drawing him towards them.  He rose and battled with his inclination to
fly screaming from the room.  Glancing fearfully about him, his eye fell
upon a high screen, standing before the door.  He dragged it forward, and
placed it between himself and the thing, so that he could not see it--nor
it see him.  Then he sat down again to his work.  For a while he forced
himself to look at the book in front of him, but at last, unable to
control himself any longer, he suffered his eyes to follow their own
bent.

"It may have been an hallucination.  He may have accidentally placed the
screen so as to favour such an illusion.  But what he saw was a bony hand
coming round the corner of the screen, and, with a cry, he fell to the
floor in a swoon.

"The people of the house came running in, and lifting him up, carried him
out, and laid him upon his bed.  As soon as he recovered, his first
question was, where had they found the thing--where was it when they
entered the room? and when they told him they had seen it standing where
it always stood, and had gone down into the room to look again, because
of his frenzied entreaties, and returned trying to hide their smiles, he
listened to their talk about overwork, and the necessity for change and
rest, and said they might do with him as they would.

"So for many months the laboratory door remained locked.  Then there came
a chill autumn evening when the man of science opened it again, and
closed it behind him.

"He lighted his lamp, and gathered his instruments and books around him,
and sat down before them in his high-backed chair.  And the old terror
returned to him.

"But this time he meant to conquer himself.  His nerves were stronger
now, and his brain clearer; he would fight his unreasoning fear.  He
crossed to the door and locked himself in, and flung the key to the other
end of the room, where it fell among jars and bottles with an echoing
clatter.

"Later on, his old housekeeper, going her final round, tapped at his door
and wished him good-night, as was her custom.  She received no response,
at first, and, growing nervous, tapped louder and called again; and at
length an answering 'good-night' came back to her.

"She thought little about it at the time, but afterwards she remembered
that the voice that had replied to her had been strangely grating and
mechanical.  Trying to describe it, she likened it to such a voice as she
would imagine coming from a statue.

"Next morning his door remained still locked.  It was no unusual thing
for him to work all night and far into the next day, so no one thought to
be surprised.  When, however, evening came, and yet he did not appear,
his servants gathered outside the room and whispered, remembering what
had happened once before.

"They listened, but could hear no sound.  They shook the door and called
to him, then beat with their fists upon the wooden panels.  But still no
sound came from the room.

"Becoming alarmed, they decided to burst open the door, and, after many
blows, it gave way, and they crowded in.

"He sat bolt upright in his high-backed chair.  They thought at first he
had died in his sleep.  But when they drew nearer and the light fell upon
him, they saw the livid marks of bony fingers round his throat; and in
his eyes there was a terror such as is not often seen in human eyes."

* * * * *

Brown was the first to break the silence that followed.  He asked me if I
had any brandy on board.  He said he felt he should like just a nip of
brandy before going to bed.  That is one of the chief charms of Jephson's
stories: they always make you feel you want a little brandy.




CHAPTER VI


"Cats," remarked Jephson to me, one afternoon, as we sat in the punt
discussing the plot of our novel, "cats are animals for whom I entertain
a very great respect.  Cats and Nonconformists seem to me the only things
in this world possessed of a practicable working conscience.  Watch a cat
doing something mean and wrong--if ever one gives you the chance; notice
how anxious she is that nobody should see her doing it; and how prompt,
if detected, to pretend that she was not doing it--that she was not even
thinking of doing it--that, as a matter of fact, she was just about to do
something else, quite different.  You might almost think they had a soul.

"Only this morning I was watching that tortoise-shell of yours on the
houseboat.  She was creeping along the roof, behind the flower-boxes,
stalking a young thrush that had perched upon a coil of rope.  Murder
gleamed from her eye, assassination lurked in every twitching muscle of
her body.  As she crouched to spring, Fate, for once favouring the weak,
directed her attention to myself, and she became, for the first time,
aware of my presence.  It acted upon her as a heavenly vision upon a
Biblical criminal.  In an instant she was a changed being.  The wicked
beast, going about seeking whom it might devour, had vanished.  In its
place sat a long-tailed, furry angel, gazing up into the sky with an
expression that was one-third innocence and two-thirds admiration of the
beauties of nature.  What was she doing there, did I want to know?  Why,
could I not see, playing with a bit of earth.  Surely I was not so evil-
minded as to imagine she wanted to kill that dear little bird--God bless
it.

"Then note an old Tom, slinking home in the early morning, after a night
spent on a roof of bad repute.  Can you picture to yourself a living
creature less eager to attract attention?  'Dear me,' you can all but
hear it saying to itself, 'I'd no idea it was so late; how time does go
when one is enjoying oneself.  I do hope I shan't meet any one I
know--very awkward, it's being so light.'

"In the distance it sees a policeman, and stops suddenly within the
shelter of a shadow.  'Now what's he doing there,' it says, 'and close to
our door too?  I can't go in while he's hanging about.  He's sure to see
and recognise me; and he's just the sort of man to talk to the servants.'

"It hides itself behind a post and waits, peeping cautiously round the
corner from time to time.  The policeman, however, seems to have taken up
his residence at that particular spot, and the cat becomes worried and
excited.

"'What's the matter with the fool?' it mutters indignantly; 'is he dead?
Why don't he move on, he's always telling other people to.  Stupid ass.'

"Just then a far-off cry of 'milk' is heard, and the cat starts up in an
agony of alarm.  'Great Scott, hark at that!  Why, everybody will be down
before I get in.  Well, I can't help it.  I must chance it.'

"He glances round at himself, and hesitates.  'I wouldn't mind if I
didn't look so dirty and untidy,' he muses; 'people are so prone to think
evil in this world.'

"'Ah, well,' he adds, giving himself a shake, 'there's nothing else for
it, I must put my trust in Providence, it's pulled me through before:
here goes.'

"He assumes an aspect of chastened sorrow, and trots along with a demure
and saddened step.  It is evident he wishes to convey the idea that he
has been out all night on work connected with the Vigilance Association,
and is now returning home sick at heart because of the sights that he has
seen.

"He squirms in, unnoticed, through a window, and has just time to give
himself a hurried lick down before he hears the cook's step on the
stairs.  When she enters the kitchen he is curled up on the hearthrug,
fast asleep.  The opening of the shutters awakes him.  He rises and comes
forward, yawning and stretching himself.

"'Dear me, is it morning, then?' he says drowsily.  'Heigh-ho!  I've had
such a lovely sleep, cook; and such a beautiful dream about poor mother.'

"Cats! do you call them?  Why, they are Christians in everything except
the number of legs."

"They certainly are," I responded, "wonderfully cunning little animals,
and it is not by their moral and religious instincts alone that they are
so closely linked to man; the marvellous ability they display in taking
care of 'number one' is worthy of the human race itself.  Some friends of
mine had a cat, a big black Tom: they have got half of him still.  They
had reared him from a kitten, and, in their homely, undemonstrative way,
they liked him.  There was nothing, however, approaching passion on
either side.

"One day a Chinchilla came to live in the neighbourhood, under the charge
of an elderly spinster, and the two cats met at a garden wall party.

"'What sort of diggings have you got?' asked the Chinchilla.

"'Oh, pretty fair.'

"'Nice people?'

"'Yes, nice enough--as people go.'

"'Pretty willing?  Look after you well, and all that sort of thing?'

"'Yes--oh yes.  I've no fault to find with them.'

"'What's the victuals like?'

"'Oh, the usual thing, you know, bones and scraps, and a bit of
dog-biscuit now and then for a change.'

"'Bones and dog-biscuits!  Do you mean to say you eat bones?'

"'Yes, when I can get 'em.  Why, what's wrong about them?'

"'Shade of Egyptian Isis, bones and dog-biscuits!  Don't you ever get any
spring chickens, or a sardine, or a lamb cutlet?'

"'Chickens!  Sardines!  What are you talking about?  What are sardines?'

"'What are sardines!  Oh, my dear child (the Chinchilla was a lady cat,
and always called gentlemen friends a little older than herself 'dear
child'), these people of yours are treating you just shamefully.  Come,
sit down and tell me all about it.  What do they give you to sleep on?'

"'The floor.'

"'I thought so; and skim milk and water to drink, I suppose?'

"'It _is_ a bit thin.'

"'I can quite imagine it.  You must leave these people, my dear, at
once.'

"'But where am I to go to?'

"'Anywhere.'

"'But who'll take me in?'

"'Anybody, if you go the right way to work.  How many times do you think
I've changed my people?  Seven!--and bettered myself on each occasion.
Why, do you know where I was born?  In a pig-sty.  There were three of
us, mother and I and my little brother.  Mother would leave us every
evening, returning generally just as it was getting light.  One morning
she did not come back.  We waited and waited, but the day passed on and
she did not return, and we grew hungrier and hungrier, and at last we lay
down, side by side, and cried ourselves to sleep.

"'In the evening, peeping through a hole in the door, we saw her coming
across the field.  She was crawling very slowly, with her body close down
against the ground.  We called to her, and she answered with a low
"crroo"; but she did not hasten her pace.

"'She crept in and rolled over on her side, and we ran to her, for we
were almost starving.  We lay long upon her breasts, and she licked us
over and over.

"'I dropped asleep upon her, and in the night I awoke, feeling cold.  I
crept closer to her, but that only made me colder still, and she was wet
and clammy with a dark moisture that was oozing from her side.  I did not
know what it was at that time, but I have learnt since.

"'That was when I could hardly have been four weeks old, and from that
day to this I've looked after myself: you've got to do that in this
world, my dear.  For a while, I and my brother lived on in that sty and
kept ourselves.  It was a grim struggle at first, two babies fighting for
life; but we pulled through.  At the end of about three months, wandering
farther from home than usual, I came upon a cottage, standing in the
fields.  It looked warm and cosy through the open door, and I went in: I
have always been blessed with plenty of nerve.  Some children were
playing round the fire, and they welcomed me and made much of me.  It was
a new sensation to me, and I stayed there.  I thought the place a palace
at the time.

"'I might have gone on thinking so if it had not been that, passing
through the village one day, I happened to catch sight of a room behind a
shop.  There was a carpet on the floor, and a rug before the fire.  I had
never known till then that there were such luxuries in the world.  I
determined to make that shop my home, and I did so.'

"'How did you manage it?' asked the black cat, who was growing
interested.

"'By the simple process of walking in and sitting down.  My dear child,
cheek's the "Open sesame" to every door.  The cat that works hard dies of
starvation, the cat that has brains is kicked downstairs for a fool, and
the cat that has virtue is drowned for a scamp; but the cat that has
cheek sleeps on a velvet cushion and dines on cream and horseflesh.  I
marched straight in and rubbed myself against the old man's legs.  He and
his wife were quite taken with what they called my "trustfulness," and
adopted me with enthusiasm.  Strolling about the fields of an evening I
often used to hear the children of the cottage calling my name.  It was
weeks before they gave up seeking for me.  One of them, the youngest,
would sob herself to sleep of a night, thinking that I was dead: they
were affectionate children.

"'I boarded with my shopkeeping friends for nearly a year, and from them
I went to some new people who had lately come to the neighbourhood, and
who possessed a really excellent cook.  I think I could have been very
satisfied with these people, but, unfortunately, they came down in the
world, and had to give up the big house and the cook, and take a cottage,
and I did not care to go back to that sort of life.

"'Accordingly I looked about for a fresh opening.  There was a curious
old fellow who lived not far off.  People said he was rich, but nobody
liked him.  He was shaped differently from other men.  I turned the
matter over in my mind for a day or two, and then determined to give him
a trial.  Being a lonely sort of man, he might make a fuss over me, and
if not I could go.

"'My surmise proved correct.  I have never been more petted than I was by
"Toady," as the village boys had dubbed him.  My present guardian is
foolish enough over me, goodness knows, but she has other ties, while
"Toady" had nothing else to love, not even himself.  He could hardly
believe his eyes at first when I jumped up on his knees and rubbed myself
against his ugly face.  "Why, Kitty," he said, "do you know you're the
first living thing that has ever come to me of its own accord."  There
were tears in his funny little red eyes as he said that.

"'I remained two years with "Toady," and was very happy indeed.  Then he
fell ill, and strange people came to the house, and I was neglected.
"Toady" liked me to come up and lie upon the bed, where he could stroke
me with his long, thin hand, and at first I used to do this.  But a sick
man is not the best of company, as you can imagine, and the atmosphere of
a sick room not too healthy, so, all things considered, I felt it was
time for me to make a fresh move.

"'I had some difficulty in getting away.  "Toady" was always asking for
me, and they tried to keep me with him: he seemed to lie easier when I
was there.  I succeeded at length, however, and, once outside the door, I
put sufficient distance between myself and the house to ensure my not
being captured, for I knew "Toady" so long as he lived would never cease
hoping to get me back.

"'Where to go, I did not know.  Two or three homes were offered me, but
none of them quite suited me.  At one place, where I put up for a day,
just to see how I liked it, there was a dog; and at another, which would
otherwise have done admirably, they kept a baby.  Whatever you do, never
stop at a house where they keep a baby.  If a child pulls your tail or
ties a paper bag round your head, you can give it one for itself and
nobody blames you.  "Well, serve you right," they say to the yelling
brat, "you shouldn't tease the poor thing."  But if you resent a baby's
holding you by the throat and trying to gouge out your eye with a wooden
ladle, you are called a spiteful beast, and "shoo'd" all round the
garden.  If people keep babies, they don't keep me; that's my rule.

"'After sampling some three or four families, I finally fixed upon a
banker.  Offers more advantageous from a worldly point of view were open
to me.  I could have gone to a public-house, where the victuals were
simply unlimited, and where the back door was left open all night.  But
about the banker's (he was also a churchwarden, and his wife never smiled
at anything less than a joke by the bishop) there was an atmosphere of
solid respectability that I felt would be comforting to my nature.  My
dear child, you will come across cynics who will sneer at respectability:
don't you listen to them.  Respectability is its own reward--and a very
real and practical reward.  It may not bring you dainty dishes and soft
beds, but it brings you something better and more lasting.  It brings you
the consciousness that you are living the right life, that you are doing
the right thing, that, so far as earthly ingenuity can fix it, you are
going to the right place, and that other folks ain't.  Don't you ever let
any one set you against respectability.  It's the most satisfying thing I
know of in this world--and about the cheapest.

"'I was nearly three years with this family, and was sorry when I had to
go.  I should never have left if I could have helped it, but one day
something happened at the bank which necessitated the banker's taking a
sudden journey to Spain, and, after that, the house became a somewhat
unpleasant place to live in.  Noisy, disagreeable people were continually
knocking at the door and making rows in the passage; and at night folks
threw bricks at the windows.

"'I was in a delicate state of health at the time, and my nerves could
not stand it.  I said good-bye to the town, and making my way back into
the country, put up with a county family.

"'They were great swells, but I should have preferred them had they been
more homely.  I am of an affectionate disposition, and I like every one
about me to love me.  They were good enough to me in their distant way,
but they did not take much notice of me, and I soon got tired of
lavishing attentions on people that neither valued nor responded to them.

"'From these people I went to a retired potato merchant.  It was a social
descent, but a rise so far as comfort and appreciation were concerned.
They appeared to be an exceedingly nice family, and to be extremely fond
of me.  I say they "appeared" to be these things, because the sequel
proved that they were neither.  Six months after I had come to them they
went away and left me.  They never asked me to accompany them.  They made
no arrangements for me to stay behind.  They evidently did not care what
became of me.  Such egotistical indifference to the claims of friendship
I had never before met with.  It shook my faith--never too robust--in
human nature.  I determined that, in future, no one should have the
opportunity of disappointing my trust in them.  I selected my present
mistress on the recommendation of a gentleman friend of mine who had
formerly lived with her.  He said she was an excellent caterer.  The only
reason he had left her was that she expected him to be in at ten each
night, and that hour didn't fit in with his other arrangements.  It made
no difference to me--as a matter of fact, I do not care for these
midnight _reunions_ that are so popular amongst us.  There are always too
many cats for one properly to enjoy oneself, and sooner or later a rowdy
element is sure to creep in.  I offered myself to her, and she accepted
me gratefully.  But I have never liked her, and never shall.  She is a
silly old woman, and bores me.  She is, however, devoted to me, and,
unless something extra attractive turns up, I shall stick to her.

"'That, my dear, is the story of my life, so far as it has gone.  I tell
it you to show you how easy it is to be "taken in."  Fix on your house,
and mew piteously at the back door.  When it is opened run in and rub
yourself against the first leg you come across.  Rub hard, and look up
confidingly.  Nothing gets round human beings, I have noticed, quicker
than confidence.  They don't get much of it, and it pleases them.  Always
be confiding.  At the same time be prepared for emergencies.  If you are
still doubtful as to your reception, try and get yourself slightly wet.
Why people should prefer a wet cat to a dry one I have never been able to
understand; but that a wet cat is practically sure of being taken in and
gushed over, while a dry cat is liable to have the garden hose turned
upon it, is an undoubted fact.  Also, if you can possibly manage it, and
it is offered you, eat a bit of dry bread.  The Human Race is always
stirred to its deepest depths by the sight of a cat eating a bit of dry
bread.'

"My friend's black Tom profited by the Chinchilla's wisdom.  A catless
couple had lately come to live next door.  He determined to adopt them on
trial.  Accordingly, on the first rainy day, he went out soon after lunch
and sat for four hours in an open field.  In the evening, soaked to the
skin, and feeling pretty hungry, he went mewing to their door.  One of
the maids opened it, he rushed under her skirts and rubbed himself
against her legs.  She screamed, and down came the master and the
mistress to know what was the matter.

"'It's a stray cat, mum,' said the girl.

"'Turn it out,' said the master.

"'Oh no, don't,' said the mistress.

"'Oh, poor thing, it's wet,' said the housemaid.

"'Perhaps it's hungry,' said the cook.

"'Try it with a bit of dry bread,' sneered the master, who wrote for the
newspapers, and thought he knew everything.

"A stale crust was proffered.  The cat ate it greedily, and afterwards
rubbed himself gratefully against the man's light trousers.

"This made the man ashamed of himself, likewise of his trousers. 'Oh,
well, let it stop if it wants to,' he said.

"So the cat was made comfortable, and stayed on.

"Meanwhile its own family were seeking for it high and low.  They had not
cared over much for it while they had had it; now it was gone, they were
inconsolable.  In the light of its absence, it appeared to them the one
thing that had made the place home.  The shadows of suspicion gathered
round the case.  The cat's disappearance, at first regarded as a mystery,
began to assume the shape of a crime.  The wife openly accused the
husband of never having liked the animal, and more than hinted that he
and the gardener between them could give a tolerably truthful account of
its last moments; an insinuation that the husband repudiated with a
warmth that only added credence to the original surmise.

"The bull-terrier was had up and searchingly examined.  Fortunately for
him, he had not had a single fight for two whole days.  Had any recent
traces of blood been detected upon him, it would have gone hard with him.

"The person who suffered most, however, was the youngest boy.  Three
weeks before, he had dressed the cat in doll's clothes and taken it round
the garden in the perambulator.  He himself had forgotten the incident,
but Justice, though tardy, was on his track.  The misdeed was suddenly
remembered at the very moment when unavailing regret for the loss of the
favourite was at its deepest, so that to box his ears and send him, then
and there, straight off to bed was felt to be a positive relief.

"At the end of a fortnight, the cat, finding he had not, after all,
bettered himself, came back.  The family were so surprised that at first
they could not be sure whether he was flesh and blood, or a spirit come
to comfort them.  After watching him eat half a pound of raw steak, they
decided he was material, and caught him up and hugged him to their
bosoms.  For a week they over-fed him and made much of him.  Then, the
excitement cooling, he found himself dropping back into his old position,
and didn't like it, and went next door again.

"The next door people had also missed him, and they likewise greeted his
return with extravagant ebullitions of joy.  This gave the cat an idea.
He saw that his game was to play the two families off one against the
other; which he did.  He spent an alternate fortnight with each, and
lived like a fighting cock.  His return was always greeted with
enthusiasm, and every means were adopted to induce him to stay.  His
little whims were carefully studied, his favourite dishes kept in
constant readiness.

"The destination of his goings leaked out at length, and then the two
families quarrelled about him over the fence.  My friend accused the
newspaper man of having lured him away.  The newspaper man retorted that
the poor creature had come to his door wet and starving, and added that
he would be ashamed to keep an animal merely to ill-treat it.  They have
a quarrel about him twice a week on the average.  It will probably come
to blows one of these days."

Jephson appeared much surprised by this story.  He remained thoughtful
and silent.  I asked him if he would like to hear any more, and as he
offered no active opposition I went on.  (Maybe he was asleep; that idea
did not occur to me at the time.)

I told him of my grandmother's cat, who, after living a blameless life
for upwards of eleven years, and bringing up a family of something like
sixty-six, not counting those that died in infancy and the water-butt,
took to drink in her old age, and was run over while in a state of
intoxication (oh, the justice of it! ) by a brewer's dray.  I have read
in temperance tracts that no dumb animal will touch a drop of alcoholic
liquor.  My advice is, if you wish to keep them respectable, don't give
them a chance to get at it.  I knew a pony--But never mind him; we are
talking about my grandmother's cat.

A leaky beer-tap was the cause of her downfall.  A saucer used to be
placed underneath it to catch the drippings.  One day the cat, coming in
thirsty, and finding nothing else to drink, lapped up a little, liked it,
and lapped a little more, went away for half an hour, and came back and
finished the saucerful.  Then sat down beside it, and waited for it to
fill again.

From that day till the hour she died, I don't believe that cat was ever
once quite sober.  Her days she passed in a drunken stupor before the
kitchen fire.  Her nights she spent in the beer cellar.

My grandmother, shocked and grieved beyond expression, gave up her barrel
and adopted bottles.  The cat, thus condemned to enforced abstinence,
meandered about the house for a day and a half in a disconsolate,
quarrelsome mood.  Then she disappeared, returning at eleven o'clock as
tight as a drum.

Where she went, and how she managed to procure the drink, we never
discovered; but the same programme was repeated every day.  Some time
during the morning she would contrive to elude our vigilance and escape;
and late every evening she would come reeling home across the fields in a
condition that I will not sully my pen by attempting to describe.

It was on Saturday night that she met the sad end to which I have before
alluded.  She must have been very drunk, for the man told us that, in
consequence of the darkness, and the fact that his horses were tired, he
was proceeding at little more than a snail's pace.

I think my grandmother was rather relieved than otherwise.  She had been
very fond of the cat at one time, but its recent conduct had alienated
her affection.  We children buried it in the garden under the mulberry
tree, but the old lady insisted that there should be no tombstone, not
even a mound raised.  So it lies there, unhonoured, in a drunkard's
grave.

I also told him of another cat our family had once possessed.  She was
the most motherly thing I have ever known.  She was never happy without a
family.  Indeed, I cannot remember her when she hadn't a family in one
stage or another.  She was not very particular what sort of a family it
was.  If she could not have kittens, then she would content herself with
puppies or rats.  Anything that she could wash and feed seemed to satisfy
her.  I believe she would have brought up chickens if we had entrusted
them to her.

All her brains must have run to motherliness, for she hadn't much sense.
She could never tell the difference between her own children and other
people's.  She thought everything young was a kitten.  We once mixed up a
spaniel puppy that had lost its own mother among her progeny.  I shall
never forget her astonishment when it first barked.  She boxed both its
ears, and then sat looking down at it with an expression of indignant
sorrow that was really touching.

"You're going to be a credit to your mother," she seemed to be saying
"you're a nice comfort to any one's old age, you are, making a row like
that.  And look at your ears flopping all over your face.  I don't know
where you pick up such ways."

He was a good little dog.  He did try to mew, and he did try to wash his
face with his paw, and to keep his tail still, but his success was not
commensurate with his will.  I do not know which was the sadder to
reflect upon, his efforts to become a creditable kitten, or his foster-
mother's despair of ever making him one.

Later on we gave her a baby squirrel to rear.  She was nursing a family
of her own at the time, but she adopted him with enthusiasm, under the
impression that he was another kitten, though she could not quite make
out how she had come to overlook him.  He soon became her prime
favourite.  She liked his colour, and took a mother's pride in his tail.
What troubled her was that it would cock up over his head.  She would
hold it down with one paw, and lick it by the half-hour together, trying
to make it set properly.  But the moment she let it go up it would cock
again.  I have heard her cry with vexation because of this.

One day a neighbouring cat came to see her, and the squirrel was clearly
the subject of their talk.

"It's a good colour," said the friend, looking critically at the supposed
kitten, who was sitting up on his haunches combing his whiskers, and
saying the only truthfully pleasant thing about him that she could think
of.

"He's a lovely colour," exclaimed our cat proudly.

"I don't like his legs much," remarked the friend.

"No," responded his mother thoughtfully, "you're right there.  His legs
are his weak point.  I can't say I think much of his legs myself."

"Maybe they'll fill out later on," suggested the friend, kindly.

"Oh, I hope so," replied the mother, regaining her momentarily dashed
cheerfulness.  "Oh yes, they'll come all right in time.  And then look at
his tail.  Now, honestly, did you ever see a kitten with a finer tail?"

"Yes, it's a good tail," assented the other; "but why do you do it up
over his head?"

"I don't," answered our cat.  "It goes that way.  I can't make it out.  I
suppose it will come straight as he gets older."

"It will be awkward if it don't," said the friend.

"Oh, but I'm sure it will," replied our cat.  "I must lick it more.  It's
a tail that wants a good deal of licking, you can see that."

And for hours that afternoon, after the other cat had gone, she sat
trimming it; and, at the end, when she lifted her paw off it, and it flew
back again like a steel spring over the squirrel's head, she sat and
gazed at it with feelings that only those among my readers who have been
mothers themselves will be able to comprehend.

"What have I done," she seemed to say--"what have I done that this
trouble should come upon me?"

Jephson roused himself on my completion of this anecdote and sat up.

"You and your friends appear to have been the possessors of some very
remarkable cats," he observed.

"Yes," I answered, "our family has been singularly fortunate in its
cats."

"Singularly so," agreed Jephson; "I have never met but one man from whom
I have heard more wonderful cat talk than, at one time or another, I have
from you."

"Oh," I said, not, perhaps without a touch of jealousy in my voice, "and
who was he?"

"He was a seafaring man," replied Jephson.  "I met him on a Hampstead
tram, and we discussed the subject of animal sagacity.

"'Yes, sir,' he said, 'monkeys is cute.  I've come across monkeys as
could give points to one or two lubbers I've sailed under; and elephants
is pretty spry, if you can believe all that's told of 'em.  I've heard
some tall tales about elephants.  And, of course, dogs has their heads
screwed on all right: I don't say as they ain't.  But what I do say is:
that for straightfor'ard, level-headed reasoning, give me cats.  You see,
sir, a dog, he thinks a powerful deal of a man--never was such a cute
thing as a man, in a dog's opinion; and he takes good care that everybody
knows it.  Naturally enough, we says a dog is the most intellectual
animal there is.  Now a cat, she's got her own opinion about human
beings.  She don't say much, but you can tell enough to make you anxious
not to hear the whole of it.  The consequence is, we says a cat's got no
intelligence.  That's where we let our prejudice steer our judgment
wrong.  In a matter of plain common sense, there ain't a cat living as
couldn't take the lee side of a dog and fly round him.  Now, have you
ever noticed a dog at the end of a chain, trying to kill a cat as is
sitting washing her face three-quarters of an inch out of his reach?  Of
course you have.  Well, who's got the sense out of those two?  The cat
knows that it ain't in the nature of steel chains to stretch.  The dog,
who ought, you'd think, to know a durned sight more about 'em than she
does, is sure they will if you only bark loud enough.

"'Then again, have you ever been made mad by cats screeching in the
night, and jumped out of bed and opened the window and yelled at them?
Did they ever budge an inch for that, though you shrieked loud enough to
skeer the dead, and waved your arms about like a man in a play?  Not
they.  They've turned and looked at you, that's all.  "Yell away, old
man," they've said, "we like to hear you: the more the merrier."  Then
what have you done?  Why, you've snatched up a hair-brush, or a boot, or
a candlestick, and made as if you'd throw it at them.  They've seen your
attitude, they've seen the thing in your hand, but they ain't moved a
point.  They knew as you weren't going to chuck valuable property out of
window with the chance of getting it lost or spoiled.  They've got sense
themselves, and they give you credit for having some.  If you don't
believe that's the reason, you try showing them a lump of coal, or half a
brick, next time--something as they know you _will_ throw.  Before you're
ready to heave it, there won't be a cat within aim.

"'Then as to judgment and knowledge of the world, why dogs are babies to
'em.  Have you ever tried telling a yarn before a cat, sir?'

"I replied that cats had often been present during anecdotal recitals of
mine, but that, hitherto, I had paid no particular attention to their
demeanour.

"'Ah, well, you take an opportunity of doing so one day, sir,' answered
the old fellow; 'it's worth the experiment.  If you're telling a story
before a cat, and she don't get uneasy during any part of the narrative,
you can reckon you've got hold of a thing as it will be safe for you to
tell to the Lord Chief Justice of England.

"'I've got a messmate,' he continued; 'William Cooley is his name.  We
call him Truthful Billy.  He's as good a seaman as ever trod
quarter-deck; but when he gets spinning yarns he ain't the sort of man as
I could advise you to rely upon.  Well, Billy, he's got a dog, and I've
seen him sit and tell yarns before that dog that would make a cat squirm
out of its skin, and that dog's taken 'em in and believed 'em.  One
night, up at his old woman's, Bill told us a yarn by the side of which
salt junk two voyages old would pass for spring chicken.  I watched the
dog, to see how he would take it.  He listened to it from beginning to
end with cocked ears, and never so much as blinked.  Every now and then
he would look round with an expression of astonishment or delight that
seemed to say: "Wonderful, isn't it!"  "Dear me, just think of it!"  "Did
you ever!"  "Well, if that don't beat everything!"  He was a
chuckle-headed dog; you could have told him anything.

"'It irritated me that Bill should have such an animal about him to
encourage him, and when he had finished I said to him, "I wish you'd tell
that yarn round at my quarters one evening."

"'Why?' said Bill.

"'Oh, it's just a fancy of mine,' I says.  I didn't tell him I was
wanting my old cat to hear it.

"'Oh, all right,' says Bill, 'you remind me.'  He loved yarning, Billy
did.

"'Next night but one he slings himself up in my cabin, and I does so.
Nothing loth, off he starts.  There was about half-a-dozen of us
stretched round, and the cat was sitting before the fire fussing itself
up.  Before Bill had got fairly under weigh, she stops washing and looks
up at me, puzzled like, as much as to say, "What have we got here, a
missionary?"  I signalled to her to keep quiet, and Bill went on with his
yarn.  When he got to the part about the sharks, she turned deliberately
round and looked at him.  I tell you there was an expression of disgust
on that cat's face as might have made a travelling Cheap Jack feel
ashamed of himself.  It was that human, I give you my word, sir, I forgot
for the moment as the poor animal couldn't speak.  I could see the words
that were on its lips: "Why don't you tell us you swallowed the anchor?"
and I sat on tenter-hooks, fearing each instant that she would say them
aloud.  It was a relief to me when she turned her back on Bill.

"'For a few minutes she sat very still, and seemed to be wrestling with
herself like.  I never saw a cat more set on controlling its feelings, or
that seemed to suffer more in silence.  It made my heart ache to watch
it.

"'At last Bill came to the point where he and the captain between 'em
hold the shark's mouth open while the cabin-boy dives in head foremost,
and fetches up, undigested, the gold watch and chain as the bo'sun was a-
wearing when he fell overboard; and at that the old cat giv'd a screech,
and rolled over on her side with her legs in the air.

"'I thought at first the poor thing was dead, but she rallied after a
bit, and it seemed as though she had braced herself up to hear the thing
out.

"'But a little further on, Bill got too much for her again, and this time
she owned herself beat.  She rose up and looked round at us: "You'll
excuse me, gentlemen," she said--leastways that is what she said if looks
go for anything--"maybe you're used to this sort of rubbish, and it don't
get on your nerves.  With me it's different.  I guess I've heard as much
of this fool's talk as my constitution will stand, and if it's all the
same to you I'll get outside before I'm sick."

"'With that she walked up to the door, and I opened it for her, and she
went out.

"'You can't fool a cat with talk same as you can a dog.'"




CHAPTER VII


Does man ever reform?  Balzac says he doesn't.  So far as my experience
goes, it agrees with that of Balzac--a fact the admirers of that author
are at liberty to make what use of they please.

When I was young and accustomed to take my views of life from people who
were older than myself, and who knew better, so they said, I used to
believe that he did.  Examples of "reformed characters" were frequently
pointed out to me--indeed, our village, situate a few miles from a small
seaport town, seemed to be peculiarly rich in such.  They were, from all
accounts, including their own, persons who had formerly behaved with
quite unnecessary depravity, and who, at the time I knew them, appeared
to be going to equally objectionable lengths in the opposite direction.
They invariably belonged to one of two classes, the low-spirited or the
aggressively unpleasant.  They said, and I believed, that they were
happy; but I could not help reflecting how very sad they must have been
before they were happy.

One of them, a small, meek-eyed old man with a piping voice, had been
exceptionally wild in his youth.  What had been his special villainy I
could never discover.  People responded to my inquiries by saying that he
had been "Oh, generally bad," and increased my longing for detail by
adding that little boys ought not to want to know about such things.  From
their tone and manner I assumed that he must have been a pirate at the
very least, and regarded him with awe, not unmingled with secret
admiration.

Whatever it was, he had been saved from it by his wife, a bony lady of
unprepossessing appearance, but irreproachable views.

One day he called at our house for some purpose or other, and, being left
alone with him for a few minutes, I took the opportunity of interviewing
him personally on the subject.

"You were very wicked once, weren't you?" I said, seeking by emphasis on
the "once" to mitigate what I felt might be the disagreeable nature of
the question.

To my intense surprise, a gleam of shameful glory lit up his wizened
face, and a sound which I tried to think a sigh, but which sounded like a
chuckle, escaped his lips.

"Ay," he replied; "I've been a bit of a spanker in my time."

The term "spanker" in such connection puzzled me.  I had been hitherto
led to regard a spanker as an eminently conscientious person, especially
where the shortcomings of other people were concerned; a person who
laboured for the good of others.  That the word could also be employed to
designate a sinful party was a revelation to me.

"But you are good now, aren't you?" I continued, dismissing further
reflection upon the etymology of "spanker" to a more fitting occasion.

"Ay, ay," he answered, his countenance resuming its customary aspect of
resigned melancholy.  "I be a brand plucked from the burning, I be.  There
beant much wrong wi' Deacon Sawyers, now."

"And it was your wife that made you good, wasn't it?" I persisted,
determined, now that I had started this investigation, to obtain
confirmation at first hand on all points.

At the mention of his wife his features became suddenly transformed.
Glancing hurriedly round, to make sure, apparently, that no one but
myself was within hearing, he leaned across and hissed these words into
my ear--I have never forgotten them, there was a ring of such evident
sincerity about them--

"I'd like to skin her, I'd like to skin her alive."

It struck me, even in the light of my then limited judgment, as an
unregenerate wish; and thus early my faith in the possibility of man's
reformation received the first of those many blows that have resulted in
shattering it.

Nature, whether human or otherwise, was not made to be reformed.  You can
develop, you can check, but you cannot alter it.

You can take a small tiger and train it to sit on a hearthrug, and to lap
milk, and so long as you provide it with hearthrugs to lie on and
sufficient milk to drink, it will purr and behave like an affectionate
domestic pet.  But it is a tiger, with all a tiger's instincts, and its
progeny to the end of all time will be tigers.

In the same way, you can take an ape and develop it through a few
thousand generations until it loses its tail and becomes an altogether
superior ape.  You can go on developing it through still a few more
thousands of generations until it gathers to itself out of the waste
vapours of eternity an intellect and a soul, by the aid of which it is
enabled to keep the original apish nature more or less under control.

But the ape is still there, and always will be, and every now and again,
when Constable Civilisation turns his back for a moment, as during
"Spanish Furies," or "September massacres," or Western mob rule, it
creeps out and bites and tears at quivering flesh, or plunges its hairy
arms elbow deep in blood, or dances round a burning nigger.

I knew a man once--or, rather, I knew of a man--who was a confirmed
drunkard.  He became and continued a drunkard, not through weakness, but
through will.  When his friends remonstrated with him, he told them to
mind their own business, and to let him mind his.  If he saw any reason
for not getting drunk he would give it up.  Meanwhile he liked getting
drunk, and he meant to get drunk as often as possible.

He went about it deliberately, and did it thoroughly.  For nearly ten
years, so it was reported, he never went to bed sober.  This may be an
exaggeration--it would be a singular report were it not--but it can be
relied upon as sufficiently truthful for all practical purposes.

Then there came a day when he did see a reason for not getting drunk.  He
signed no pledge, he took no oath.  He said, "I will never touch another
drop of drink," and for twenty-six years he kept his word.

At the end of that time a combination of circumstances occurred that made
life troublesome to him, so that he desired to be rid of it altogether.
He was a man accustomed, when he desired a thing within his reach, to
stretch out his hand and take it.  He reviewed the case calmly, and
decided to commit suicide.

If the thing were to be done at all, it would be best, for reasons that
if set forth would make this a long story, that it should be done that
very night, and, if possible, before eleven o'clock, which was the
earliest hour a certain person could arrive from a certain place.

It was then four in the afternoon.  He attended to some necessary
business, and wrote some necessary letters.  This occupied him until
seven.  He then called a cab and drove to a small hotel in the suburbs,
engaged a private room, and ordered up materials for the making of the
particular punch that had been the last beverage he had got drunk on, six-
and-twenty years ago.

For three hours he sat there drinking steadily, with his watch before
him.  At half-past ten he rang the bell, paid his bill, came home, and
cut his throat.

For a quarter of a century people had been calling that man a "reformed
character."  His character had not reformed one jot.  The craving for
drink had never died.  For twenty-six years he had, being a great man,
held it gripped by the throat.  When all things became a matter of
indifference to him, he loosened his grasp, and the evil instinct rose up
within him as strong on the day he died as on the day he forced it down.

That is all a man can do, pray for strength to crush down the evil that
is in him, and to keep it held down day after day.  I never hear washy
talk about "changed characters" and "reformed natures" but I think of a
sermon I once heard at a Wesleyan revivalist meeting in the Black
Country.

"Ah! my friends, we've all of us got the devil inside us.  I've got him,
you've got him," cried the preacher--he was an old man, with long white
hair and beard, and wild, fighting eyes.  Most of the preachers who came
"reviving," as it was called, through that district, had those eyes.  Some
of them needed "reviving" themselves, in quite another sense, before they
got clear out of it.  I am speaking now of more than thirty years ago.

"Ah! so us have--so us have," came the response.

"And you carn't get rid of him," continued the speaker.

"Not of oursel's," ejaculated a fervent voice at the end of the room,
"but the Lord will help us."

The old preacher turned on him almost fiercely:--

"But th' Lord woan't," he shouted; "doan't 'ee reckon on that, lad.  Ye've
got him an' ye've got ta keep him.  Ye carn't get rid of him.  Th' Lord
doan't mean 'ee to."

Here there broke forth murmurs of angry disapproval, but the old fellow
went on, unheeding:--

"It arn't good for 'ee to get rid of him.  Ye've just got to hug him
tight.  Doan't let him go.  Hold him fast, and--LAM INTO HIM.  I tell 'ee
it's good, healthy Christian exercise."

We had been discussing the subject with reference to our hero.  It had
been suggested by Brown as an unhackneyed idea, and one lending itself,
therefore, to comparative freshness of treatment, that our hero should be
a thorough-paced scamp.

Jephson seconded the proposal, for the reason that it would the better
enable us to accomplish artistic work.  He was of opinion that we should
be more sure of our ground in drawing a villain than in attempting to
portray a good man.

MacShaughnassy thirded (if I may coin what has often appeared to me to be
a much-needed word) the motion with ardour.  He was tired, he said, of
the crystal-hearted, noble-thinking young man of fiction.  Besides, it
made bad reading for the "young person."  It gave her false ideas, and
made her dissatisfied with mankind as he really is.

And, thereupon, he launched forth and sketched us his idea of a hero,
with reference to whom I can only say that I should not like to meet him
on a dark night.

Brown, our one earnest member, begged us to be reasonable, and reminded
us, not for the first time, and not, perhaps, altogether unnecessarily,
that these meetings were for the purpose of discussing business, not of
talking nonsense.

Thus adjured, we attacked the subject conscientiously.

Brown's idea was that the man should be an out-and-out blackguard, until
about the middle of the book, when some event should transpire that would
have the effect of completely reforming him.  This naturally brought the
discussion down to the question with which I have commenced this chapter:
Does man ever reform?  I argued in the negative, and gave the reasons for
my disbelief much as I have set them forth here.  MacShaughnassy, on the
other hand, contended that he did, and instanced the case of himself--a
man who, in his early days, so he asserted, had been a scatterbrained,
impracticable person, entirely without stability.

I maintained that this was merely an example of enormous will-power
enabling a man to overcome and rise superior to the defects of character
with which nature had handicapped him.

"My opinion of you," I said, "is that you are naturally a hopelessly
irresponsible, well-meaning ass.  But," I continued quickly, seeing his
hand reaching out towards a complete Shakespeare in one volume that lay
upon the piano, "your mental capabilities are of such extraordinary power
that you can disguise this fact, and make yourself appear a man of sense
and wisdom."

Brown agreed with me that in MacShaughnassy's case traces of the former
disposition were clearly apparent, but pleaded that the illustration was
an unfortunate one, and that it ought not to have weight in the
discussion.

"Seriously speaking," said he, "don't you think that there are some
experiences great enough to break up and re-form a man's nature?"

"To break up," I replied, "yes; but to re-form, no.  Passing through a
great experience may shatter a man, or it may strengthen a man, just as
passing through a furnace may melt or purify metal, but no furnace ever
lit upon this earth can change a bar of gold into a bar of lead, or a bar
of lead into one of gold."

I asked Jephson what he thought.  He did not consider the bar of gold
simile a good one.  He held that a man's character was not an immutable
element.  He likened it to a drug--poison or elixir--compounded by each
man for himself from the pharmacopoeia of all things known to life and
time, and saw no impossibility, though some improbability, in the glass
being flung aside and a fresh draught prepared with pain and labour.

"Well," I said, "let us put the case practically; did you ever know a
man's character to change?"

"Yes," he answered, "I did know a man whose character seemed to me to be
completely changed by an experience that happened to him.  It may, as you
say, only have been that he was shattered, or that the lesson may have
taught him to keep his natural disposition ever under control.  The
result, in any case, was striking."

We asked him to give us the history of the case, and he did so.

"He was a friend of some cousins of mine," Jephson began, "people I used
to see a good deal of in my undergraduate days.  When I met him first he
was a young fellow of twenty-six, strong mentally and physically, and of
a stern and stubborn nature that those who liked him called masterful,
and that those who disliked him--a more numerous body--termed tyrannical.
When I saw him three years later, he was an old man of twenty-nine,
gentle and yielding beyond the border-line of weakness, mistrustful of
himself and considerate of others to a degree that was often unwise.
Formerly, his anger had been a thing very easily and frequently aroused.
Since the change of which I speak, I have never known the shade of anger
to cross his face but once.  In the course of a walk, one day, we came
upon a young rough terrifying a small child by pretending to set a dog at
her.  He seized the boy with a grip that almost choked him, and
administered to him a punishment that seemed to me altogether out of
proportion to the crime, brutal though it was.

"I remonstrated with him when he rejoined me.

"'Yes,' he replied apologetically; 'I suppose I'm a hard judge of some
follies.'  And, knowing what his haunted eyes were looking at, I said no
more.

"He was junior partner in a large firm of tea brokers in the City.  There
was not much for him to do in the London office, and when, therefore, as
the result of some mortgage transactions, a South Indian tea plantation
fell into the hands of the firm, it was suggested that he should go out
and take the management of it.  The plan suited him admirably.  He was a
man in every way qualified to lead a rough life; to face a by no means
contemptible amount of difficulty and danger, to govern a small army of
native workers more amenable to fear than to affection.  Such a life,
demanding thought and action, would afford his strong nature greater
interest and enjoyment than he could ever hope to obtain amid the cramped
surroundings of civilisation.

"Only one thing could in reason have been urged against the arrangement,
that thing was his wife.  She was a fragile, delicate girl, whom he had
married in obedience to that instinct of attraction towards the opposite
which Nature, for the purpose of maintaining her average, has implanted
in our breasts--a timid, meek-eyed creature, one of those women to whom
death is less terrible than danger, and fate easier to face than fear.
Such women have been known to run screaming from a mouse and to meet
martyrdom with heroism.  They can no more keep their nerves from
trembling than an aspen tree can stay the quivering of its leaves.

"That she was totally unfitted for, and would be made wretched by the
life to which his acceptance of the post would condemn her might have
readily occurred to him, had he stopped to consider for a moment her
feelings in the matter.  But to view a question from any other standpoint
than his own was not his habit.  That he loved her passionately, in his
way, as a thing belonging to himself, there can be no doubt, but it was
with the love that such men have for the dog they will thrash, the horse
they will spur to a broken back.  To consult her on the subject never
entered his head.  He informed her one day of his decision and of the
date of their sailing, and, handing her a handsome cheque, told her to
purchase all things necessary to her, and to let him know if she needed
more; and she, loving him with a dog-like devotion that was not good for
him, opened her big eyes a little wider, but said nothing.  She thought
much about the coming change to herself, however, and, when nobody was
by, she would cry softly; then, hearing his footsteps, would hastily wipe
away the traces of her tears, and go to meet him with a smile.

"Now, her timidity and nervousness, which at home had been a butt for
mere chaff, became, under the new circumstances of their life, a serious
annoyance to the man.  A woman who seemed unable to repress a scream
whenever she turned and saw in the gloom a pair of piercing eyes looking
out at her from a dusky face, who was liable to drop off her horse with
fear at the sound of a wild beast's roar a mile off, and who would turn
white and limp with horror at the mere sight of a snake, was not a
companionable person to live with in the neighbourhood of Indian jungles.

"He himself was entirely without fear, and could not understand it.  To
him it was pure affectation.  He had a muddled idea, common to men of his
stamp, that women assume nervousness because they think it pretty and
becoming to them, and that if one could only convince them of the folly
of it they might be induced to lay it aside, in the same way that they
lay aside mincing steps and simpering voices.  A man who prided himself,
as he did, upon his knowledge of horses, might, one would think, have
grasped a truer notion of the nature of nervousness, which is a mere
matter of temperament.  But the man was a fool.

"The thing that vexed him most was her horror of snakes.  He was
unblessed--or uncursed, whichever you may prefer--with imagination of any
kind.  There was no special enmity between him and the seed of the
serpent.  A creature that crawled upon its belly was no more terrible to
him than a creature that walked upon its legs; indeed, less so, for he
knew that, as a rule, there was less danger to be apprehended from them.
A reptile is only too eager at all times to escape from man.  Unless
attacked or frightened, it will make no onset.  Most people are content
to acquire their knowledge of this fact from the natural history books.
He had proved it for himself.  His servant, an old sergeant of dragoons,
has told me that he has seen him stop with his face six inches from the
head of a hooded cobra, and stand watching it through his eye-glass as it
crawled away from him, knowing that one touch of its fangs would mean
death from which there could be no possible escape.  That any reasoning
being should be inspired with terror--sickening, deadly terror--by such
pitifully harmless things, seemed to him monstrous; and he determined to
try and cure her of her fear of them.

"He succeeded in doing this eventually somewhat more thoroughly than he
had anticipated, but it left a terror in his own eyes that has not gone
out of them to this day, and that never will.

"One evening, riding home through a part of the jungle not far from his
bungalow, he heard a soft, low hiss close to his ear, and, looking up,
saw a python swing itself from the branch of a tree and make off through
the long grass.  He had been out antelope-shooting, and his loaded rifle
hung by his stirrup.  Springing from the frightened horse, he was just in
time to get a shot at the creature before it disappeared.  He had hardly
expected, under the circumstances, to even hit it.  By chance the bullet
struck it at the junction of the vertebrae with the head, and killed it
instantly.  It was a well-marked specimen, and, except for the small
wound the bullet had made, quite uninjured.  He picked it up, and hung it
across the saddle, intending to take it home and preserve it.

"Galloping along, glancing down every now and again at the huge, hideous
thing swaying and writhing in front of him almost as if still alive, a
brilliant idea occurred to him.  He would use this dead reptile to cure
his wife of her fear of living ones.  He would fix matters so that she
should see it, and think it was alive, and be terrified by it; then he
would show her that she had been frightened by a mere dead thing, and she
would feel ashamed of herself, and be healed of her folly.  It was the
sort of idea that would occur to a fool.

"When he reached home, he took the dead snake into his smoking-room;
then, locking the door, the idiot set out his prescription.  He arranged
the monster in a very natural and life-like position.  It appeared to be
crawling from the open window across the floor, and any one coming into
the room suddenly could hardly avoid treading on it.  It was very
cleverly done.

"That finished, he picked out a book from the shelves, opened it, and
laid it face downward upon the couch.  When he had completed all things
to his satisfaction he unlocked the door and came out, very pleased with
himself.

"After dinner he lit a cigar and sat smoking a while in silence.

"'Are you feeling tired?' he said to her at length, with a smile.

"She laughed, and, calling him a lazy old thing, asked what it was he
wanted.

"'Only my novel that I was reading.  I left it in my den.  Do you mind?
You will find it open on the couch.'

"She sprang up and ran lightly to the door.

"As she paused there for a moment to look back at him and ask the name of
the book, he thought how pretty and how sweet she was; and for the first
time a faint glimmer of the true nature of the thing he was doing forced
itself into his brain.

"'Never mind,' he said, half rising, 'I'll--'; then, enamoured of the
brilliancy of his plan, checked himself; and she was gone.

"He heard her footsteps passing along the matted passage, and smiled to
himself.  He thought the affair was going to be rather amusing.  One
finds it difficult to pity him even now when one thinks of it.

"The smoking-room door opened and closed, and he still sat gazing
dreamily at the ash of his cigar, and smiling.

"One moment, perhaps two passed, but the time seemed much longer.  The
man blew the gray cloud from before his eyes and waited.  Then he heard
what he had been expecting to hear--a piercing shriek.  Then another,
which, expecting to hear the clanging of the distant door and the
scurrying back of her footsteps along the passage, puzzled him, so that
the smile died away from his lips.

"Then another, and another, and another, shriek after shriek.

"The native servant, gliding noiselessly about the room, laid down the
thing that was in his hand and moved instinctively towards the door.  The
man started up and held him back.

"'Keep where you are,' he said hoarsely.  'It is nothing.  Your mistress
is frightened, that is all.  She must learn to get over this folly.'  Then
he listened again, and the shrieks ended with what sounded curiously like
a smothered laugh; and there came a sudden silence.

"And out of that bottomless silence, Fear for the first time in his life
came to the man, and he and the dusky servant looked at each other with
eyes in which there was a strange likeness; and by a common instinct
moved together towards the place where the silence came from.

"When the man opened the door he saw three things: one was the dead
python, lying where he had left it; the second was a live python, its
comrade apparently, slowly crawling round it; the third a crushed, bloody
heap in the middle of the floor.

"He himself remembered nothing more until, weeks afterwards, he opened
his eyes in a darkened, unfamiliar place, but the native servant, before
he fled screaming from the house, saw his master fling himself upon the
living serpent and grasp it with his hands, and when, later on, others
burst into the room and caught him staggering in their arms, they found
the second python with its head torn off.

"That is the incident that changed the character of my man--if it be
changed," concluded Jephson.  "He told it me one night as we sat on the
deck of the steamer, returning from Bombay.  He did not spare himself.  He
told me the story, much as I have told it to you, but in an even,
monotonous tone, free from emotion of any kind.  I asked him, when he had
finished, how he could bear to recall it.

"'Recall it!' he replied, with a slight accent of surprise; 'it is always
with me.'"




CHAPTER VIII


One day we spoke of crime and criminals.  We had discussed the
possibility of a novel without a villain, but had decided that it would
be uninteresting.

"It is a terribly sad reflection," remarked MacShaughnassy, musingly;
"but what a desperately dull place this earth would be if it were not for
our friends the bad people.  Do you know," he continued, "when I hear of
folks going about the world trying to reform everybody and make them
good, I get positively nervous.  Once do away with sin, and literature
will become a thing of the past.  Without the criminal classes we authors
would starve."

"I shouldn't worry," replied Jephson, drily; "one half mankind has been
'reforming' the other half pretty steadily ever since the Creation, yet
there appears to be a fairly appreciable amount of human nature left in
it, notwithstanding.  Suppressing sin is much the same sort of task that
suppressing a volcano would be--plugging one vent merely opens another.
Evil will last our time."

"I cannot take your optimistic view of the case," answered
MacShaughnassy.  "It seems to me that crime--at all events, interesting
crime--is being slowly driven out of our existence.  Pirates and
highwaymen have been practically abolished.  Dear old 'Smuggler Bill' has
melted down his cutlass into a pint-can with a false bottom.  The
pressgang that was always so ready to rescue our hero from his
approaching marriage has been disbanded.  There's not a lugger fit for
the purposes of abduction left upon the coast.  Men settle their 'affairs
of honour' in the law courts, and return home wounded only in the pocket.
Assaults on unprotected females are confined to the slums, where heroes
do not dwell, and are avenged by the nearest magistrate.  Your modern
burglar is generally an out-of-work green-grocer.  His 'swag' usually
consists of an overcoat and a pair of boots, in attempting to make off
with which he is captured by the servant-girl.  Suicides and murders are
getting scarcer every season.  At the present rate of decrease, deaths by
violence will be unheard of in another decade, and a murder story will be
laughed at as too improbable to be interesting.  A certain section of
busybodies are even crying out for the enforcement of the seventh
commandment.  If they succeed authors will have to follow the advice
generally given to them by the critics, and retire from business
altogether.  I tell you our means of livelihood are being filched from us
one by one.  Authors ought to form themselves into a society for the
support and encouragement of crime."

MacShaughnassy's leading intention in making these remarks was to shock
and grieve Brown, and in this object he succeeded.  Brown is--or was, in
those days--an earnest young man with an exalted--some were inclined to
say an exaggerated--view of the importance and dignity of the literary
profession.  Brown's notion of the scheme of Creation was that God made
the universe so as to give the literary man something to write about.  I
used at one time to credit Brown with originality for this idea; but as I
have grown older I have learned that the theory is a very common and
popular one in cultured circles.

Brown expostulated with MacShaughnassy.  "You speak," he said, "as though
literature were the parasite of evil."

"And what else is she?" replied the MacShaughnassy, with enthusiasm.
"What would become of literature without folly and sin?  What is the work
of the literary man but raking a living for himself out of the dust-heap
of human woe?  Imagine, if you can, a perfect world--a world where men
and women never said foolish things and never did unwise ones; where
small boys were never mischievous and children never made awkward
remarks; where dogs never fought and cats never screeched; where wives
never henpecked their husbands and mothers-in-law never nagged; where men
never went to bed in their boots and sea-captains never swore; where
plumbers understood their work and old maids never dressed as girls;
where niggers never stole chickens and proud men were never sea-sick!
where would be your humour and your wit?  Imagine a world where hearts
were never bruised; where lips were never pressed with pain; where eyes
were never dim; where feet were never weary; where stomachs were never
empty! where would be your pathos?  Imagine a world where husbands never
loved more wives than one, and that the right one; where wives were never
kissed but by their husbands; where men's hearts were never black and
women's thoughts never impure; where there was no hating and no envying;
no desiring; no despairing! where would be your scenes of passion, your
interesting complications, your subtle psychological analyses?  My dear
Brown, we writers--novelists, dramatists, poets--we fatten on the misery
of our fellow-creatures.  God created man and woman, and the woman
created the literary man when she put her teeth into the apple.  We came
into the world under the shadow of the serpent.  We are special
correspondents with the Devil's army.  We report his victories in our
three-volume novels, his occasional defeats in our five-act melodramas."

"All of which is very true," remarked Jephson; "but you must remember it
is not only the literary man who traffics in misfortune.  The doctor, the
lawyer, the preacher, the newspaper proprietor, the weather prophet, will
hardly, I should say, welcome the millennium.  I shall never forget an
anecdote my uncle used to relate, dealing with the period when he was
chaplain of the Lincolnshire county jail.  One morning there was to be a
hanging; and the usual little crowd of witnesses, consisting of the
sheriff, the governor, three or four reporters, a magistrate, and a
couple of warders, was assembled in the prison.  The condemned man, a
brutal ruffian who had been found guilty of murdering a young girl under
exceptionally revolting circumstances, was being pinioned by the hangman
and his assistant; and my uncle was employing the last few moments at his
disposal in trying to break down the sullen indifference the fellow had
throughout manifested towards both his crime and his fate.

"My uncle failing to make any impression upon him, the governor ventured
to add a few words of exhortation, upon which the man turned fiercely on
the whole of them.

"'Go to hell,' he cried, 'with your snivelling jaw.  Who are you, to
preach at me?  _You're_ glad enough I'm here--all of you.  Why, I'm the
only one of you as ain't going to make a bit over this job.  Where would
you all be, I should like to know, you canting swine, if it wasn't for me
and my sort?  Why, it's the likes of me as _keeps_ the likes of you,'
with which he walked straight to the gallows and told the hangman to
'hurry up' and not keep the gentlemen waiting."

"There was some 'grit' in that man," said MacShaughnassy.

"Yes," added Jephson, "and wholesome wit also."

MacShaughnassy puffed a mouthful of smoke over a spider which was just
about to kill a fly.  This caused the spider to fall into the river, from
where a supper-hunting swallow quickly rescued him.

"You remind me," he said, "of a scene I once witnessed in the office of
_The Daily_--well, in the office of a certain daily newspaper.  It was
the dead season, and things were somewhat slow.  An endeavour had been
made to launch a discussion on the question 'Are Babies a Blessing?'  The
youngest reporter on the staff, writing over the simple but touching
signature of 'Mother of Six,' had led off with a scathing, though
somewhat irrelevant, attack upon husbands, as a class; the Sporting
Editor, signing himself 'Working Man,' and garnishing his contribution
with painfully elaborated orthographical lapses, arranged to give an air
of verisimilitude to the correspondence, while, at the same time, not to
offend the susceptibilities of the democracy (from whom the paper derived
its chief support), had replied, vindicating the British father, and
giving what purported to be stirring midnight experiences of his own.  The
Gallery Man, calling himself, with a burst of imagination, 'Gentleman and
Christian,' wrote indignantly that he considered the agitation of the
subject to be both impious and indelicate, and added he was surprised
that a paper holding the exalted, and deservedly popular, position of
_The_ --- should have opened its columns to the brainless vapourings of
'Mother of Six' and 'Working Man.'

"The topic had, however, fallen flat.  With the exception of one man who
had invented a new feeding-bottle, and thought he was going to advertise
it for nothing, the outside public did not respond, and over the
editorial department gloom had settled down.

"One evening, as two or three of us were mooning about the stairs,
praying secretly for a war or a famine, Todhunter, the town reporter,
rushed past us with a cheer, and burst into the Sub-editor's room.  We
followed.  He was waving his notebook above his head, and clamouring,
after the manner of people in French exercises, for pens, ink, and paper.

"'What's up?' cried the Sub-editor, catching his enthusiasm; 'influenza
again?'

"'Better than that!' shouted Todhunter.  'Excursion steamer run down, a
hundred and twenty-five lives lost--four good columns of heartrending
scenes.'

"'By Jove!' said the Sub, 'couldn't have happened at a better time
either'--and then he sat down and dashed off a leaderette, in which he
dwelt upon the pain and regret the paper felt at having to announce the
disaster, and drew attention to the exceptionally harrowing account
provided by the energy and talent of 'our special reporter.'"

"It is the law of nature," said Jephson: "we are not the first party of
young philosophers who have been struck with the fact that one man's
misfortune is another man's opportunity."

"Occasionally, another woman's," I observed.

I was thinking of an incident told me by a nurse.  If a nurse in fair
practice does not know more about human nature--does not see clearer into
the souls of men and women than all the novelists in little Bookland put
together--it must be because she is physically blind and deaf.  All the
world's a stage, and all the men and women merely players; so long as we
are in good health, we play our parts out bravely to the end, acting
them, on the whole, artistically and with strenuousness, even to the
extent of sometimes fancying ourselves the people we are pretending to
be.  But with sickness comes forgetfulness of our part, and carelessness
of the impression we are making upon the audience.  We are too weak to
put the paint and powder on our faces, the stage finery lies unheeded by
our side.  The heroic gestures, the virtuous sentiments are a weariness
to us.  In the quiet, darkened room, where the foot-lights of the great
stage no longer glare upon us, where our ears are no longer strained to
catch the clapping or the hissing of the town, we are, for a brief space,
ourselves.

This nurse was a quiet, demure little woman, with a pair of dreamy, soft
gray eyes that had a curious power of absorbing everything that passed
before them without seeming to look at anything.  Gazing upon much life,
laid bare, had given to them a slightly cynical expression, but there was
a background of kindliness behind.

During the evenings of my convalescence she would talk to me of her
nursing experiences.  I have sometimes thought I would put down in
writing the stories that she told me, but they would be sad reading.  The
majority of them, I fear, would show only the tangled, seamy side of
human nature, and God knows there is little need for us to point that out
to each other, though so many nowadays seem to think it the only work
worth doing.  A few of them were sweet, but I think they were the
saddest; and over one or two a man might laugh, but it would not be a
pleasant laugh.

"I never enter the door of a house to which I have been summoned," she
said to me one evening, "without wondering, as I step over the threshold,
what the story is going to be.  I always feel inside a sick-room as if I
were behind the scenes of life.  The people come and go about you, and
you listen to them talking and laughing, and you look into your patient's
eyes, and you just know that it's all a play."

The incident that Jephson's remark had reminded me of, she told me one
afternoon, as I sat propped up by the fire, trying to drink a glass of
port wine, and feeling somewhat depressed at discovering I did not like
it.

"One of my first cases," she said, "was a surgical operation.  I was very
young at the time, and I made rather an awkward mistake--I don't mean a
professional mistake--but a mistake nevertheless that I ought to have had
more sense than to make.

"My patient was a good-looking, pleasant-spoken gentleman.  The wife was
a pretty, dark little woman, but I never liked her from the first; she
was one of those perfectly proper, frigid women, who always give me the
idea that they were born in a church, and have never got over the chill.
However, she seemed very fond of him, and he of her; and they talked very
prettily to each other--too prettily for it to be quite genuine, I should
have said, if I'd known as much of the world then as I do now.

"The operation was a difficult and dangerous one.  When I came on duty in
the evening I found him, as I expected, highly delirious.  I kept him as
quiet as I could, but towards nine o'clock, as the delirium only
increased, I began to get anxious.  I bent down close to him and listened
to his ravings.  Over and over again I heard the name 'Louise.'  Why
wouldn't 'Louise' come to him?  It was so unkind of her--they had dug a
great pit, and were pushing him down into it--oh! why didn't she come and
save him?  He should be saved if she would only come and take his hand.

"His cries became so pitiful that I could bear them no longer.  His wife
had gone to attend a prayer-meeting, but the church was only in the next
street.  Fortunately, the day-nurse had not left the house: I called her
in to watch him for a minute, and, slipping on my bonnet, ran across.  I
told my errand to one of the vergers and he took me to her.  She was
kneeling, but I could not wait.  I pushed open the pew door, and, bending
down, whispered to her, 'Please come over at once; your husband is more
delirious than I quite care about, and you may be able to calm him.'

"She whispered back, without raising her head, 'I'll be over in a little
while.  The meeting won't last much longer.'

"Her answer surprised and nettled me.  'You'll be acting more like a
Christian woman by coming home with me,' I said sharply, 'than by
stopping here.  He keeps calling for you, and I can't get him to sleep.'

"She raised her head from her hands: 'Calling for me?' she asked, with a
slightly incredulous accent.

"'Yes,' I replied, 'it has been his one cry for the last hour: Where's
Louise, why doesn't Louise come to him.'

"Her face was in shadow, but as she turned it away, and the faint light
from one of the turned-down gas-jets fell across it, I fancied I saw a
smile upon it, and I disliked her more than ever.

"'I'll come back with you,' she said, rising and putting her books away,
and we left the church together.

"She asked me many questions on the way: Did patients, when they were
delirious, know the people about them?  Did they remember actual facts,
or was their talk mere incoherent rambling?  Could one guide their
thoughts in any way?

"The moment we were inside the door, she flung off her bonnet and cloak,
and came upstairs quickly and softly.

"She walked to the bedside, and stood looking down at him, but he was
quite unconscious of her presence, and continued muttering.  I suggested
that she should speak to him, but she said she was sure it would be
useless, and drawing a chair back into the shadow, sat down beside him.

"Seeing she was no good to him, I tried to persuade her to go to bed, but
she said she would rather stop, and I, being little more than a girl
then, and without much authority, let her.  All night long he tossed and
raved, the one name on his lips being ever Louise--Louise--and all night
long that woman sat there in the shadow, never moving, never speaking,
with a set smile on her lips that made me long to take her by the
shoulders and shake her.

"At one time he imagined himself back in his courting days, and pleaded,
'Say you love me, Louise.  I know you do.  I can read it in your eyes.
What's the use of our pretending?  We _know_ each other.  Put your white
arms about me.  Let me feel your breath upon my neck.  Ah!  I knew it, my
darling, my love!'

"The whole house was deadly still, and I could hear every word of his
troubled ravings.  I almost felt as if I had no right to be there,
listening to them, but my duty held me.  Later on, he fancied himself
planning a holiday with her, so I concluded.  'I shall start on Monday
evening,' he was saying, and you can join me in Dublin at Jackson's Hotel
on the Wednesday, and we'll go straight on.'

"His voice grew a little faint, and his wife moved forward on her chair,
and bent her head closer to his lips.

"'No, no,' he continued, after a pause, 'there's no danger whatever.  It's
a lonely little place, right in the heart of the Galway
Mountains--O'Mullen's Half-way House they call it--five miles from
Ballynahinch.  We shan't meet a soul there.  We'll have three weeks of
heaven all to ourselves, my goddess, my Mrs. Maddox from Boston--don't
forget the name.'

"He laughed in his delirium; and the woman, sitting by his side, laughed
also; and then the truth flashed across me.

"I ran up to her and caught her by the arm.  'Your name's not Louise,' I
said, looking straight at her.  It was an impertinent interference, but I
felt excited, and acted on impulse.

"'No,' she replied, very quietly; 'but it's the name of a very dear
school friend of mine.  I've got the clue to-night that I've been waiting
two years to get.  Good-night, nurse, thanks for fetching me.'

"She rose and went out, and I listened to her footsteps going down the
stairs, and then drew up the blind and let in the dawn.

"I've never told that incident to any one until this evening," my nurse
concluded, as she took the empty port wine glass out of my hand, and
stirred the fire.  "A nurse wouldn't get many engagements if she had the
reputation for making blunders of that sort."

Another story that she told me showed married life more lovelit, but
then, as she added, with that cynical twinkle which glinted so oddly from
her gentle, demure eyes, this couple had only very recently been wed--had,
in fact, only just returned from their honeymoon.

They had been travelling on the Continent, and there had both contracted
typhoid fever, which showed itself immediately on their home-coming.

"I was called in to them on the very day of their arrival," she said;
"the husband was the first to take to his bed, and the wife followed suit
twelve hours afterwards.  We placed them in adjoining rooms, and, as
often as was possible, we left the door ajar so that they could call out
to one another.

"Poor things!  They were little else than boy and girl, and they worried
more about each other than they thought about themselves.  The wife's
only trouble was that she wouldn't be able to do anything for 'poor
Jack.'  'Oh, nurse, you will be good to him, won't you?' she would cry,
with her big childish eyes full of tears; and the moment I went in to him
it would be: 'Oh, don't trouble about me, nurse, I'm all right.  Just
look after the wifie, will you?'

"I had a hard time between the two of them, for, with the help of her
sister, I was nursing them both.  It was an unprofessional thing to do,
but I could see they were not well off, and I assured the doctor that I
could manage.  To me it was worth while going through the double work
just to breathe the atmosphere of unselfishness that sweetened those two
sick-rooms.  The average invalid is not the patient sufferer people
imagine.  It is a fretful, querulous, self-pitying little world that we
live in as a rule, and that we grow hard in.  It gave me a new heart,
nursing these young people.

"The man pulled through, and began steadily to recover, but the wife was
a wee slip of a girl, and her strength--what there was of it--ebbed day
by day.  As he got stronger he would call out more and more cheerfully to
her through the open door, and ask her how she was getting on, and she
would struggle to call back laughing answers.  It had been a mistake to
put them next to each other, and I blamed myself for having done so, but
it was too late to change then.  All we could do was to beg her not to
exhaust herself, and to let us, when he called out, tell him she was
asleep.  But the thought of not answering him or calling to him made her
so wretched that it seemed safer to let her have her way.

"Her one anxiety was that he should not know how weak she was.  'It will
worry him so,' she would say; 'he is such an old fidget over me.  And I
_am_ getting stronger, slowly; ain't I, nurse?'

"One morning he called out to her, as usual, asking her how she was, and
she answered, though she had to wait for a few seconds to gather strength
to do so.  He seemed to detect the effort, for he called back anxiously,
'Are you _sure_ you're all right, dear?'

"'Yes,' she replied, 'getting on famously.  Why?'

"'I thought your voice sounded a little weak, dear,' he answered; 'don't
call out if it tries you.'

"Then for the first time she began to worry about herself--not for her
own sake, but because of him.

"'Do you think I _am_ getting weaker, nurse?' she asked me, fixing her
great eyes on me with a frightened look.

"'You're making yourself weak by calling out,' I answered, a little
sharply.  'I shall have to keep that door shut.'

"'Oh, don't tell him'--that was all her thought--'don't let him know it.
Tell him I'm strong, won't you, nurse?  It will kill him if he thinks I'm
not getting well.'

"I was glad when her sister came up, and I could get out of the room, for
you're not much good at nursing when you feel, as I felt then, as though
you had swallowed a tablespoon and it was sticking in your throat.

"Later on, when I went in to him, he drew me to the bedside, and
whispered me to tell him truly how she was.  If you are telling a lie at
all, you may just as well make it a good one, so I told him she was
really wonderfully well, only a little exhausted after the illness, as
was natural, and that I expected to have her up before him.

"Poor lad! that lie did him more good than a week's doctoring and
nursing; and next morning he called out more cheerily than ever to her,
and offered to bet her a new bonnet against a new hat that he would race
her, and be up first.

"She laughed back quite merrily (I was in his room at the time).  'All
right,' she said, 'you'll lose.  I shall be well first, and I shall come
and visit you.'

"Her laugh was so bright, and her voice sounded so much stronger, that I
really began to think she had taken a turn for the better, so that when
on going in to her I found her pillow wet with tears, I could not
understand it.

"'Why, we were so cheerful just a minute ago,' I said; 'what's the
matter?'

"'Oh, poor Jack!' she moaned, as her little, wasted fingers opened and
closed upon the counterpane.  'Poor Jack, it will break his heart.'

"It was no good my saying anything.  There comes a moment when something
tells your patient all that is to be known about the case, and the doctor
and the nurse can keep their hopeful assurances for where they will be of
more use.  The only thing that would have brought comfort to her then
would have been to convince her that he would soon forget her and be
happy without her.  I thought it at the time, and I tried to say
something of the kind to her, but I couldn't get it out, and she wouldn't
have believed me if I had.

"So all I could do was to go back to the other room, and tell him that I
wanted her to go to sleep, and that he must not call out to her until I
told him.

"She lay very still all day.  The doctor came at his usual hour and
looked at her.  He patted her hand, and just glanced at the untouched
food beside her.

"'Yes,' he said, quietly.  'I shouldn't worry her, nurse.'  And I
understood.

"Towards evening she opened her eyes, and beckoned to her sister, who was
standing by the bedside, to bend down.

"'Jeanie,' she whispered, 'do you think it wrong to deceive any one when
it's for their own good?'

"'I don't know,' said the girl, in a dry voice; 'I shouldn't think so.
Why do you ask?'

"'Jeanie, your voice was always very much like mine--do you remember,
they used to mistake us at home.  Jeanie, call out for me--just till--till
he's a bit better; promise me.'

"They had loved each other, those two, more than is common among sisters.
Jeanie could not answer, but she pressed her sister closer in her arms,
and the other was satisfied.

"Then, drawing all her little stock of life together for one final
effort, the child raised herself in her sister's arms.

"'Good-night, Jack,' she called out, loud and clear enough to be heard
through the closed door.

"'Good-night, little wife,' he cried back, cheerily; 'are you all right?'

"'Yes, dear.  Good-night.'

"Her little, worn-out frame dropped back upon the bed, and the next thing
I remember is snatching up a pillow, and holding it tight-pressed against
Jeanie's face for fear the sound of her sobs should penetrate into the
next room; and afterwards we both got out, somehow, by the other door,
and rushed downstairs, and clung to each other in the back kitchen.

"How we two women managed to keep up the deceit, as, for three whole
days, we did, I shall never myself know.  Jeanie sat in the room where
her dead sister, from its head to its sticking-up feet, lay outlined
under the white sheet; and I stayed beside the living man, and told lies
and acted lies, till I took a joy in them, and had to guard against the
danger of over-elaborating them.

"He wondered at what he thought my 'new merry mood,' and I told him it
was because of my delight that his wife was out of danger; and then I
went on for the pure devilment of the thing, and told him that a week
ago, when we had let him think his wife was growing stronger, we had been
deceiving him; that, as a matter of fact, she was at that time in great
peril, and I had been in hourly alarm concerning her, but that now the
strain was over, and she was safe; and I dropped down by the foot of the
bed, and burst into a fit of laughter, and had to clutch hold of the
bedstead to keep myself from rolling on the floor.

"He had started up in bed with a wild white face when Jeanie had first
answered him from the other room, though the sisters' voices had been so
uncannily alike that I had never been able to distinguish one from the
other at any time.  I told him the slight change was the result of the
fever, that his own voice also was changed a little, and that such was
always the case with a person recovering from a long illness.  To guide
his thoughts away from the real clue, I told him Jeanie had broken down
with the long work, and that, the need for her being past, I had packed
her off into the country for a short rest.  That afternoon we concocted a
letter to him, and I watched Jeanie's eyes with a towel in my hand while
she wrote it, so that no tears should fall on it, and that night she
travelled twenty miles down the Great Western line to post it, returning
by the next up-train.

"No suspicion of the truth ever occurred to him, and the doctor helped us
out with our deception; yet his pulse, which day by day had been getting
stronger, now beat feebler every hour.  In that part of the country where
I was born and grew up, the folks say that wherever the dead lie, there
round about them, whether the time be summer or winter, the air grows
cold and colder, and that no fire, though you pile the logs half-way up
the chimney, will ever make it warm.  A few months' hospital training
generally cures one of all fanciful notions about death, but this idea I
have never been able to get rid of.  My thermometer may show me sixty,
and I may try to believe that the temperature _is_ sixty, but if the dead
are beside me I feel cold to the marrow of my bones.  I could _see_ the
chill from the dead room crawling underneath the door, and creeping up
about his bed, and reaching out its hand to touch his heart.

"Jeanie and I redoubled our efforts, for it seemed to us as if Death were
waiting just outside in the passage, watching with his eye at the keyhole
for either of us to make a blunder and let the truth slip out.  I hardly
ever left his side except now and again to go into that next room, and
poke an imaginary fire, and say a few chaffing words to an imaginary
living woman on the bed where the dead one lay; and Jeanie sat close to
the corpse, and called out saucy messages to him, or reassuring answers
to his anxious questions.

"At times, knowing that if we stopped another moment in these rooms we
should scream, we would steal softly out and rush downstairs, and,
shutting ourselves out of hearing in a cellar underneath the yard, laugh
till we reeled against the dirty walls.  I think we were both getting a
little mad.

"One day--it was the third of that nightmare life, so I learned
afterwards, though for all I could have told then it might have been the
three hundredth, for Time seemed to have fled from that house as from a
dream, so that all things were tangled--I made a slip that came near to
ending the matter, then and there.

"I had gone into that other room.  Jeanie had left her post for a moment,
and the place was empty.

"I did not think what I was doing.  I had not closed my eyes that I can
remember since the wife had died, and my brain and my senses were losing
their hold of one another.  I went through my usual performance of
talking loudly to the thing underneath the white sheet, and noisily
patting the pillows and rattling the bottles on the table.

"On my return, he asked me how she was, and I answered, half in a dream,
'Oh, bonny, she's trying to read a little,' and he raised himself on his
elbow and called out to her, and for answer there came back silence--not
the silence that _is_ silence, but the silence that is as a voice.  I do
not know if you understand what I mean by that.  If you had lived among
the dead as long as I have, you would know.

"I darted to the door and pretended to look in.  'She's fallen asleep,' I
whispered, closing it; and he said nothing, but his eyes looked queerly
at me.

"That night, Jeanie and I stood in the hall talking.  He had fallen to
sleep early, and I had locked the door between the two rooms, and put the
key in my pocket, and had stolen down to tell her what had happened, and
to consult with her.

"'What can we do!  God help us, what can we do!' was all that Jeanie
could say.  We had thought that in a day or two he would be stronger, and
that the truth might be broken to him.  But instead of that he had grown
so weak, that to excite his suspicions now by moving him or her would be
to kill him.

"We stood looking blankly in each other's faces, wondering how the
problem could be solved; and while we did so the problem solved itself.

"The one woman-servant had gone out, and the house was very silent--so
silent that I could hear the ticking of Jeanie's watch inside her dress.
Suddenly, into the stillness there came a sound.  It was not a cry.  It
came from no human voice.  I have heard the voice of human pain till I
know its every note, and have grown careless to it; but I have prayed God
on my knees that I may never hear that sound again, for it was the sob of
a soul.

"It wailed through the quiet house and passed away, and neither of us
stirred.

"At length, with the return of the blood to our veins, we went upstairs
together.  He had crept from his own room along the passage into hers.  He
had not had strength enough to pull the sheet off, though he had tried.
He lay across the bed with one hand grasping hers."

* * * * *

My nurse sat for a while without speaking, a somewhat unusual thing for
her to do.

"You ought to write your experiences," I said.

"Ah!" she said, giving the fire a contemplative poke, "if you'd seen as
much sorrow in the world as I have, you wouldn't want to write a sad
book."

"I think," she added, after a long pause, with the poker still in her
hand, "it can only be the people who have never _known_ suffering who can
care to read of it.  If I could write a book, I should write a merry
book--a book that would make people laugh."




CHAPTER IX


The discussion arose in this way.  I had proposed a match between our
villain and the daughter of the local chemist, a singularly noble and
pure-minded girl, the humble but worthy friend of the heroine.

Brown had refused his consent on the ground of improbability.  "What in
thunder would induce him to marry _her_?" he asked.

"Love!" I replied; "love, that burns as brightly in the meanest villain's
breast as in the proud heart of the good young man."

"Are you trying to be light and amusing," returned Brown, severely, "or
are you supposed to be discussing the matter seriously?  What attraction
could such a girl have for such a man as Reuben Neil?"

"Every attraction," I retorted.  "She is the exact moral contrast to
himself.  She is beautiful (if she's not beautiful enough, we can touch
her up a bit), and, when the father dies, there will be the shop."

"Besides," I added, "it will make the thing seem more natural if
everybody wonders what on earth could have been the reason for their
marrying each other."

Brown wasted no further words on me, but turned to MacShaughnassy.

"Can _you_ imagine our friend Reuben seized with a burning desire to
marry Mary Holme?" he asked, with a smile.

"Of course I can," said MacShaughnassy; "I can imagine anything, and
believe anything of anybody.  It is only in novels that people act
reasonably and in accordance with what might be expected of them.  I knew
an old sea-captain who used to read the _Young Ladies' Journal_ in bed,
and cry over it.  I knew a bookmaker who always carried Browning's poems
about with him in his pocket to study in the train.  I have known a
Harley Street doctor to develop at forty-eight a sudden and overmastering
passion for switchbacks, and to spend every hour he could spare from his
practice at one or other of the exhibitions, having three-pen'orths one
after the other.  I have known a book-reviewer give oranges (not poisoned
ones) to children.  A man is not a character, he is a dozen characters,
one of them prominent, the other eleven more or less undeveloped.  I knew
a man once, two of whose characters were of equal value, and the
consequences were peculiar."

We begged him to relate the case to us, and he did so.

"He was a Balliol man," said MacShaughnassy, "and his Christian name was
Joseph.  He was a member of the 'Devonshire' at the time I knew him, and
was, I think, the most superior person I have ever met.  He sneered at
the _Saturday Review_ as the pet journal of the suburban literary club;
and at the _Athenaeum_ as the trade organ of the unsuccessful writer.
Thackeray, he considered, was fairly entitled to his position of
favourite author to the cultured clerk; and Carlyle he regarded as the
exponent of the earnest artisan.  Living authors he never read, but this
did not prevent his criticising them contemptuously.  The only
inhabitants of the nineteenth century that he ever praised were a few
obscure French novelists, of whom nobody but himself had ever heard.  He
had his own opinion about God Almighty, and objected to Heaven on account
of the strong Clapham contingent likely to be found in residence there.
Humour made him sad, and sentiment made him ill.  Art irritated him and
science bored him.  He despised his own family and disliked everybody
else.  For exercise he yawned, and his conversation was mainly confined
to an occasional shrug.

"Nobody liked him, but everybody respected him.  One felt grateful to him
for his condescension in living at all.

"One summer, I was fishing over the Norfolk Broads, and on the Bank
Holiday, thinking I would like to see the London 'Arry in his glory, I
ran over to Yarmouth.  Walking along the sea-front in the evening, I
suddenly found myself confronted by four remarkably choice specimens of
the class.  They were urging on their wild and erratic career arm-in-arm.
The one nearest the road was playing an unusually wheezy concertina, and
the other three were bawling out the chorus of a music-hall song, the
heroine of which appeared to be 'Hemmer.'

"They spread themselves right across the pavement, compelling all the
women and children they met to step into the roadway.  I stood my ground
on the kerb, and as they brushed by me something in the face of the one
with the concertina struck me as familiar.

"I turned and followed them.  They were evidently enjoying themselves
immensely.  To every girl they passed they yelled out, 'Oh, you little
jam tart!' and every old lady they addressed as 'Mar.'  The noisiest and
the most vulgar of the four was the one with the concertina.

"I followed them on to the pier, and then, hurrying past, waited for them
under a gas-lamp.  When the man with the concertina came into the light
and I saw him clearly I started.  From the face I could have sworn it was
Joseph; but everything else about him rendered such an assumption
impossible.  Putting aside the time and the place, and forgetting his
behaviour, his companions, and his instrument, what remained was
sufficient to make the suggestion absurd.  Joseph was always clean
shaven; this youth had a smudgy moustache and a pair of incipient red
whiskers.  He was dressed in the loudest check suit I have ever seen, off
the stage.  He wore patent-leather boots with mother-of-pearl buttons,
and a necktie that in an earlier age would have called down lightning out
of Heaven.  He had a low-crowned billycock hat on his head, and a big
evil-smelling cigar between his lips.

"Argue as I would, however, the face was the face of Joseph; and, moved
by a curiosity I could not control, I kept near him, watching him.

"Once, for a little while, I missed him; but there was not much fear of
losing that suit for long, and after a little looking about I struck it
again.  He was sitting at the end of the pier, where it was less crowded,
with his arm round a girl's waist.  I crept close.  She was a jolly, red-
faced girl, good-looking enough, but common to the last degree.  Her hat
lay on the seat beside her, and her head was resting on his shoulder.  She
appeared to be fond of him, but he was evidently bored.

"'Don'tcher like me, Joe?' I heard her murmur.

"'Yas,' he replied, somewhat unconvincingly, 'o' course I likes yer.'

"She gave him an affectionate slap, but he did not respond, and a few
minutes afterwards, muttering some excuse, he rose and left her, and I
followed him as he made his way towards the refreshment-room.  At the
door he met one of his pals.

"'Hullo!' was the question, 'wot 'a yer done wi' 'Liza?'

"'Oh, I carn't stand 'er,' was his reply; 'she gives me the bloomin'
'ump.  You 'ave a turn with 'er.'

"His friend disappeared in the direction of 'Liza, and Joe pushed into
the room, I keeping close behind him.  Now that he was alone I was
determined to speak to him.  The longer I had studied his features the
more resemblance I had found in them to those of my superior friend
Joseph.

"He was leaning across the bar, clamouring for two of gin, when I tapped
him on the shoulder.  He turned his head, and the moment he saw me, his
face went livid.

"'Mr. Joseph Smythe, I believe,' I said with a smile.

"'Who's Mr. Joseph Smythe?' he answered hoarsely; 'my name's Smith, I
ain't no bloomin' Smythe.  Who are you?  I don't know yer.'

"As he spoke, my eyes rested upon a curious gold ring of Indian
workmanship which he wore upon his left hand.  There was no mistaking the
ring, at all events: it had been passed round the club on more than one
occasion as a unique curiosity.  His eyes followed my gaze.  He burst
into tears, and pushing me before him into a quiet corner of the saloon,
sat down facing me.

"'Don't give me away, old man,' he whimpered; 'for Gawd's sake, don't let
on to any of the chaps 'ere that I'm a member of that blessed old waxwork
show in Saint James's: they'd never speak to me agen.  And keep yer mug
shut about Oxford, there's a good sort.  I wouldn't 'ave 'em know as 'ow
I was one o' them college blokes for anythink.'

"I sat aghast.  I had listened to hear him entreat me to keep 'Smith,'
the rorty 'Arry, a secret from the acquaintances of 'Smythe,' the
superior person.  Here was 'Smith' in mortal terror lest his pals should
hear of his identity with the aristocratic 'Smythe,' and discard him.  His
attitude puzzled me at the time, but, when I came to reflect, my wonder
was at myself for having expected the opposite.

"'I carn't 'elp it,' he went on; 'I 'ave to live two lives.  'Arf my time
I'm a stuck-up prig, as orter be jolly well kicked--'

"'At which times,' I interrupted, 'I have heard you express some
extremely uncomplimentary opinions concerning 'Arries.'

"'I know,' he replied, in a voice betraying strong emotion; 'that's where
it's so precious rough on me.  When I'm a toff I despises myself, 'cos I
knows that underneath my sneering phiz I'm a bloomin' 'Arry.  When I'm an
'Arry, I 'ates myself 'cos I knows I'm a toff.'

"'Can't you decide which character you prefer, and stick to it?' I asked.

"'No,' he answered, 'I carn't.  It's a rum thing, but whichever I am,
sure as fate, 'bout the end of a month I begin to get sick o' myself.'

"'I can quite understand it,' I murmured; 'I should give way myself in a
fortnight.'

"'I've been myself, now,' he continued, without noticing my remark, 'for
somethin' like ten days.  One mornin', in 'bout three weeks' time, I
shall get up in my diggins in the Mile End Road, and I shall look round
the room, and at these clothes 'angin' over the bed, and at this yer
concertina' (he gave it an affectionate squeeze), 'and I shall feel
myself gettin' scarlet all over.  Then I shall jump out o' bed, and look
at myself in the glass.  "You howling little cad," I shall say to myself,
"I have half a mind to strangle you"; and I shall shave myself, and put
on a quiet blue serge suit and a bowler 'at, tell my landlady to keep my
rooms for me till I comes back, slip out o' the 'ouse, and into the fust
'ansom I meets, and back to the Halbany.  And a month arter that, I shall
come into my chambers at the Halbany, fling Voltaire and Parini into the
fire, shy me 'at at the bust of good old 'Omer, slip on my blue suit
agen, and back to the Mile End Road.'

"'How do you explain your absence to both parties?' I asked.

"'Oh, that's simple enough,' he replied.  'I just tells my 'ousekeeper at
the Halbany as I'm goin' on the Continong; and my mates 'ere thinks I'm a
traveller.'

"'Nobody misses me much,' he added, pathetically; 'I hain't a
partic'larly fetchin' sort o' bloke, either of me.  I'm sich an out-and-
outer.  When I'm an 'Arry, I'm too much of an 'Arry, and when I'm a prig,
I'm a reg'lar fust prize prig.  Seems to me as if I was two ends of a man
without any middle.  If I could only mix myself up a bit more, I'd be all
right.'

"He sniffed once or twice, and then he laughed.  'Ah, well,' he said,
casting aside his momentary gloom; 'it's all a game, and wot's the odds
so long as yer 'appy.  'Ave a wet?'

"I declined the wet, and left him playing sentimental airs to himself
upon the concertina.

"One afternoon, about a month later, the servant came to me with a card
on which was engraved the name of 'Mr. Joseph Smythe.'  I requested her
to show him up.  He entered with his usual air of languid
superciliousness, and seated himself in a graceful attitude upon the
sofa.

"'Well,' I said, as soon as the girl had closed the door behind her, 'so
you've got rid of Smith?'

"A sickly smile passed over his face.  'You have not mentioned it to any
one?' he asked anxiously.

"'Not to a soul,' I replied; 'though I confess I often feel tempted to.'

"'I sincerely trust you never will,' he said, in a tone of alarm.  'You
can have no conception of the misery the whole thing causes me.  I cannot
understand it.  What possible affinity there can be between myself and
that disgusting little snob passes my comprehension.  I assure you, my
dear Mac, the knowledge that I was a ghoul, or a vampire, would cause me
less nausea than the reflection that I am one and the same with that
odious little Whitechapel bounder.  When I think of him every nerve in my
body--'

"'Don't think about him any more,' I interrupted, perceiving his strongly-
suppressed emotion.  'You didn't come here to talk about him, I'm sure.
Let us dismiss him.'

"'Well,' he replied, 'in a certain roundabout way it is slightly
connected with him.  That is really my excuse for inflicting the subject
upon you.  You are the only man I _can_ speak to about it--if I shall not
bore you?'

"'Not in the least,' I said.  'I am most interested.'  As he still
hesitated, I asked him point-blank what it was.

"He appeared embarrassed.  'It is really very absurd of me,' he said,
while the faintest suspicion of pink crossed his usually colourless face;
'but I feel I must talk to somebody about it.  The fact is, my dear Mac,
I am in love.'

"'Capital!' I cried; 'I'm delighted to hear it.'  (I thought it might
make a man of him.)  'Do I know the lady?'

"'I am inclined to think you must have seen her,' he replied; 'she was
with me on the pier at Yarmouth that evening you met me.'

"'Not 'Liza!' I exclaimed.

"'That was she,' he answered; 'Miss Elizabeth Muggins.'  He dwelt
lovingly upon the name.

"'But,' I said, 'you seemed--I really could not help noticing, it was so
pronounced--you seemed to positively dislike her.  Indeed, I gathered
from your remark to a friend that her society was distinctly distasteful
to you.'

"'To Smith,' he corrected me.  'What judge would that howling little
blackguard be of a woman's worth!  The dislike of such a man as that is a
testimonial to her merit!'

"'I may be mistaken,' I said; 'but she struck me as a bit common.'

"'She is not, perhaps, what the world would call a lady,' he admitted;
'but then, my dear Mac, my opinion of the world is not such as to render
_its_ opinion of much value to me.  I and the world differ on most
subjects, I am glad to say.  She is beautiful, and she is good, and she
is my choice.'

"'She's a jolly enough little girl,' I replied, 'and, I should say,
affectionate; but have you considered, Smythe, whether she is quite--what
shall we say--quite as intellectual as could be desired?'

"'Really, to tell the truth, I have not troubled myself much about her
intellect,' he replied, with one of his sneering smiles.  'I have no
doubt that the amount of intellect absolutely necessary to the formation
of a British home, I shall be able to supply myself.  I have no desire
for an intellectual wife.  One is compelled to meet tiresome people, but
one does not live with them if one can avoid it.'

"'No,' he continued, reverting to his more natural tone; 'the more I
think of Elizabeth the more clear it becomes to me that she is the one
woman in the world for whom marriage with me is possible.  I perceive
that to the superficial observer my selection must appear extraordinary.
I do not pretend to explain it, or even to understand it.  The study of
mankind is beyond man.  Only fools attempt it.  Maybe it is her contrast
to myself that attracts me.  Maybe my, perhaps, too spiritual nature
feels the need of contact with her coarser clay to perfect itself.  I
cannot tell.  These things must always remain mysteries.  I only know
that I love her--that, if any reliance is to be placed upon instinct, she
is the mate to whom Artemis is leading me.'

"It was clear that he was in love, and I therefore ceased to argue with
him.  'You kept up your acquaintanceship with her, then, after you'--I
was going to say 'after you ceased to be Smith,' but not wishing to
agitate him by more mention of that person than I could help, I
substituted, 'after you returned to the Albany?'

"'Not exactly,' he replied; 'I lost sight of her after I left Yarmouth,
and I did not see her again until five days ago, when I came across her
in an aerated bread shop.  I had gone in to get a glass of milk and a
bun, and _she_ brought them to me.  I recognised her in a moment.'  His
face lighted up with quite a human smile.  'I take tea there every
afternoon now,' he added, glancing towards the clock, 'at four.'

"'There's not much need to ask _her_ views on the subject,' I said,
laughing; 'her feelings towards you were pretty evident.'

"'Well, that is the curious part of it,' he replied, with a return to his
former embarrassment; 'she does not seem to care for me now at all.
Indeed, she positively refuses me.  She says--to put it in the dear
child's own racy language--that she wouldn't take me on at any price.  She
says it would be like marrying a clockwork figure without the key.  She's
more frank than complimentary, but I like that.'

"'Wait a minute,' I said; 'an idea occurs to me.  Does she know of your
identity with Smith?'

"'No,' he replied, alarmed, 'I would not have her know it for worlds.
Only yesterday she told me that I reminded her of a fellow she had met at
Yarmouth, and my heart was in my mouth.'

"'How did she look when she told you that?' I asked.

"'How did she look?' he repeated, not understanding me.

"'What was her expression at that moment?' I said--'was it severe or
tender?'

"'Well,' he replied, 'now I come to think of it, she did seem to soften a
bit just then.'

"'My dear boy,' I said, 'the case is as clear as daylight.  She loves
Smith.  No girl who admired Smith could be attracted by Smythe.  As your
present self you will never win her.  In a few weeks' time, however, you
will be Smith.  Leave the matter over until then.  Propose to her as
Smith, and she will accept you.  After marriage you can break Smythe
gently to her.'

"'By Jove!' he exclaimed, startled out of his customary lethargy, 'I
never thought of that.  The truth is, when I am in my right senses, Smith
and all his affairs seem like a dream to me.  Any idea connected with him
would never enter my mind.'

"He rose and held out his hand.  'I am so glad I came to see you,' he
said; 'your suggestion has almost reconciled me to my miserable fate.
Indeed, I quite look forward to a month of Smith, now.'

"'I'm so pleased,' I answered, shaking hands with him.  'Mind you come
and tell me how you get on.  Another man's love affairs are not usually
absorbing, but there is an element of interest about yours that renders
the case exceptional.'

"We parted, and I did not see him again for another month.  Then, late
one evening, the servant knocked at my door to say that a Mr. Smith
wished to see me.

"'Smith, Smith,' I repeated; 'what Smith? didn't he give you a card?'

"'No, sir,' answered the girl; 'he doesn't look the sort that would have
a card.  He's not a gentleman, sir; but he says you'll know him.'  She
evidently regarded the statement as an aspersion upon myself.

"I was about to tell her to say I was out, when the recollection of
Smythe's other self flashed into my mind, and I directed her to send him
up.

"A minute passed, and then he entered.  He was wearing a new suit of a
louder pattern, if possible, than before.  I think he must have designed
it himself.  He looked hot and greasy.  He did not offer to shake hands,
but sat down awkwardly on the extreme edge of a small chair, and gaped
about the room as if he had never seen it before.

"He communicated his shyness to myself.  I could not think what to say,
and we sat for a while in painful silence.

"'Well,' I said, at last, plunging head-foremost into the matter,
according to the method of shy people, 'and how's 'Liza?'

"'Oh, _she's_ all right,' he replied, keeping his eyes fixed on his hat.

"'Have you done it?' I continued.

"'Done wot?' he asked, looking up.

"'Married her.'

"'No,' he answered, returning to the contemplation of his hat.

"'Has she refused you then?' I said.

"'I ain't arst 'er,' he returned.

"He seemed unwilling to explain matters of his own accord.  I had to put
the conversation into the form of a cross-examination.

"'Why not?' I asked; 'don't you think she cares for you any longer?'

"He burst into a harsh laugh.  'There ain't much fear o' that,' he said;
'it's like 'aving an Alcock's porous plaster mashed on yer, blowed if it
ain't.  There's no gettin' rid of 'er.  I wish she'd giv' somebody else a
turn.  I'm fair sick of 'er.'

"'But you were enthusiastic about her a month ago!' I exclaimed in
astonishment.

"'Smythe may 'ave been,' he said; 'there ain't no accounting for that
ninny, 'is 'ead's full of starch.  Anyhow, I don't take 'er on while I'm
myself.  I'm too jolly fly.'

"'That sort o' gal's all right enough to lark with,' he continued; 'but
yer don't want to marry 'em.  They don't do yer no good.  A man wants a
wife as 'e can respect--some one as is a cut above 'imself, as will raise
'im up a peg or two--some one as 'e can look up to and worship.  A man's
wife orter be to 'im a gawddess--a hangel, a--'

"'You appear to have met the lady,' I remarked, interrupting him.

"He blushed scarlet, and became suddenly absorbed in the pattern of the
carpet.  But the next moment he looked up again, and his face seemed
literally transformed.

"'Oh!  Mr. MacShaughnassy,' he burst out, with a ring of genuine
manliness in his voice, 'you don't know 'ow good, 'ow beautiful she is.  I
ain't fit to breathe 'er name in my thoughts.  An' she's so clever.  I
met 'er at that Toynbee 'All.  There was a party of toffs there all
together.  You would 'ave enjoyed it, Mr. MacShaughnassy, if you could
'ave 'eard 'er; she was makin' fun of the pictures and the people round
about to 'er pa--such wit, such learnin', such 'aughtiness.  I follered
them out and opened the carriage door for 'er, and she just drew 'er
skirt aside and looked at me as if I was the dirt in the road.  I wish I
was, for then perhaps one day I'd kiss 'er feet.'

"His emotion was so genuine that I did not feel inclined to laugh at him.
'Did you find out who she was?' I asked.

"'Yes,' he answered; 'I 'eard the old gentleman say "'Ome" to the
coachman, and I ran after the carriage all the way to 'Arley Street.
Trevior's 'er name, Hedith Trevior.'

"'Miss Trevior!' I cried, 'a tall, dark girl, with untidy hair and rather
weak eyes?'

"'Tall and dark,' he replied 'with 'air that seems tryin' to reach 'er
lips to kiss 'em, and heyes, light blue, like a Cambridge necktie.  A
'undred and seventy-three was the number.'

"'That's right,' I said; 'my dear Smith, this is becoming complicated.
You've met the lady and talked to her for half an hour--as Smythe, don't
you remember?'

"'No,' he said, after cogitating for a minute, 'carn't say I do; I never
can remember much about Smythe.  He allers seems to me like a bad dream.'

"'Well, you met her,' I said; 'I'm positive.  I introduced you to her
myself, and she confided to me afterwards that she thought you a most
charming man.'

"'No--did she?' he remarked, evidently softening in his feelings towards
Smythe; 'and did _I_ like '_er_?'

"'Well, to tell the truth,' I answered, 'I don't think you did.  You
looked intensely bored.'

"'The Juggins,' I heard him mutter to himself, and then he said aloud:
'D'yer think I shall get a chance o' seein' 'er agen, when I'm--when I'm
Smythe?'

"'Of course,' I said, 'I'll take you round myself.  By the bye,' I added,
jumping up and looking on the mantelpiece, 'I've got a card for a
Cinderella at their place--something to do with a birthday.  Will you be
Smythe on November the twentieth?'

"'Ye--as,' he replied; 'oh, yas--bound to be by then.'

"'Very well, then,' I said, 'I'll call round for you at the Albany, and
we'll go together.'

"He rose and stood smoothing his hat with his sleeve.  'Fust time I've
ever looked for'ard to bein' that hanimated corpse, Smythe,' he said
slowly.  'Blowed if I don't try to 'urry it up--'pon my sivey I will.'

"'He'll be no good to you till the twentieth,' I reminded him.  'And,' I
added, as I stood up to ring the bell, 'you're sure it's a genuine case
this time.  You won't be going back to 'Liza?'

"'Oh, don't talk 'bout 'Liza in the same breath with Hedith,' he replied,
'it sounds like sacrilege.'

"He stood hesitating with the handle of the door in his hand.  At last,
opening it and looking very hard at his hat, he said, 'I'm goin' to
'Arley Street now.  I walk up and down outside the 'ouse every evening,
and sometimes, when there ain't no one lookin', I get a chance to kiss
the doorstep.'

"He disappeared, and I returned to my chair.

"On November twentieth, I called for him according to promise.  I found
him on the point of starting for the club: he had forgotten all about our
appointment.  I reminded him of it, and he with difficulty recalled it,
and consented, without any enthusiasm, to accompany me.  By a few artful
hints to her mother (including a casual mention of his income), I
manoeuvred matters so that he had Edith almost entirely to himself for
the whole evening.  I was proud of what I had done, and as we were
walking home together I waited to receive his gratitude.

"As it seemed slow in coming, I hinted my expectations.

"'Well,' I said, 'I think I managed that very cleverly for you.'

"'Managed what very cleverly?' said he.

"'Why, getting you and Miss Trevior left together for such a long time in
the conservatory,' I answered, somewhat hurt; '_I_ fixed that for you.'

"'Oh, it was _you_, was it,' he replied; 'I've been cursing Providence.'

"I stopped dead in the middle of the pavement, and faced him.  'Don't you
love her?' I said.

"'Love her!' he repeated, in the utmost astonishment; 'what on earth is
there in her to love?  She's nothing but a bad translation of a modern
French comedy, with the interest omitted.'

"This 'tired' me--to use an Americanism.  'You came to me a month ago,' I
said, 'raving over her, and talking about being the dirt under her feet
and kissing her doorstep.'

"He turned very red.  'I wish, my dear Mac,' he said, 'you would pay me
the compliment of not mistaking me for that detestable little cad with
whom I have the misfortune to be connected.  You would greatly oblige me
if next time he attempts to inflict upon you his vulgar drivel you would
kindly kick him downstairs.'

"'No doubt,' he added, with a sneer, as we walked on, 'Miss Trevior would
be his ideal.  She is exactly the type of woman, I should say, to charm
that type of man.  For myself, I do not appreciate the artistic and
literary female.'

"'Besides,' he continued, in a deeper tone, 'you know my feelings.  I
shall never care for any other woman but Elizabeth.'

"'And she?' I said

"'She,' he sighed, 'is breaking her heart for Smith.'

"'Why don't you tell her you are Smith?' I asked.

"'I cannot,' he replied, 'not even to win her.  Besides, she would not
believe me.'

"We said good-night at the corner of Bond Street, and I did not see him
again till one afternoon late in the following March, when I ran against
him in Ludgate Circus.  He was wearing his transition blue suit and
bowler hat.  I went up to him and took his arm.

"'Which are you?' I said.

"'Neither, for the moment,' he replied, 'thank God.  Half an hour ago I
was Smythe, half an hour hence I shall be Smith.  For the present half-
hour I am a man.'

"There was a pleasant, hearty ring in his voice, and a genial, kindly
light in his eyes, and he held himself like a frank gentleman.

"'You are certainly an improvement upon both of them,' I said.

"He laughed a sunny laugh, with just the shadow of sadness dashed across
it.  'Do you know my idea of Heaven?' he said.

"'No,' I replied, somewhat surprised at the question.

"'Ludgate Circus,' was the answer.  'The only really satisfying moments
of my life,' he said, 'have been passed in the neighbourhood of Ludgate
Circus.  I leave Piccadilly an unhealthy, unwholesome prig.  At Charing
Cross I begin to feel my blood stir in my veins.  From Ludgate Circus to
Cheapside I am a human thing with human feeling throbbing in my heart,
and human thought throbbing in my brain--with fancies, sympathies, and
hopes.  At the Bank my mind becomes a blank.  As I walk on, my senses
grow coarse and blunted; and by the time I reach Whitechapel I am a poor
little uncivilised cad.  On the return journey it is the same thing
reversed.'

"'Why not live in Ludgate Circus,' I said, 'and be always as you are
now?'

"'Because,' he answered, 'man is a pendulum, and must travel his arc.'

"'My dear Mac,' said he, laying his hand upon my shoulder, 'there is only
one good thing about me, and that is a moral.  Man is as God made him:
don't be so sure that you can take him to pieces and improve him.  All my
life I have sought to make myself an unnaturally superior person.  Nature
has retaliated by making me also an unnaturally inferior person.  Nature
abhors lopsidedness.  She turns out man as a whole, to be developed as a
whole.  I always wonder, whenever I come across a supernaturally pious, a
supernaturally moral, a supernaturally cultured person, if they also have
a reverse self.'

"I was shocked at his suggested argument, and walked by his side for a
while without speaking.  At last, feeling curious on the subject, I asked
him how his various love affairs were progressing.

"'Oh, as usual,' he replied; 'in and out of a _cul de sac_.  When I am
Smythe I love Eliza, and Eliza loathes me.  When I am Smith I love Edith,
and the mere sight of me makes her shudder.  It is as unfortunate for
them as for me.  I am not saying it boastfully.  Heaven knows it is an
added draught of misery in my cup; but it is a fact that Eliza is
literally pining away for me as Smith, and--as Smith I find it impossible
to be even civil to her; while Edith, poor girl, has been foolish enough
to set her heart on me as Smythe, and as Smythe she seems to me but the
skin of a woman stuffed with the husks of learning, and rags torn from
the corpse of wit.'

"I remained absorbed in my own thoughts for some time, and did not come
out of them till we were crossing the Minories.  Then, the idea suddenly
occurring to me, I said:

"'Why don't you get a new girl altogether?  There must be medium girls
that both Smith and Smythe could like, and that would put up with both of
you.'

"'No more girls for this child,' he answered 'they're more trouble than
they're worth.  Those yer want yer carn't get, and those yer can 'ave,
yer don't want.'

"I started, and looked up at him.  He was slouching along with his hands
in his pockets, and a vacuous look in his face.

"A sudden repulsion seized me.  'I must go now,' I said, stopping.  'I'd
no idea I had come so far.'

"He seemed as glad to be rid of me as I to be rid of him.  'Oh, must
yer,' he said, holding out his hand.  'Well, so long.'

"We shook hands carelessly.  He disappeared in the crowd, and that is the
last I have ever seen of him."

* * * * *

"Is that a true story?" asked Jephson.

"Well, I've altered the names and dates," said MacShaughnassy; "but the
main facts you can rely upon."




CHAPTER X


The final question discussed at our last meeting been: What shall our
hero be?  MacShaughnassy had suggested an author, with a critic for the
villain.  My idea was a stockbroker, with an undercurrent of romance in
his nature.  Said Jephson, who has a practical mind: "The question is not
what we like, but what the female novel-reader likes."

"That is so," agreed MacShaughnassy.  "I propose that we collect feminine
opinion upon this point.  I will write to my aunt and obtain from her the
old lady's view.  You," he said, turning to me, "can put the case to your
wife, and get the young lady's ideal.  Let Brown write to his sister at
Newnham, and find out whom the intellectual maiden favours, while Jephson
can learn from Miss Medbury what is most attractive to the common-sensed
girl."

This plan we had adopted, and the result was now under consideration.
MacShaughnassy opened the proceedings by reading his aunt's letter.  Wrote
the old lady:

   "I think, if I were you, my dear boy, I should choose a soldier.  You
   know your poor grandfather, who ran away to America with that _wicked_
   Mrs. Featherly, the banker's wife, was a soldier, and so was your poor
   cousin Robert, who lost eight thousand pounds at Monte Carlo.  I have
   always felt singularly drawn towards soldiers, even as a girl; though
   your poor dear uncle could not bear them.  You will find many
   allusions to soldiers and men of war in the Old Testament (see Jer.
   xlviii. 14).  Of course one does not like to think of their fighting
   and killing each other, but then they do not seem to do that sort of
   thing nowadays."

"So much for the old lady," said MacShaughnassy, as he folded up the
letter and returned it to his pocket.  "What says culture?"

Brown produced from his cigar-case a letter addressed in a bold round
hand, and read as follows:

   "What a curious coincidence!  A few of us were discussing this very
   subject last night in Millicent Hightopper's rooms, and I may tell you
   at once that our decision was unanimous in favour of soldiers.  You
   see, my dear Selkirk, in human nature the attraction is towards the
   opposite.  To a milliner's apprentice a poet would no doubt be
   satisfying; to a woman of intelligence he would he an unutterable
   bore.  What the intellectual woman requires in man is not something to
   argue with, but something to look at.  To an empty-headed woman I can
   imagine the soldier type proving vapid and uninteresting; to the woman
   of mind he represents her ideal of man--a creature strong, handsome,
   well-dressed, and not too clever."

"That gives us two votes for the army," remarked MacShaughnassy, as Brown
tore his sister's letter in two, and threw the pieces into the
waste-paper basket.  "What says the common-sensed girl?"

"First catch your common-sensed girl," muttered Jephson, a little
grumpily, as it seemed to me.  "Where do you propose finding her?"

"Well," returned MacShaughnassy, "I looked to find her in Miss Medbury."

As a rule, the mention of Miss Medbury's name brings a flush of joy to
Jephson's face; but now his features wore an expression distinctly
approaching a scowl.

"Oh!" he replied, "did you?  Well, then, the common-sensed girl loves the
military also."

"By Jove!" exclaimed MacShaughnassy, "what an extraordinary thing.  What
reason does she give?"

"That there's a something about them, and that they dance so divinely,"
answered Jephson, shortly.

"Well, you do surprise me," murmured MacShaughnassy, "I am astonished."

Then to me he said: "And what does the young married woman say?  The
same?"

"Yes," I replied, "precisely the same."

"Does _she_ give a reason?" he asked.

"Oh yes," I explained; "because you can't help liking them."

There was silence for the next few minutes, while we smoked and thought.
I fancy we were all wishing we had never started this inquiry.

That four distinctly different types of educated womanhood should, with
promptness and unanimity quite unfeminine, have selected the soldier as
their ideal, was certainly discouraging to the civilian heart.  Had they
been nursemaids or servant girls, I should have expected it.  The worship
of Mars by the Venus of the white cap is one of the few vital religions
left to this devoutless age.  A year or two ago I lodged near a barracks,
and the sight to be seen round its huge iron gates on Sunday afternoons I
shall never forget.  The girls began to assemble about twelve o'clock.  By
two, at which hour the army, with its hair nicely oiled and a cane in its
hand, was ready for a stroll, there would be some four or five hundred of
them waiting in a line.  Formerly they had collected in a wild mob, and
as the soldiers were let out to them two at a time, had fought for them,
as lions for early Christians.  This, however, had led to scenes of such
disorder and brutality, that the police had been obliged to interfere;
and the girls were now marshalled in _queue_, two abreast, and compelled,
by a force of constables specially told off for the purpose, to keep
their places and wait their proper turn.

At three o'clock the sentry on duty would come down to the wicket and
close it.  "They're all gone, my dears," he would shout out to the girls
still left; "it's no good your stopping, we've no more for you to-day."

"Oh, not one!" some poor child would murmur pleadingly, while the tears
welled up into her big round eyes, "not even a little one.  I've been
waiting _such_ a long time."

"Can't help that," the honest fellow would reply, gruffly, but not
unkindly, turning aside to hide his emotion; "you've had 'em all between
you.  We don't make 'em, you know: you can't have 'em if we haven't got
'em, can you?  Come earlier next time."

Then he would hurry away to escape further importunity; and the police,
who appeared to have been waiting for this moment with gloating
anticipation, would jeeringly hustle away the weeping remnant.  "Now
then, pass along, you girls, pass along," they would say, in that
irritatingly unsympathetic voice of theirs.  "You've had your chance.
Can't have the roadway blocked up all the afternoon with this 'ere
demonstration of the unloved.  Pass along."

In connection with this same barracks, our char-woman told Amenda, who
told Ethelbertha, who told me a story, which I now told the boys.

Into a certain house, in a certain street in the neighbourhood, there
moved one day a certain family.  Their servant had left them--most of
their servants did at the end of a week--and the day after the moving-in
an advertisement for a domestic was drawn up and sent to the _Chronicle_.
It ran thus:

   WANTED, GENERAL SERVANT, in small family of eleven.  Wages, 6 pounds;
   no beer money.  Must be early riser and hard worker.  Washing done at
   home.  Must be good cook, and not object to window-cleaning.  Unitarian
   preferred.--Apply, with references, to A. B., etc.

That advertisement was sent off on Wednesday afternoon.  At seven o'clock
on Thursday morning the whole family were awakened by continuous ringing
of the street-door bell.  The husband, looking out of window, was
surprised to see a crowd of about fifty girls surrounding the house.  He
slipped on his dressing-gown and went down to see what was the matter.
The moment he opened the door, fifteen of them charged tumultuously into
the passage, sweeping him completely off his legs.  Once inside, these
fifteen faced round, fought the other thirty-five or so back on to the
doorstep, and slammed the door in their faces.  Then they picked up the
master of the house, and asked him politely to conduct them to "A. B."

At first, owing to the clamour of the mob outside, who were hammering at
the door and shouting curses through the keyhole, he could understand
nothing, but at length they succeeded in explaining to him that they were
domestic servants come ill answer to his wife's advertisement.  The man
went and told his wife, and his wife said she would see them, one at a
time.

Which one should have audience first was a delicate question to decide.
The man, on being appealed to, said he would prefer to leave it to them.
They accordingly discussed the matter among themselves.  At the end of a
quarter of an hour, the victor, having borrowed some hair-pins and a
looking-glass from our char-woman, who had slept in the house, went
upstairs, while the remaining fourteen sat down in the hall, and fanned
themselves with their bonnets.

"A. B." was a good deal astonished when the first applicant presented
herself.  She was a tall, genteel-looking girl.  Up to yesterday she had
been head housemaid at Lady Stanton's, and before that she had been under-
cook for two years to the Duchess of York.

"And why did you leave Lady Stanton?" asked "A. B."

"To come here, mum," replied the girl.  The lady was puzzled.

"And you'll be satisfied with six pounds a year?" she asked.

"Certainly, mum, I think it ample."

"And you don't mind hard work?"

"I love it, mum."

"And you're an early riser?"

"Oh yes, mum, it upsets me stopping in bed after half-past five."

"You know we do the washing at home?"

"Yes, mum.  I think it so much better to do it at home.  Those laundries
ruin good clothes.  They're so careless."

"Are you a Unitarian?" continued the lady.

"Not yet, mum," replied the girl, "but I should like to be one."

The lady took her reference, and said she would write.

The next applicant offered to come for three pounds--thought six pounds
too much.  She expressed her willingness to sleep in the back kitchen: a
shakedown under the sink was all she wanted.  She likewise had yearnings
towards Unitarianism.

The third girl did not require any wages at all--could not understand
what servants wanted with wages--thought wages only encouraged a love of
foolish finery--thought a comfortable home in a Unitarian family ought to
be sufficient wages for any girl.

This girl said there was one stipulation she should like to make, and
that was that she should be allowed to pay for all breakages caused by
her own carelessness or neglect.  She objected to holidays and evenings
out; she held that they distracted a girl from her work.

The fourth candidate offered a premium of five pounds for the place; and
then "A. B." began to get frightened, and refused to see any more of the
girls, convinced that they must be lunatics from some neighbouring asylum
out for a walk.

Later in the day, meeting the next-door lady on the doorstep, she related
her morning's experiences.

"Oh, that's nothing extraordinary," said the next-door lady; "none of us
on this side of the street pay wages; and we get the pick of all the best
servants in London.  Why, girls will come from the other end of the
kingdom to get into one of these houses.  It's the dream of their lives.
They save up for years, so as to be able to come here for nothing."

"What's the attraction?" asked "A. B.," more amazed than ever.

"Why, don't you see," explained the next door lady, "our back windows
open upon the barrack yard.  A girl living in one of these houses is
always close to soldiers.  By looking out of window she can always see
soldiers; and sometimes a soldier will nod to her or even call up to her.
They never dream of asking for wages.  They'll work eighteen hours a day,
and put up with anything just to be allowed to stop."

"A. B." profited by this information, and engaged the girl who offered
the five pounds premium.  She found her a perfect treasure of a servant.
She was invariably willing and respectful, slept on a sofa in the
kitchen, and was always contented with an egg for her dinner.

The truth of this story I cannot vouch for.  Myself, I can believe it.
Brown and MacShaughnassy made no attempt to do so, which seemed
unfriendly.  Jephson excused himself on the plea of a headache.  I admit
there are points in it presenting difficulties to the average intellect.
As I explained at the commencement, it was told to me by Ethelbertha, who
had it from Amenda, who got it from the char-woman, and exaggerations may
have crept into it.  The following, however, were incidents that came
under my own personal observation.  They afforded a still stronger
example of the influence exercised by Tommy Atkins upon the British
domestic, and I therefore thought it right to relate them.

"The heroine of them," I said, "is our Amenda.  Now, you would call her a
tolerably well-behaved, orderly young woman, would you not?"

"She is my ideal of unostentatious respectability," answered
MacShaughnassy.

"That was my opinion also," I replied.  "You can, therefore, imagine my
feelings on passing her one evening in the Folkestone High Street with a
Panama hat upon her head (_my_ Panama hat), and a soldier's arm round her
waist.  She was one of a mob following the band of the Third Berkshire
Infantry, then in camp at Sandgate.  There was an ecstatic, far-away look
in her eyes.  She was dancing rather than walking, and with her left hand
she beat time to the music.

"Ethelbertha was with me at the time.  We stared after the procession
until it had turned the corner, and then we stared at each other.

"'Oh, it's impossible,' said Ethelbertha to me.

"'But that was my hat,' I said to Ethelbertha.

"The moment we reached home Ethelbertha looked for Amenda, and I looked
for my hat.  Neither was to be found.

"Nine o'clock struck, ten o'clock struck.  At half-past ten, we went down
and got our own supper, and had it in the kitchen.  At a quarter-past
eleven, Amenda returned.  She walked into the kitchen without a word,
hung my hat up behind the door, and commenced clearing away the supper
things.

"Ethelbertha rose, calm but severe.

"'Where have you been, Amenda?' she inquired.

"'Gadding half over the county with a lot of low soldiers,' answered
Amenda, continuing her work.

"'You had on my hat,' I added.

"'Yes, sir,' replied Amenda, still continuing her work, 'it was the first
thing that came to hand.  What I'm thankful for is that it wasn't
missis's best bonnet.'

"Whether Ethelbertha was mollified by the proper spirit displayed in this
last remark, I cannot say, but I think it probable.  At all events, it
was in a voice more of sorrow than of anger that she resumed her
examination.

"'You were walking with a soldier's arm around your waist when we passed
you, Amenda?' she observed interrogatively.

"'I know, mum,' admitted Amenda, 'I found it there myself when the music
stopped.'

"Ethelbertha looked her inquiries.  Amenda filled a saucepan with water,
and then replied to them.

"'I'm a disgrace to a decent household,' she said; 'no mistress who
respected herself would keep me a moment.  I ought to be put on the
doorstep with my box and a month's wages.'

"'But why did you do it then?' said Ethelbertha, with natural
astonishment.

"'Because I'm a helpless ninny, mum.  I can't help myself; if I see
soldiers I'm bound to follow them.  It runs in our family.  My poor
cousin Emma was just such another fool.  She was engaged to be married to
a quiet, respectable young fellow with a shop of his own, and three days
before the wedding she ran off with a regiment of marines to Chatham and
married the colour-sergeant.  That's what I shall end by doing.  I've
been all the way to Sandgate with that lot you saw me with, and I've
kissed four of them--the nasty wretches.  I'm a nice sort of girl to be
walking out with a respectable milkman.'

"She was so deeply disgusted with herself that it seemed superfluous for
anybody else to be indignant with her; and Ethelbertha changed her tone
and tried to comfort her.

"'Oh, you'll get over all that nonsense, Amenda,' she said, laughingly;
'you see yourself how silly it is.  You must tell Mr. Bowles to keep you
away from soldiers.'

"'Ah, I can't look at it in the same light way that you do, mum,'
returned Amenda, somewhat reprovingly; 'a girl that can't see a bit of
red marching down the street without wanting to rush out and follow it
ain't fit to be anybody's wife.  Why, I should be leaving the shop with
nobody in it about twice a week, and he'd have to go the round of all the
barracks in London, looking for me.  I shall save up and get myself into
a lunatic asylum, that's what I shall do.'

"Ethelbertha began to grow quite troubled.  'But surely this is something
altogether new, Amenda,' she said; 'you must have often met soldiers when
you've been out in London?'

"'Oh yes, one or two at a time, walking about anyhow, I can stand that
all right.  It's when there's a lot of them with a band that I lose my
head.'

"'You don't know what it's like, mum,' she added, noticing Ethelbertha's
puzzled expression; 'you've never had it.  I only hope you never may.'

"We kept a careful watch over Amenda during the remainder of our stay at
Folkestone, and an anxious time we had of it.  Every day some regiment or
other would march through the town, and at the first sound of its music
Amenda would become restless and excited.  The Pied Piper's reed could
not have stirred the Hamelin children deeper than did those Sandgate
bands the heart of our domestic.  Fortunately, they generally passed
early in the morning when we were indoors, but one day, returning home to
lunch, we heard distant strains dying away upon the Hythe Road.  We
hurried in.  Ethelbertha ran down into the kitchen; it was empty!--up
into Amenda's bedroom; it was vacant!  We called.  There was no answer.

"'That miserable girl has gone off again,' said Ethelbertha.  'What a
terrible misfortune it is for her.  It's quite a disease.'

"Ethelbertha wanted me to go to Sandgate camp and inquire for her.  I was
sorry for the girl myself, but the picture of a young and
innocent-looking man wandering about a complicated camp, inquiring for a
lost domestic, presenting itself to my mind, I said that I'd rather not.

"Ethelbertha thought me heartless, and said that if I would not go she
would go herself.  I replied that I thought one female member of my
household was enough in that camp at a time, and requested her not to.
Ethelbertha expressed her sense of my inhuman behaviour by haughtily
declining to eat any lunch, and I expressed my sense of her
unreasonableness by sweeping the whole meal into the grate, after which
Ethelbertha suddenly developed exuberant affection for the cat (who
didn't want anybody's love, but wanted to get under the grate after the
lunch), and I became supernaturally absorbed in the
day-before-yesterday's newspaper.

"In the afternoon, strolling out into the garden, I heard the faint cry
of a female in distress.  I listened attentively, and the cry was
repeated.  I thought it sounded like Amenda's voice, but where it came
from I could not conceive.  It drew nearer, however, as I approached the
bottom of the garden, and at last I located it in a small wooden shed,
used by the proprietor of the house as a dark-room for developing
photographs.

"The door was locked.  'Is that you, Amenda?' I cried through the
keyhole.

"'Yes, sir,' came back the muffled answer. 'Will you please let me out?
you'll find the key on the ground near the door.'

"I discovered it on the grass about a yard away, and released her.  'Who
locked you in?' I asked.

"'I did, sir,' she replied; 'I locked myself in, and pushed the key out
under the door.  I had to do it, or I should have gone off with those
beastly soldiers.'

"'I hope I haven't inconvenienced you, sir,' she added, stepping out; 'I
left the lunch all laid.'"

* * * * *

Amenda's passion for soldiers was her one tribute to sentiment.  Towards
all others of the male sex she maintained an attitude of callous
unsusceptibility, and her engagements with them (which were numerous)
were entered into or abandoned on grounds so sordid as to seriously shock
Ethelbertha.

When she came to us she was engaged to a pork butcher--with a milkman in
reserve.  For Amenda's sake we dealt with the man, but we never liked
him, and we liked his pork still less.  When, therefore, Amenda announced
to us that her engagement with him was "off," and intimated that her
feelings would in no way suffer by our going elsewhere for our bacon, we
secretly rejoiced.

"I am confident you have done right, Amenda," said Ethelbertha; "you
would never have been happy with that man."

"No, mum, I don't think I ever should," replied Amenda.  "I don't see how
any girl could as hadn't the digestion of an ostrich."

Ethelbertha looked puzzled.  "But what has digestion got to do with it?"
she asked.

"A pretty good deal, mum," answered Amenda, "when you're thinking of
marrying a man as can't make a sausage fit to eat."

"But, surely," exclaimed Ethelbertha, "you don't mean to say you're
breaking off the match because you don't like his sausages!"

"Well, I suppose that's what it comes to," agreed Amenda, unconcernedly.

"What an awful idea!" sighed poor Ethelbertha, after a long pause.  "Do
you think you ever really loved him?"

"Oh yes," said Amenda, "I loved him right enough, but it's no good loving
a man that wants you to live on sausages that keep you awake all night."

"But does he want you to live on sausages?" persisted Ethelbertha.

"Oh, he doesn't say anything about it," explained Amenda; "but you know
what it is, mum, when you marry a pork butcher; you're expected to eat
what's left over.  That's the mistake my poor cousin Eliza made.  She
married a muffin man.  Of course, what he didn't sell they had to finish
up themselves.  Why, one winter, when he had a run of bad luck, they
lived for two months on nothing but muffins.  I never saw a girl so
changed in all my life.  One has to think of these things, you know."

But the most shamefully mercenary engagement that I think Amenda ever
entered into, was one with a 'bus conductor.  We were living in the north
of London then, and she had a young man, a cheesemonger, who kept a shop
in Lupus Street, Chelsea.  He could not come up to her because of the
shop, so once a week she used to go down to him.  One did not ride ten
miles for a penny in those days, and she found the fare from Holloway to
Victoria and back a severe tax upon her purse.  The same 'bus that took
her down at six brought her back at ten.  During the first journey the
'bus conductor stared at Amenda; during the second he talked to her,
during the third he gave her a cocoanut, during the fourth he proposed to
her, and was promptly accepted.  After that, Amenda was enabled to visit
her cheesemonger without expense.

He was a quaint character himself, this 'bus conductor.  I often rode
with him to Fleet Street.  He knew me quite well (I suppose Amenda must
have pointed me out to him), and would always ask me after her--aloud,
before all the other passengers, which was trying--and give me messages
to take back to her.  Where women were concerned he had what is called "a
way" with him, and from the extent and variety of his female
acquaintance, and the evident tenderness with which the majority of them
regarded him, I am inclined to hope that Amenda's desertion of him (which
happened contemporaneously with her jilting of the cheesemonger) caused
him less prolonged suffering than might otherwise have been the case.

He was a man from whom I derived a good deal of amusement one way and
another.  Thinking of him brings back to my mind a somewhat odd incident.

One afternoon, I jumped upon his 'bus in the Seven Sisters Road.  An
elderly Frenchman was the only other occupant of the vehicle.  "You vil
not forget me," the Frenchman was saying as I entered, "I desire Sharing
Cross."

"I won't forget yer," answered the conductor, "you shall 'ave yer Sharing
Cross.  Don't make a fuss about it."

"That's the third time 'ee's arst me not to forget 'im," he remarked to
me in a stentorian aside; "'ee don't giv' yer much chance of doin' it,
does 'ee?"

At the corner of the Holloway Road we drew up, and our conductor began to
shout after the manner of his species: "Charing Cross--Charing Cross--'ere
yer are--Come along, lady--Charing Cross."

The little Frenchman jumped up, and prepared to exit; the conductor
pushed him back.

"Sit down and don't be silly," he said; "this ain't Charing Cross."

The Frenchman looked puzzled, but collapsed meekly.  We picked up a few
passengers, and proceeded on our way.  Half a mile up the Liverpool Road
a lady stood on the kerb regarding us as we passed with that pathetic
mingling of desire and distrust which is the average woman's attitude
towards conveyances of all kinds.  Our conductor stopped.

"Where d'yer want to go to?" he asked her severely--"Strand--Charing
Cross?"

The Frenchman did not hear or did not understand the first part of the
speech, but he caught the words "Charing Cross," and bounced up and out
on to the step.  The conductor collared him as he was getting off, and
jerked him back savagely.

"Carn't yer keep still a minute," he cried indignantly; "blessed if you
don't want lookin' after like a bloomin' kid."

"I vont to be put down at Sharing Cross," answered the Frenchman, humbly.

"You vont to be put down at Sharing Cross," repeated the other bitterly,
as he led him back to his seat.  "I shall put yer down in the middle of
the road if I 'ave much more of yer.  You stop there till I come and
sling yer out.  I ain't likely to let yer go much past yer Sharing Cross,
I shall be too jolly glad to get rid o' yer."

The poor Frenchman subsided, and we jolted on.  At "The Angel" we, of
course, stopped.  "Charing Cross," shouted the conductor, and up sprang
the Frenchman.

"Oh, my Gawd," said the conductor, taking him by the shoulders and
forcing him down into the corner seat, "wot am I to do?  Carn't somebody
sit on 'im?"

He held him firmly down until the 'bus started, and then released him.  At
the top of Chancery Lane the same scene took place, and the poor little
Frenchman became exasperated.

"He keep saying Sharing Cross, Sharing Cross," he exclaimed, turning to
the other passengers; "and it is _no_ Sharing Cross.  He is fool."

"Carn't yer understand," retorted the conductor, equally indignant; "of
course I say Sharing Cross--I mean Charing Cross, but that don't mean
that it _is_ Charing Cross.  That means--" and then perceiving from the
blank look on the Frenchman's face the utter impossibility of ever making
the matter clear to him, he turned to us with an appealing gesture, and
asked:

"Does any gentleman know the French for 'bloomin' idiot'?"

A day or two afterwards, I happened to enter his omnibus again.

"Well," I asked him, "did you get your French friend to Charing Cross all
right?"

"No, sir," he replied, "you'll 'ardly believe it, but I 'ad a bit of a
row with a policeman just before I got to the corner, and it put 'im
clean out o' my 'ead.  Blessed if I didn't run 'im on to Victoria."




CHAPTER XI


Said Brown one evening, "There is but one vice, and that is selfishness."

Jephson was standing before the fire lighting his pipe.  He puffed the
tobacco into a glow, threw the match into the embers, and then said:

"And the seed of all virtue also."

"Sit down and get on with your work," said MacShaughnassy from the sofa
where he lay at full length with his heels on a chair; "we're discussing
the novel.  Paradoxes not admitted during business hours."

Jephson, however, was in an argumentative mood.

"Selfishness," he continued, "is merely another name for Will.  Every
deed, good or bad, that we do is prompted by selfishness.  We are
charitable to secure ourselves a good place in the next world, to make
ourselves respected in this, to ease our own distress at the knowledge of
suffering.  One man is kind because it gives him pleasure to be kind,
just as another is cruel because cruelty pleases him.  A great man does
his duty because to him the sense of duty done is a deeper delight than
would be the case resulting from avoidance of duty.  The religious man is
religious because he finds a joy in religion; the moral man moral because
with his strong self-respect, viciousness would mean wretchedness.  Self-
sacrifice itself is only a subtle selfishness: we prefer the mental
exaltation gained thereby to the sensual gratification which is the
alternative reward.  Man cannot be anything else but selfish.  Selfishness
is the law of all life.  Each thing, from the farthest fixed star to the
smallest insect crawling on the earth, fighting for itself according to
its strength; and brooding over all, the Eternal, working for _Himself_:
that is the universe."

"Have some whisky," said MacShaughnassy; "and don't be so complicatedly
metaphysical.  You make my head ache."

"If all action, good and bad, spring from selfishness," replied Brown,
"then there must be good selfishness and bad selfishness: and your bad
selfishness is my plain selfishness, without any adjective, so we are
back where we started.  I say selfishness--bad selfishness--is the root
of all evil, and there you are bound to agree with me."

"Not always," persisted Jephson; "I've known selfishness--selfishness
according to the ordinarily accepted meaning of the term--to be
productive of good actions.  I can give you an instance, if you like."

"Has it got a moral?" asked MacShaughnassy, drowsily,

Jephson mused a moment.  "Yes," he said at length; "a very practical
moral--and one very useful to young men."

"That's the sort of story we want," said the MacShaughnassy, raising
himself into a sitting position.  "You listen to this, Brown."

Jephson seated himself upon a chair, in his favourite attitude, with his
elbows resting upon the back, and smoked for a while in silence.

"There are three people in this story," he began; "the wife, the wife's
husband, and the other man.  In most dramas of this type, it is the wife
who is the chief character.  In this case, the interesting person is the
other man.

"The wife--I met her once: she was the most beautiful woman I have ever
seen, and the most wicked-looking; which is saying a good deal for both
statements.  I remember, during a walking tour one year, coming across a
lovely little cottage.  It was the sweetest place imaginable.  I need not
describe it.  It was the cottage one sees in pictures, and reads of in
sentimental poetry.  I was leaning over the neatly-cropped hedge,
drinking in its beauty, when at one of the tiny casements I saw, looking
out at me, a face.  It stayed there only a moment, but in that moment the
cottage had become ugly, and I hurried away with a shudder.

"That woman's face reminded me of the incident.  It was an angel's face,
until the woman herself looked out of it: then you were struck by the
strange incongruity between tenement and tenant.

"That at one time she had loved her husband, I have little doubt.  Vicious
women have few vices, and sordidness is not usually one of them.  She had
probably married him, borne towards him by one of those waves of passion
upon which the souls of animal natures are continually rising and
falling.  On possession, however, had quickly followed satiety, and from
satiety had grown the desire for a new sensation.

"They were living at Cairo at the period; her husband held an important
official position there, and by virtue of this, and of her own beauty and
tact, her house soon became the centre of the Anglo-Saxon society ever
drifting in and out of the city.  The women disliked her, and copied her.
The men spoke slightingly of her to their wives, lightly of her to each
other, and made idiots of themselves when they were alone with her.  She
laughed at them to their faces, and mimicked them behind their backs.
Their friends said it was clever.

"One year there arrived a young English engineer, who had come out to
superintend some canal works.  He brought with him satisfactory letters
of recommendation, and was at once received by the European residents as
a welcome addition to their social circle.  He was not particularly good-
looking, he was not remarkably charming, but he possessed the one thing
that few women can resist in a man, and that is strength.  The woman
looked at the man, and the man looked back at the woman; and the drama
began.

"Scandal flies swiftly through small communities.  Before a month, their
relationship was the chief topic of conversation throughout the quarter.
In less than two, it reached the ears of the woman's husband.

"He was either an exceptionally mean or an exceptionally noble character,
according to how one views the matter.  He worshipped his wife--as men
with big hearts and weak brains often do worship such women--with dog-
like devotion.  His only dread was lest the scandal should reach
proportions that would compel him to take notice of it, and thus bring
shame and suffering upon the woman to whom he would have given his life.
That a man who saw her should love her seemed natural to him; that she
should have grown tired of himself, a thing not to be wondered at.  He
was grateful to her for having once loved him, for a little while.

"As for 'the other man,' he proved somewhat of an enigma to the gossips.
He attempted no secrecy; if anything, he rather paraded his
subjugation--or his conquest, it was difficult to decide which term to
apply.  He rode and drove with her; visited her in public and in private
(in such privacy as can be hoped for in a house filled with chattering
servants, and watched by spying eyes); loaded her with expensive
presents, which she wore openly, and papered his smoking-den with her
photographs.  Yet he never allowed himself to appear in the least degree
ridiculous; never allowed her to come between him and his work.  A letter
from her, he would lay aside unopened until he had finished what he
evidently regarded as more important business.  When boudoir and engine-
shed became rivals, it was the boudoir that had to wait.

"The woman chafed under his self-control, which stung her like a lash,
but clung to him the more abjectly.

"'Tell me you love me!' she would cry fiercely, stretching her white arms
towards him.

"'I have told you so,' he would reply calmly, without moving.

"'I want to hear you tell it me again,' she would plead with a voice that
trembled on a sob.  'Come close to me and tell it me again, again,
again!'

"Then, as she lay with half-closed eyes, he would pour forth a flood of
passionate words sufficient to satisfy even her thirsty ears, and
afterwards, as the gates clanged behind him, would take up an engineering
problem at the exact point at which half an hour before, on her entrance
into the room, he had temporarily dismissed it.

"One day, a privileged friend put bluntly to him this question: 'Are you
playing for love or vanity?'

"To which the man, after long pondering, gave this reply: ''Pon my soul,
Jack, I couldn't tell you.'

"Now, when a man is in love with a woman who cannot make up her mind
whether she loves him or not, we call the complication comedy; where it
is the woman who is in earnest the result is generally tragedy.

"They continued to meet and to make love.  They talked--as people in
their position are prone to talk--of the beautiful life they would lead
if it only were not for the thing that was; of the earthly paradise--or,
maybe, 'earthy' would be the more suitable adjective--they would each
create for the other, if only they had the right which they hadn't.

"In this work of imagination the man trusted chiefly to his literary
faculties, which were considerable; the woman to her desires.  Thus, his
scenes possessed a grace and finish which hers lacked, but her pictures
were the more vivid.  Indeed, so realistic did she paint them, that to
herself they seemed realities, waiting for her.  Then she would rise to
go towards them only to strike herself against the thought of the thing
that stood between her and them.  At first she only hated the thing, but
after a while there came an ugly look of hope into her eyes.

"The time drew near for the man to return to England.  The canal was
completed, and a day appointed for the letting in of the water.  The man
determined to make the event the occasion of a social gathering.  He
invited a large number of guests, among whom were the woman and her
husband, to assist at the function.  Afterwards the party were to picnic
at a pleasant wooded spot some three-quarters of a mile from the first
lock.

"The ceremony of flooding was to be performed by the woman, her husband's
position entitling her to this distinction.  Between the river and the
head of the cutting had been left a strong bank of earth, pierced some
distance down by a hole, which hole was kept closed by means of a closely-
fitting steel plate.  The woman drew the lever releasing this plate, and
the water rushed through and began to press against the lock gates.  When
it had attained a certain depth, the sluices were raised, and the water
poured down into the deep basin of the lock.

"It was an exceptionally deep lock.  The party gathered round and watched
the water slowly rising.  The woman looked down, and shuddered; the man
was standing by her side.

"'How deep it is,' she said.

"'Yes,' he replied, 'it holds thirty feet of water, when full.'

"The water crept up inch by inch.

"'Why don't you open the gates, and let it in quickly?' she asked.

"'It would not do for it to come in too quickly,' he explained; 'we shall
half fill this lock, and then open the sluices at the other end, and so
let the water pass through.'

"The woman looked at the smooth stone walls and at the iron-plated gates.

"'I wonder what a man would do,' she said, 'if he fell in, and there was
no one near to help him?'

"The man laughed.  'I think he would stop there,' he answered.  'Come,
the others are waiting for us.'

"He lingered a moment to give some final instructions to the workmen.
'You can follow on when you've made all right,' he said, 'and get
something to eat.  There's no need for more than one to stop.'  Then they
joined the rest of the party, and sauntered on, laughing and talking, to
the picnic ground.

"After lunch the party broke up, as is the custom of picnic parties, and
wandered away in groups and pairs.  The man, whose duty as host had
hitherto occupied all his attention, looked for the woman, but she was
gone.

"A friend strolled by, the same that had put the question to him about
love and vanity.

"'Have you quarrelled?' asked the friend.

"'No,' replied the man.

"'I fancied you had,' said the other.  'I met her just now walking with
her husband, of all men in the world, and making herself quite agreeable
to him.'

"The friend strolled on, and the man sat down on a fallen tree, and
lighted a cigar.  He smoked and thought, and the cigar burnt out, but he
still sat thinking.

"After a while he heard a faint rustling of the branches behind him, and
peering between the interlacing leaves that hid him, saw the crouching
figure of the woman creeping through the wood.

"His lips were parted to call her name, when she turned her listening
head in his direction, and his eyes fell full upon her face.  Something
about it, he could not have told what, struck him dumb, and the woman
crept on.

"Gradually the nebulous thoughts floating through his brain began to
solidify into a tangible idea, and the man unconsciously started forward.
After walking a few steps he broke into a run, for the idea had grown
clearer.  It continued to grow still clearer and clearer, and the man ran
faster and faster, until at last he found himself racing madly towards
the lock.  As he approached it he looked round for the watchman who ought
to have been there, but the man was gone from his post.  He shouted, but
if any answer was returned, it was drowned by the roar of the rushing
water.

"He reached the edge and looked down.  Fifteen feet below him was the
reality of the dim vision that had come to him a mile back in the woods:
the woman's husband swimming round and round like a rat in a pail.

"The river was flowing in and out of the lock at the same rate, so that
the level of the water remained constant.  The first thing the man did
was to close the lower sluices and then open those in the upper gate to
their fullest extent.  The water began to rise.

"'Can you hold out?' he cried.

"The drowning man turned to him a face already contorted by the agony of
exhaustion, and answered with a feeble 'No.'

"He looked around for something to throw to the man.  A plank had lain
there in the morning, he remembered stumbling over it, and complaining of
its having been left there; he cursed himself now for his care.

"A hut used by the navvies to keep their tools in stood about two hundred
yards away; perhaps it had been taken there, perhaps there he might even
find a rope.

"'Just one minute, old fellow!' he shouted down, 'and I'll be back.'

"But the other did not hear him.  The feeble struggles ceased.  The face
fell back upon the water, the eyes half closed as if with weary
indifference.  There was no time for him to do more than kick off his
riding boots and jump in and clutch the unconscious figure as it sank.

"Down there, in that walled-in trap, he fought a long fight with Death
for the life that stood between him and the woman.  He was not an expert
swimmer, his clothes hampered him, he was already blown with his long
race, the burden in his arms dragged him down, the water rose slowly
enough to make his torture fit for Dante's hell.

"At first he could not understand why this was so, but in glancing down
he saw to his horror that he had not properly closed the lower sluices;
in each some eight or ten inches remained open, so that the stream was
passing out nearly half as fast as it came in.  It would be another five-
and-twenty minutes before the water would be high enough for him to grasp
the top.

"He noted where the line of wet had reached to, on the smooth stone wall,
then looked again after what he thought must be a lapse of ten minutes,
and found it had risen half an inch, if that.  Once or twice he shouted
for help, but the effort taxed severely his already failing breath, and
his voice only came back to him in a hundred echoes from his prison
walls.

"Inch by inch the line of wet crept up, but the spending of his strength
went on more swiftly.  It seemed to him as if his inside were being
gripped and torn slowly out: his whole body cried out to him to let it
sink and lie in rest at the bottom.

"At length his unconscious burden opened its eyes and stared at him
stupidly, then closed them again with a sigh; a minute later opened them
once more, and looked long and hard at him.

"'Let me go,' he said, 'we shall both drown.  You can manage by
yourself.'

"He made a feeble effort to release himself, but the other held him.

"'Keep still, you fool!' he hissed; 'you're going to get out of this with
me, or I'm going down with you.'

"So the grim struggle went on in silence, till the man, looking up, saw
the stone coping just a little way above his head, made one mad leap and
caught it with his finger-tips, held on an instant, then fell back with a
'plump' and sank; came up and made another dash, and, helped by the
impetus of his rise, caught the coping firmly this time with the whole of
his fingers, hung on till his eyes saw the stunted grass, till they were
both able to scramble out upon the bank and lie there, their breasts
pressed close against the ground, their hands clutching the earth, while
the overflowing water swirled softly round them.

"After a while, they raised themselves and looked at one another.

"'Tiring work,' said the other man, with a nod towards the lock.

"'Yes,' answered the husband, 'beastly awkward not being a good swimmer.
How did you know I had fallen in?  You met my wife, I suppose?'

"'Yes,' said the other man.

"The husband sat staring at a point in the horizon for some minutes.  'Do
you know what I was wondering this morning?' said he.

"'No,' said the other man.

"'Whether I should kill you or not.'

"'They told me,' he continued, after a pause, 'a lot of silly gossip
which I was cad enough to believe.  I know now it wasn't true,
because--well, if it had been, you would not have done what you have
done.'

"He rose and came across.  'I beg your pardon,' he said, holding out his
hand.

"'I beg yours,' said the other man, rising and taking it; 'do you mind
giving me a hand with the sluices?'

"They set to work to put the lock right.

"'How did you manage to fall in?' asked the other man, who was raising
one of the lower sluices, without looking round.

"The husband hesitated, as if he found the explanation somewhat
difficult.  'Oh,' he answered carelessly, 'the wife and I were chaffing,
and she said she'd often seen you jump it, and'--he laughed a rather
forced laugh--'she promised me a--a kiss if I cleared it.  It was a
foolish thing to do.'

"'Yes, it was rather,' said the other man.

"A few days afterwards the man and woman met at a reception.  He found
her in a leafy corner of the garden talking to some friends.  She
advanced to meet him, holding out her hand.  'What can I say more than
thank you?' she murmured in a low voice.

"The others moved away, leaving them alone.  'They tell me you risked
your life to save his?' she said.

"'Yes,' he answered.

"She raised her eyes to his, then struck him across the face with her
ungloved hand.

"'You damned fool!' she whispered.

"He seized her by her white arms, and forced her back behind the orange
trees.  'Do you know why?' he said, speaking slowly and distinctly;
'because I feared that, with him dead, you would want me to marry you,
and that, talked about as we have been, I might find it awkward to avoid
doing so; because I feared that, without him to stand between us, you
might prove an annoyance to me--perhaps come between me and the woman I
love, the woman I am going back to.  Now do you understand?'

"'Yes,' whispered the woman, and he left her.

"But there are only two people," concluded Jephson, "who do not regard
his saving of the husband's life as a highly noble and unselfish action,
and they are the man himself and the woman."

We thanked Jephson for his story, and promised to profit by the moral,
when discovered.  Meanwhile, MacShaughnassy said that he knew a story
dealing with the same theme, namely, the too close attachment of a woman
to a strange man, which really had a moral, which moral was: don't have
anything to do with inventions.

Brown, who had patented a safety gun, which he had never yet found a man
plucky enough to let off, said it was a bad moral.  We agreed to hear the
particulars, and judge for ourselves.

"This story," commenced MacShaughnassy, "comes from Furtwangen, a small
town in the Black Forest.  There lived there a very wonderful old fellow
named Nicholaus Geibel.  His business was the making of mechanical toys,
at which work he had acquired an almost European reputation.  He made
rabbits that would emerge from the heart of a cabbage, flap their ears,
smooth their whiskers, and disappear again; cats that would wash their
faces, and mew so naturally that dogs would mistake them for real cats,
and fly at them; dolls, with phonographs concealed within them, that
would raise their hats and say, 'Good morning; how do you do?' and some
that would even sing a song.

"But he was something more than a mere mechanic; he was an artist.  His
work was with him a hobby, almost a passion.  His shop was filled with
all manner of strange things that never would, or could, be sold--things
he had made for the pure love of making them.  He had contrived a
mechanical donkey that would trot for two hours by means of stored
electricity, and trot, too, much faster than the live article, and with
less need for exertion on the part of the driver; a bird that would shoot
up into the air, fly round and round in a circle, and drop to earth at
the exact spot from where it started; a skeleton that, supported by an
upright iron bar, would dance a hornpipe; a life-size lady doll that
could play the fiddle; and a gentleman with a hollow inside who could
smoke a pipe and drink more lager beer than any three average German
students put together, which is saying much.

"Indeed, it was the belief of the town that old Geibel could make a man
capable of doing everything that a respectable man need want to do.  One
day he made a man who did too much, and it came about in this way.

"Young Doctor Follen had a baby, and the baby had a birthday.  Its first
birthday put Doctor Follen's household into somewhat of a flurry, but on
the occasion of its second birthday, Mrs. Doctor Follen gave a ball in
honour of the event.  Old Geibel and his daughter Olga were among the
guests.

"During the afternoon of the next day, some three or four of Olga's bosom
friends, who had also been present at the ball, dropped in to have a chat
about it.  They naturally fell to discussing the men, and to criticising
their dancing.  Old Geibel was in the room, but he appeared to be
absorbed in his newspaper, and the girls took no notice of him.

"'There seem to be fewer men who can dance, at every ball you go to,'
said one of the girls.

"'Yes, and don't the ones who can, give themselves airs,' said another;
'they make quite a favour of asking you.'

"'And how stupidly they talk,' added a third.  'They always say exactly
the same things: "How charming you are looking to-night."  "Do you often
go to Vienna?  Oh, you should, it's delightful."  "What a charming dress
you have on."  "What a warm day it has been."  "Do you like Wagner?"  I
do wish they'd think of something new.'

"'Oh, I never mind how they talk,' said a fourth.  'If a man dances well
he may be a fool for all I care.'

"'He generally is,' slipped in a thin girl, rather spitefully.

"'I go to a ball to dance,' continued the previous speaker, not noticing
the interruption.  'All I ask of a partner is that he shall hold me
firmly, take me round steadily, and not get tired before I do.'

"'A clockwork figure would be the thing for you,' said the girl who had
interrupted.

"'Bravo!' cried one of the others, clapping her hands, 'what a capital
idea!'

"'What's a capital idea?' they asked.

"'Why, a clockwork dancer, or, better still, one that would go by
electricity and never run down.'

"The girls took up the idea with enthusiasm.

"'Oh, what a lovely partner he would make,' said one; 'he would never
kick you, or tread on your toes.'

"'Or tear your dress,' said another.

"'Or get out of step.'

"'Or get giddy and lean on you.'

"'And he would never want to mop his face with his handkerchief.  I do
hate to see a man do that after every dance.'

"'And wouldn't want to spend the whole evening in the supper-room.'

"'Why, with a phonograph inside him to grind out all the stock remarks,
you would not be able to tell him from a real man,' said the girl who had
first suggested the idea.

"'Oh yes, you would,' said the thin girl, 'he would be so much nicer.'

"Old Geibel had laid down his paper, and was listening with both his
ears.  On one of the girls glancing in his direction, however, he
hurriedly hid himself again behind it.

"After the girls were gone, he went into his workshop, where Olga heard
him walking up and down, and every now and then chuckling to himself; and
that night he talked to her a good deal about dancing and dancing
men--asked what they usually said and did--what dances were most
popular--what steps were gone through, with many other questions bearing
on the subject.

"Then for a couple of weeks he kept much to his factory, and was very
thoughtful and busy, though prone at unexpected moments to break into a
quiet low laugh, as if enjoying a joke that nobody else knew of.

"A month later another ball took place in Furtwangen.  On this occasion
it was given by old Wenzel, the wealthy timber merchant, to celebrate his
niece's betrothal, and Geibel and his daughter were again among the
invited.

"When the hour arrived to set out, Olga sought her father.  Not finding
him in the house, she tapped at the door of his workshop.  He appeared in
his shirt-sleeves, looking hot, but radiant.

"'Don't wait for me,' he said, 'you go on, I'll follow you.  I've got
something to finish.'

"As she turned to obey he called after her, 'Tell them I'm going to bring
a young man with me--such a nice young man, and an excellent dancer.  All
the girls will like him.'  Then he laughed and closed the door.

"Her father generally kept his doings secret from everybody, but she had
a pretty shrewd suspicion of what he had been planning, and so, to a
certain extent, was able to prepare the guests for what was coming.
Anticipation ran high, and the arrival of the famous mechanist was
eagerly awaited.

"At length the sound of wheels was heard outside, followed by a great
commotion in the passage, and old Wenzel himself, his jolly face red with
excitement and suppressed laughter, burst into the room and announced in
stentorian tones:

"'Herr Geibel--and a friend.'

"Herr Geibel and his 'friend' entered, greeted with shouts of laughter
and applause, and advanced to the centre of the room.

"'Allow me, ladies and gentlemen,' said Herr Geibel, 'to introduce you to
my friend, Lieutenant Fritz.  Fritz, my dear fellow, bow to the ladies
and gentlemen.'

"Geibel placed his hand encouragingly on Fritz's shoulder, and the
lieutenant bowed low, accompanying the action with a harsh clicking noise
in his throat, unpleasantly suggestive of a death rattle.  But that was
only a detail.

"'He walks a little stiffly' (old Geibel took his arm and walked him
forward a few steps.  He certainly did walk stiffly), 'but then, walking
is not his forte.  He is essentially a dancing man.  I have only been
able to teach him the waltz as yet, but at that he is faultless.  Come,
which of you ladies may I introduce him to, as a partner?  He keeps
perfect time; he never gets tired; he won't kick you or tread on your
dress; he will hold you as firmly as you like, and go as quickly or as
slowly as you please; he never gets giddy; and he is full of
conversation.  Come, speak up for yourself, my boy.'

"The old gentleman twisted one of the buttons of his coat, and
immediately Fritz opened his mouth, and in thin tones that appeared to
proceed from the back of his head, remarked suddenly, 'May I have the
pleasure?' and then shut his mouth again with a snap.

"That Lieutenant Fritz had made a strong impression on the company was
undoubted, yet none of the girls seemed inclined to dance with him.  They
looked askance at his waxen face, with its staring eyes and fixed smile,
and shuddered.  At last old Geibel came to the girl who had conceived the
idea.

"'It is your own suggestion, carried out to the letter,' said Geibel, 'an
electric dancer.  You owe it to the gentleman to give him a trial.'

"She was a bright saucy little girl, fond of a frolic.  Her host added
his entreaties, and she consented.

"Herr Geibel fixed the figure to her.  Its right arm was screwed round
her waist, and held her firmly; its delicately jointed left hand was made
to fasten itself upon her right.  The old toymaker showed her how to
regulate its speed, and how to stop it, and release herself.

"'It will take you round in a complete circle,' he explained; 'be careful
that no one knocks against you, and alters its course.'

"The music struck up.  Old Geibel put the current in motion, and Annette
and her strange partner began to dance.

"For a while every one stood watching them.  The figure performed its
purpose admirably.  Keeping perfect time and step, and holding its little
partner tightly clasped in an unyielding embrace, it revolved steadily,
pouring forth at the same time a constant flow of squeaky conversation,
broken by brief intervals of grinding silence.

"'How charming you are looking to-night,' it remarked in its thin, far-
away voice.  'What a lovely day it has been.  Do you like dancing?  How
well our steps agree.  You will give me another, won't you?  Oh, don't be
so cruel.  What a charming gown you have on.  Isn't waltzing delightful?
I could go on dancing for ever--with you.  Have you had supper?'

"As she grew more familiar with the uncanny creature, the girl's
nervousness wore off, and she entered into the fun of the thing.

"'Oh, he's just lovely,' she cried, laughing, 'I could go on dancing with
him all my life.'

"Couple after couple now joined them, and soon all the dancers in the
room were whirling round behind them.  Nicholaus Geibel stood looking on,
beaming with childish delight at his success,

"Old Wenzel approached him, and whispered something in his ear.  Geibel
laughed and nodded, and the two worked their way quietly towards the
door.

"'This is the young people's house to-night,' said Wenzel, as soon as
they were outside; 'you and I will have a quiet pipe and a glass of hock,
over in the counting-house.'

"Meanwhile the dancing grew more fast and furious.  Little Annette
loosened the screw regulating her partner's rate of progress, and the
figure flew round with her swifter and swifter.  Couple after couple
dropped out exhausted, but they only went the faster, till at length they
were the only pair left dancing.

"Madder and madder became the waltz.  The music lagged behind: the
musicians, unable to keep pace, ceased, and sat staring.  The younger
guests applauded, but the older faces began to grow anxious.

"'Hadn't you better stop, dear,' said one of the women, 'You'll make
yourself so tired.'

"But Annette did not answer.

"'I believe she's fainted,' cried out a girl, who had caught sight of her
face as it was swept by.

"One of the men sprang forward and clutched at the figure, but its
impetus threw him down on to the floor, where its steel-cased feet laid
bare his cheek.  The thing evidently did not intend to part with its
prize easily.

"Had any one retained a cool head, the figure, one cannot help thinking,
might easily have been stopped.  Two or three men, acting in concert,
might have lifted it bodily off the floor, or have jammed it into a
corner.  But few human heads are capable of remaining cool under
excitement.  Those who are not present think how stupid must have been
those who were; those who are, reflect afterwards how simple it would
have been to do this, that, or the other, if only they had thought of it
at the time.

"The women grew hysterical.  The men shouted contradictory directions to
one another.  Two of them made a bungling rush at the figure, which had
the result of forcing it out of its orbit in the centre of the room, and
sending it crashing against the walls and furniture.  A stream of blood
showed itself down the girl's white frock, and followed her along the
floor.  The affair was becoming horrible.  The women rushed screaming
from the room.  The men followed them.

"One sensible suggestion was made: 'Find Geibel--fetch Geibel.'

"No one had noticed him leave the room, no one knew where he was.  A
party went in search of him.  The others, too unnerved to go back into
the ballroom, crowded outside the door and listened.  They could hear the
steady whir of the wheels upon the polished floor, as the thing spun
round and round; the dull thud as every now and again it dashed itself
and its burden against some opposing object and ricocheted off in a new
direction.

"And everlastingly it talked in that thin ghostly voice, repeating over
and over the same formula: 'How charming you are looking to-night.  What
a lovely day it has been.  Oh, don't be so cruel.  I could go on dancing
for ever--with you.  Have you had supper?'

"Of course they sought for Geibel everywhere but where he was.  They
looked in every room in the house, then they rushed off in a body to his
own place, and spent precious minutes in waking up his deaf old
housekeeper.  At last it occurred to one of the party that Wenzel was
missing also, and then the idea of the counting-house across the yard
presented itself to them, and there they found him.

"He rose up, very pale, and followed them; and he and old Wenzel forced
their way through the crowd of guests gathered outside, and entered the
room, and locked the door behind them.

"From within there came the muffled sound of low voices and quick steps,
followed by a confused scuffling noise, then silence, then the low voices
again.

"After a time the door opened, and those near it pressed forward to
enter, but old Wenzel's broad shoulders barred the way.

"'I want you--and you, Bekler,' he said, addressing a couple of the elder
men.  His voice was calm, but his face was deadly white.  'The rest of
you, please go--get the women away as quickly as you can.'

"From that day old Nicholaus Geibel confined himself to the making of
mechanical rabbits and cats that mewed and washed their faces."

We agreed that the moral of MacShaughnassy's story was a good one.




CHAPTER XII


How much more of our--fortunately not very valuable--time we devoted to
this wonderful novel of ours, I cannot exactly say.  Turning the dogs'-
eared leaves of the dilapidated diary that lies before me, I find the
record of our later gatherings confused and incomplete.  For weeks there
does not appear a single word.  Then comes an alarmingly business-like
minute of a meeting at which there were--"Present: Jephson,
MacShaughnassy, Brown, and Self"; and at which the "Proceedings commenced
at 8.30."  At what time the "proceedings" terminated, and what business
was done, the chronicle, however, sayeth not; though, faintly pencilled
in the margin of the page, I trace these hieroglyphics: "3.14.9-2.6.7,"
bringing out a result of "1.8.2."  Evidently an unremunerative night.

On September 13th we seem to have become suddenly imbued with energy to a
quite remarkable degree, for I read that we "Resolved to start the first
chapter at once"--"at once" being underlined.  After this spurt, we rest
until October 4th, when we "Discussed whether it should be a novel of
plot or of character," without--so far as the diary affords
indication--arriving at any definite decision.  I observe that on the
same day "Mac told a story about a man who accidentally bought a camel at
a sale."  Details of the story are, however, wanting, which, perhaps, is
fortunate for the reader.

On the 16th, we were still debating the character of our hero; and I see
that I suggested "a man of the Charley Buswell type."

Poor Charley, I wonder what could have made me think of him in connection
with heroes; his lovableness, I suppose--certainly not his heroic
qualities.  I can recall his boyish face now (it was always a boyish
face), the tears streaming down it as he sat in the schoolyard beside a
bucket, in which he was drowning three white mice and a tame rat.  I sat
down opposite and cried too, while helping him to hold a saucepan lid
over the poor little creatures, and thus there sprang up a friendship
between us, which grew.

Over the grave of these murdered rodents, he took a solemn oath never to
break school rules again, by keeping either white mice or tame rats, but
to devote the whole of his energies for the future to pleasing his
masters, and affording his parents some satisfaction for the money being
spent upon his education.

Seven weeks later, the pervadence throughout the dormitory of an
atmospheric effect more curious than pleasing led to the discovery that
he had converted his box into a rabbit hutch.  Confronted with eleven
kicking witnesses, and reminded of his former promises, he explained that
rabbits were not mice, and seemed to consider that a new and vexatious
regulation had been sprung upon him.  The rabbits were confiscated.  What
was their ultimate fate, we never knew with certainty, but three days
later we were given rabbit-pie for dinner.  To comfort him I endeavoured
to assure him that these could not be his rabbits.  He, however,
convinced that they were, cried steadily into his plate all the time that
he was eating them, and afterwards, in the playground, had a stand-up
fight with a fourth form boy who had requested a second helping.

That evening he performed another solemn oath-taking, and for the next
month was the model boy of the school.  He read tracts, sent his spare
pocket-money to assist in annoying the heathen, and subscribed to _The
Young Christian_ and _The Weekly Rambler_, an Evangelical Miscellany
(whatever that may mean).  An undiluted course of this pernicious
literature naturally created in him a desire towards the opposite
extreme.  He suddenly dropped _The Young Christian_ and _The Weekly
Rambler_, and purchased penny dreadfuls; and taking no further interest
in the welfare of the heathen, saved up and bought a second-hand revolver
and a hundred cartridges.  His ambition, he confided to me, was to become
"a dead shot," and the marvel of it is that he did not succeed.

Of course, there followed the usual discovery and consequent trouble, the
usual repentance and reformation, the usual determination to start a new
life.

Poor fellow, he lived "starting a new life."  Every New Year's Day he
would start a new life--on his birthday--on other people's birthdays.  I
fancy that, later on, when he came to know their importance, he extended
the principle to quarter days.  "Tidying up, and starting afresh," he
always called it.

I think as a young man he was better than most of us.  But he lacked that
great gift which is the distinguishing feature of the English-speaking
race all the world over, the gift of hypocrisy.  He seemed incapable of
doing the slightest thing without getting found out; a grave misfortune
for a man to suffer from, this.

Dear simple-hearted fellow, it never occurred to him that he was as other
men--with, perhaps, a dash of straightforwardness added; he regarded
himself as a monster of depravity.  One evening I found him in his
chambers engaged upon his Sisyphean labour of "tidying up." A heap of
letters, photographs, and bills lay before him.  He was tearing them up
and throwing them into the fire.

I came towards him, but he stopped me.  "Don't come near me," he cried,
"don't touch me.  I'm not fit to shake hands with a decent man."

It was the sort of speech to make one feel hot and uncomfortable.  I did
not know what to answer, and murmured something about his being no worse
than the average.

"Don't talk like that," he answered excitedly; "you say that to comfort
me, I know; but I don't like to hear it.  If I thought other men were
like me I should be ashamed of being a man.  I've been a blackguard, old
fellow, but, please God, it's not too late.  To-morrow morning I begin a
new life."

He finished his work of destruction, and then rang the bell, and sent his
man downstairs for a bottle of champagne.

"My last drink," he said, as we clicked glasses.  "Here's to the old life
out, and the new life in."

He took a sip and flung the glass with the remainder into the fire.  He
was always a little theatrical, especially when most in earnest.

For a long while after that I saw nothing of him.  Then, one evening,
sitting down to supper at a restaurant, I noticed him opposite to me in
company that could hardly be called doubtful.

He flushed and came over to me.  "I've been an old woman for nearly six
months," he said, with a laugh.  "I find I can't stand it any longer."

"After all," he continued, "what is life for but to live?  It's only
hypocritical to try and be a thing we are not.  And do you know"--he
leant across the table, speaking earnestly--"honestly and seriously, I'm
a better man--I feel it and know it--when I am my natural self than when
I am trying to be an impossible saint."

That was the mistake he made; he always ran to extremes.  He thought that
an oath, if it were only big enough, would frighten away Human Nature,
instead of serving only as a challenge to it.  Accordingly, each
reformation was more intemperate than the last, to be duly followed by a
greater swing of the pendulum in the opposite direction.

Being now in a thoroughly reckless mood, he went the pace rather hotly.
Then, one evening, without any previous warning, I had a note from him.
"Come round and see me on Thursday.  It is my wedding eve."

I went.  He was once more "tidying up."  All his drawers were open, and
on the table were piled packs of cards, betting books, and much written
paper, all, as before, in course of demolition.

I smiled: I could not help it, and, no way abashed, he laughed his usual
hearty, honest laugh.

"I know," he exclaimed gaily, "but this is not the same as the others."

Then, laying his hand on my shoulder, and speaking with the sudden
seriousness that comes so readily to shallow natures, he said, "God has
heard my prayer, old friend.  He knows I am weak.  He has sent down an
angel out of Heaven to help me."

He took her portrait from the mantelpiece and handed it me.  It seemed to
me the face of a hard, narrow woman, but, of course, he raved about her.

As he talked, there fluttered to the ground from the heap before him an
old restaurant bill, and, stooping, he picked it up and held it in his
hand, musing.

"Have you ever noticed how the scent of the champagne and the candles
seems to cling to these things?" he said lightly, sniffing carelessly at
it.  "I wonder what's become of her?"

"I think I wouldn't think about her at all to-night," I answered.

He loosened his hand, letting the paper fall into the fire.

"My God!" he cried vehemently, "when I think of all the wrong I have
done--the irreparable, ever-widening ruin I have perhaps brought into the
world--O God! spare me a long life that I may make amends.  Every hour,
every minute of it shall be devoted to your service."

As he stood there, with his eager boyish eyes upraised, a light seemed to
fall upon his face and illumine it.  I had pushed the photograph back to
him, and it lay upon the table before him.  He knelt and pressed his lips
to it.

"With your help, my darling, and His," he murmured.

The next morning he was married.  She was a well-meaning girl, though her
piety, as is the case with most people, was of the negative order; and
her antipathy to things evil much stronger than her sympathy with things
good.  For a longer time than I had expected she kept him
straight--perhaps a little too straight.  But at last there came the
inevitable relapse.

I called upon him, in answer to an excited message, and found him in the
depths of despair.  It was the old story, human weakness, combined with
lamentable lack of the most ordinary precautions against being found out.
He gave me details, interspersed with exuberant denunciations of himself,
and I undertook the delicate task of peace-maker.

It was a weary work, but eventually she consented to forgive him.  His
joy, when I told him, was boundless.

"How good women are," he said, while the tears came into his eyes.  "But
she shall not repent it.  Please God, from this day forth, I'll--"

He stopped, and for the first time in his life the doubt of himself
crossed his mind.  As I sat watching him, the joy died out of his face,
and the first hint of age passed over it.

"I seem to have been 'tidying up and starting afresh' all my life," he
said wearily; "I'm beginning to see where the untidiness lies, and the
only way to get rid of it."

I did not understand the meaning of his words at the time, but learnt it
later on.

He strove, according to his strength, and fell.  But by a miracle his
transgression was not discovered.  The facts came to light long
afterwards, but at the time there were only two who knew.

It was his last failure.  Late one evening I received a
hurriedly-scrawled note from his wife, begging me to come round.

"A terrible thing has happened," it ran; "Charley went up to his study
after dinner, saying he had some 'tidying up,' as he calls it, to do, and
did not wish to be disturbed.  In clearing out his desk he must have
handled carelessly the revolver that he always keeps there, not
remembering, I suppose, that it was loaded.  We heard a report, and on
rushing into the room found him lying dead on the floor.  The bullet had
passed right through his heart."

Hardly the type of man for a hero!  And yet I do not know.  Perhaps he
fought harder than many a man who conquers.  In the world's courts, we
are compelled to judge on circumstantial evidence only, and the chief
witness, the man's soul, cannot very well be called.

I remember the subject of bravery being discussed one evening at a dinner
party, when a German gentleman present related an anecdote, the hero of
which was a young Prussian officer.

"I cannot give you his name," our German friend explained--"the man
himself told me the story in confidence; and though he personally, by
virtue of his after record, could afford to have it known, there are
other reasons why it should not be bruited about.

"How I learnt it was in this way.  For a dashing exploit performed during
the brief war against Austria he had been presented with the Iron Cross.
This, as you are well aware, is the most highly-prized decoration in our
army; men who have earned it are usually conceited about it, and, indeed,
have some excuse for being so.  He, on the contrary, kept his locked in a
drawer of his desk, and never wore it except when compelled by official
etiquette.  The mere sight of it seemed to be painful to him.  One day I
asked him the reason.  We are very old and close friends, and he told me.

"The incident occurred when he was a young lieutenant.  Indeed, it was
his first engagement.  By some means or another he had become separated
from his company, and, unable to regain it, had attached himself to a
line regiment stationed at the extreme right of the Prussian lines.

"The enemy's effort was mainly directed against the left centre, and for
a while our young lieutenant was nothing more than a distant spectator of
the battle.  Suddenly, however, the attack shifted, and the regiment
found itself occupying an extremely important and critical position.  The
shells began to fall unpleasantly near, and the order was given to
'grass.'

"The men fell upon their faces and waited.  The shells ploughed the
ground around them, smothering them with dirt.  A horrible, griping pain
started in my young friend's stomach, and began creeping upwards.  His
head and heart both seemed to be shrinking and growing cold.  A shot tore
off the head of the man next to him, sending the blood spurting into his
face; a minute later another ripped open the back of a poor fellow lying
to the front of him.

"His body seemed not to belong to himself at all.  A strange, shrivelled
creature had taken possession of it.  He raised his head and peered about
him.  He and three soldiers--youngsters, like himself, who had never
before been under fire--appeared to be utterly alone in that hell.  They
were the end men of the regiment, and the configuration of the ground
completely hid them from their comrades.

"They glanced at each other, these four, and read one another's thoughts.
Leaving their rifles lying on the grass, they commenced to crawl
stealthily upon their bellies, the lieutenant leading, the other three
following.

"Some few hundred yards in front of them rose a small, steep hill.  If
they could reach this it would shut them out of sight.  They hastened on,
pausing every thirty yards or so to lie still and pant for breath, then
hurrying on again, quicker than before, tearing their flesh against the
broken ground.

"At last they reached the base of the slope, and slinking a little way
round it, raised their heads and looked back.  Where they were it was
impossible for them to be seen from the Prussian lines.

"They sprang to their feet and broke into a wild race.  A dozen steps
further they came face to face with an Austrian field battery.

"The demon that had taken possession of them had been growing stronger
the further they had fled.  They were not men, they were animals mad with
fear.  Driven by the same frenzy that prompted other panic-stricken
creatures to once rush down a steep place into the sea, these four men,
with a yell, flung themselves, sword in hand, upon the whole battery; and
the whole battery, bewildered by the suddenness and unexpectedness of the
attack, thinking the entire battalion was upon them, gave way, and rushed
pell-mell down the hill.

"With the sight of those flying Austrians the fear, as independently as
it had come to him, left him, and he felt only a desire to hack and kill.
The four Prussians flew after them, cutting and stabbing at them as they
ran; and when the Prussian cavalry came thundering up, they found my
young lieutenant and his three friends had captured two guns and
accounted for half a score of the enemy.

"Next day, he was summoned to headquarters.

"'Will you be good enough to remember for the future, sir,' said the
Chief of the Staff, 'that His Majesty does not require his lieutenants to
execute manoeuvres on their own responsibility, and also that to attack a
battery with three men is not war, but damned tomfoolery.  You ought to
be court-martialled, sir!'

"Then, in somewhat different tones, the old soldier added, his face
softening into a smile: 'However, alertness and daring, my young friend,
are good qualities, especially when crowned with success.  If the
Austrians had once succeeded in planting a battery on that hill it might
have been difficult to dislodge them.  Perhaps, under the circumstances,
His Majesty may overlook your indiscretion.'

"'His Majesty not only overlooked it, but bestowed upon me the Iron
Cross,' concluded my friend.  'For the credit of the army, I judged it
better to keep quiet and take it.  But, as you can understand, the sight
of it does not recall very pleasurable reflections.'"

* * * * *

To return to my diary, I see that on November 14th we held another
meeting.  But at this there were present only "Jephson, MacShaughnassy,
and Self"; and of Brown's name I find henceforth no further trace.  On
Christmas eve we three met again, and my notes inform me that
MacShaughnassy brewed some whiskey-punch, according to a recipe of his
own, a record suggestive of a sad Christmas for all three of us.  No
particular business appears to have been accomplished on either occasion.

Then there is a break until February 8th, and the assemblage has shrunk
to "Jephson and Self."  With a final flicker, as of a dying candle, my
diary at this point, however, grows luminous, shedding much light upon
that evening's conversation.

Our talk seems to have been of many things--of most things, in fact,
except our novel.  Among other subjects we spoke of literature generally.

"I am tired of this eternal cackle about books," said Jephson; "these
columns of criticism to every line of writing; these endless books about
books; these shrill praises and shrill denunciations; this silly worship
of novelist Tom; this silly hate of poet Dick; this silly squabbling over
playwright Harry.  There is no soberness, no sense in it all.  One would
think, to listen to the High Priests of Culture, that man was made for
literature, not literature for man.  Thought existed before the Printing
Press; and the men who wrote the best hundred books never read them.
Books have their place in the world, but they are not its purpose.  They
are things side by side with beef and mutton, the scent of the sea, the
touch of a hand, the memory of a hope, and all the other items in the sum-
total of our three-score years and ten.  Yet we speak of them as though
they were the voice of Life instead of merely its faint echo.  Tales are
delightful _as_ tales--sweet as primroses after the long winter, restful
as the cawing of rooks at sunset.  But we do not write 'tales' now; we
prepare 'human documents' and dissect souls."

He broke off abruptly in the midst of his tirade.  "Do you know what
these 'psychological studies,' that are so fashionable just now, always
make me think of?" he said.  "One monkey examining another monkey for
fleas.

"And what, after all, does our dissecting pen lay bare?" he continued.
"Human nature? or merely some more or less unsavoury undergarment,
disguising and disfiguring human nature?  There is a story told of an
elderly tramp, who, overtaken by misfortune, was compelled to retire for
a while to the seclusion of Portland.  His hosts, desiring to see as much
as possible of their guest during his limited stay with them, proceeded
to bath him.  They bathed him twice a day for a week, each time learning
more of him; until at last they reached a flannel shirt.  And with that
they had to be content, soap and water proving powerless to go further.

"That tramp appears to me symbolical of mankind.  Human Nature has worn
its conventions for so long that its habit has grown on to it.  In this
nineteenth century it is impossible to say where the clothes of custom
end and the natural man begins.  Our virtues are taught to us as a branch
of 'Deportment'; our vices are the recognised vices of our reign and set.
Our religion hangs ready-made beside our cradle to be buttoned upon us by
loving hands.  Our tastes we acquire, with difficulty; our sentiments we
learn by rote.  At cost of infinite suffering, we study to love whiskey
and cigars, high art and classical music.  In one age we admire Byron and
drink sweet champagne: twenty years later it is more fashionable to
prefer Shelley, and we like our champagne dry.  At school we are told
that Shakespeare is a great poet, and that the Venus di Medici is a fine
piece of sculpture; and so for the rest of our lives we go about saying
what a great poet we think Shakespeare, and that there is no piece of
sculpture, in our opinion, so fine as the Venus di Medici.  If we are
Frenchmen we adore our mother; if Englishmen we love dogs and virtue.  We
grieve for the death of a near relative twelve months; but for a second
cousin we sorrow only three.  The good man has his regulation
excellencies to strive after, his regulation sins to repent of.  I knew a
good man who was quite troubled because he was not proud, and could not,
therefore, with any reasonableness, pray for humility.  In society one
must needs be cynical and mildly wicked: in Bohemia, orthodoxly
unorthodox.  I remember my mother expostulating with a friend, an
actress, who had left a devoted husband and eloped with a disagreeable,
ugly, little low comedian (I am speaking of long, long ago).

"'You must be mad,' said my mother; 'what on earth induced you to take
such a step?'

"'My dear Emma,' replied the lady; 'what else was there for me?  You know
I can't act.  I had to do _something_ to show I was 'an artiste!'

"We are dressed-up marionettes.  Our voice is the voice of the unseen
showman, Convention; our very movements of passion and pain are but in
answer to his jerk.  A man resembles one of those gigantic bundles that
one sees in nursemaids' arms.  It is very bulky and very long; it looks a
mass of delicate lace and rich fur and fine woven stuffs; and somewhere,
hidden out of sight among the finery, there is a tiny red bit of
bewildered humanity, with no voice but a foolish cry.

"There is but one story," he went on, after a long pause, uttering his
own thoughts aloud rather than speaking to me.  "We sit at our desks and
think and think, and write and write, but the story is ever the same.  Men
told it and men listened to it many years ago; we are telling it to one
another to-day; we shall be telling it to one another a thousand years
hence; and the story is: 'Once upon a time there lived a man, and a woman
who loved him.'  The little critic cries that it is not new, and asks for
something fresh, thinking--as children do--that there are strange things
in the world."

* * * * *

At that point my notes end, and there is nothing in the book beyond.
Whether any of us thought any more of the novel, whether we ever met
again to discuss it, whether it were ever begun, whether it were ever
abandoned--I cannot say.  There is a fairy story that I read many, many
years ago that has never ceased to haunt me.  It told how a little boy
once climbed a rainbow.  And at the end of the rainbow, just behind the
clouds, he found a wondrous city.  Its houses were of gold, and its
streets were paved with silver, and the light that shone upon it was as
the light that lies upon the sleeping world at dawn.  In this city there
were palaces so beautiful that merely to look upon them satisfied all
desires; temples so perfect that they who once knelt therein were
cleansed of sin.  And all the men who dwelt in this wondrous city were
great and good, and the women fairer than the women of a young man's
dreams.  And the name of the city was, "The city of the things men meant
to do."






The neighbourhood of Bloomsbury Square towards four o'clock of a
November afternoon is not so crowded as to secure to the stranger, of
appearance anything out of the common, immunity from observation. Tibb's
boy, screaming at the top of his voice that _she_ was his honey, stopped
suddenly, stepped backwards on to the toes of a voluble young lady
wheeling a perambulator, and remained deaf, apparently, to the somewhat
personal remarks of the voluble young lady. Not until he had reached
the next corner--and then more as a soliloquy than as information to the
street--did Tibb's boy recover sufficient interest in his own affairs to
remark that _he_ was her bee. The voluble young lady herself, following
some half-a-dozen yards behind, forgot her wrongs in contemplation
of the stranger's back. There was this that was peculiar about the
stranger's back: that instead of being flat it presented a decided
curve. "It ain't a 'ump, and it don't look like kervitcher of the
spine," observed the voluble young lady to herself. "Blimy if I don't
believe 'e's taking 'ome 'is washing up his back."

The constable at the corner, trying to seem busy doing nothing, noticed
the stranger's approach with gathering interest. "That's an odd sort of
a walk of yours, young man," thought the constable. "You take care you
don't fall down and tumble over yourself."

"Thought he was a young man," murmured the constable, the stranger
having passed him. "He had a young face right enough."

The daylight was fading. The stranger, finding it impossible to read the
name of the street upon the corner house, turned back.

"Why, 'tis a young man," the constable told himself; "a mere boy."

"I beg your pardon," said the stranger; "but would you mind telling me
my way to Bloomsbury Square."

"This is Bloomsbury Square," explained the constable; "leastways round
the corner is. What number might you be wanting?"

The stranger took from the ticket pocket of his tightly buttoned
overcoat a piece of paper, unfolded it and read it out: "Mrs.
Pennycherry. Number Forty-eight."

"Round to the left," instructed him the constable; "fourth house. Been
recommended there?"

"By--by a friend," replied the stranger. "Thank you very much."

"Ah," muttered the constable to himself; "guess you won't be calling him
that by the end of the week, young--"

"Funny," added the constable, gazing after the retreating figure of the
stranger. "Seen plenty of the other sex as looked young behind and old
in front. This cove looks young in front and old behind. Guess he'll
look old all round if he stops long at mother Pennycherry's: stingy old
cat."

Constables whose beat included Bloomsbury Square had their reasons for
not liking Mrs. Pennycherry. Indeed it might have been difficult to
discover any human being with reasons for liking that sharp-featured
lady. Maybe the keeping of second-rate boarding houses in the
neighbourhood of Bloomsbury does not tend to develop the virtues of
generosity and amiability.

Meanwhile the stranger, proceeding upon his way, had rung the bell of
Number Forty-eight. Mrs. Pennycherry, peeping from the area and catching
a glimpse, above the railings, of a handsome if somewhat effeminate
masculine face, hastened to readjust her widow's cap before the
looking-glass while directing Mary Jane to show the stranger, should he
prove a problematical boarder, into the dining-room, and to light the
gas.

"And don't stop gossiping, and don't you take it upon yourself to answer
questions. Say I'll be up in a minute," were Mrs. Pennycherry's further
instructions, "and mind you hide your hands as much as you can."

***

"What are you grinning at?" demanded Mrs. Pennycherry, a couple of
minutes later, of the dingy Mary Jane.

"Wasn't grinning," explained the meek Mary Jane, "was only smiling to
myself."

"What at?"

"Dunno," admitted Mary Jane. But still she went on smiling.

"What's he like then?" demanded Mrs. Pennycherry.

"'E ain't the usual sort," was Mary Jane's opinion.

"Thank God for that," ejaculated Mrs. Pennycherry piously.

"Says 'e's been recommended, by a friend."

"By whom?"

"By a friend. 'E didn't say no name." Mrs. Pennycherry pondered. "He's
not the funny sort, is he?"

Not that sort at all. Mary Jane was sure of it.

Mrs. Pennycherry ascended the stairs still pondering. As she entered the
room the stranger rose and bowed. Nothing could have been simpler than
the stranger's bow, yet there came with it to Mrs. Pennycherry a rush of
old sensations long forgotten. For one brief moment Mrs. Pennycherry saw
herself an amiable well-bred lady, widow of a solicitor: a visitor
had called to see her. It was but a momentary fancy. The next instant
Reality reasserted itself. Mrs. Pennycherry, a lodging-house keeper,
existing precariously upon a daily round of petty meannesses, was
prepared for contest with a possible new boarder, who fortunately looked
an inexperienced young gentleman.

"Someone has recommended me to you," began Mrs. Pennycherry; "may I ask
who?"

But the stranger waved the question aside as immaterial.

"You might not remember--him," he smiled. "He thought that I should do
well to pass the few months I am given--that I have to be in London,
here. You can take me in?"

Mrs. Pennycherry thought that she would be able to take the stranger in.

"A room to sleep in," explained the stranger, "--any room will do--with
food and drink sufficient for a man, is all that I require."

"For breakfast," began Mrs. Pennycherry, "I always give--"

"What is right and proper, I am convinced," interrupted the stranger.
"Pray do not trouble to go into detail, Mrs. Pennycherry. With whatever
it is I shall be content."

Mrs. Pennycherry, puzzled, shot a quick glance at the stranger, but his
face, though the gentle eyes were smiling, was frank and serious.

"At all events you will see the room," suggested Mrs. Pennycherry,
"before we discuss terms."

"Certainly," agreed the stranger. "I am a little tired and shall be glad
to rest there."

Mrs. Pennycherry led the way upward; on the landing of the third floor,
paused a moment undecided, then opened the door of the back bedroom.

"It is very comfortable," commented the stranger.

"For this room," stated Mrs. Pennycherry, "together with full board,
consisting of--"

"Of everything needful. It goes without saying," again interrupted the
stranger with his quiet grave smile.

"I have generally asked," continued Mrs. Pennycherry, "four pounds a
week. To you--" Mrs. Pennycherry's voice, unknown to her, took to itself
the note of aggressive generosity--"seeing you have been recommended
here, say three pounds ten."

"Dear lady," said the stranger, "that is kind of you. As you have
divined, I am not a rich man. If it be not imposing upon you I accept
your reduction with gratitude."

Again Mrs. Pennycherry, familiar with the satirical method, shot a
suspicious glance upon the stranger, but not a line was there, upon
that smooth fair face, to which a sneer could for a moment have clung.
Clearly he was as simple as he looked.

"Gas, of course, extra."

"Of course," agreed the Stranger.

"Coals--"

"We shall not quarrel," for a third time the stranger interrupted. "You
have been very considerate to me as it is. I feel, Mrs. Pennycherry, I
can leave myself entirely in your hands."

The stranger appeared anxious to be alone. Mrs. Pennycherry, having put
a match to the stranger's fire, turned to depart. And at this point it
was that Mrs. Pennycherry, the holder hitherto of an unbroken record
for sanity, behaved in a manner she herself, five minutes earlier in her
career, would have deemed impossible--that no living soul who had ever
known her would have believed, even had Mrs. Pennycherry gone down upon
her knees and sworn it to them.

"Did I say three pound ten?" demanded Mrs. Pennycherry of the stranger,
her hand upon the door. She spoke crossly. She was feeling cross, with
the stranger, with herself--particularly with herself.

"You were kind enough to reduce it to that amount," replied the
stranger; "but if upon reflection you find yourself unable--"

"I was making a mistake," said Mrs. Pennycherry, "it should have been
two pound ten."

"I cannot--I will not accept such sacrifice," exclaimed the stranger;
"the three pound ten I can well afford."

"Two pound ten are my terms," snapped Mrs. Pennycherry. "If you are bent
on paying more, you can go elsewhere. You'll find plenty to oblige you."

Her vehemence must have impressed the stranger. "We will not contend
further," he smiled. "I was merely afraid that in the goodness of your
heart--"

"Oh, it isn't as good as all that," growled Mrs. Pennycherry.

"I am not so sure," returned the stranger. "I am somewhat suspicious of
you. But wilful woman must, I suppose, have her way."

The stranger held out his hand, and to Mrs. Pennycherry, at that moment,
it seemed the most natural thing in the world to take it as if it had
been the hand of an old friend and to end the interview with a pleasant
laugh--though laughing was an exercise not often indulged in by Mrs.
Pennycherry.

Mary Jane was standing by the window, her hands folded in front of her,
when Mrs. Pennycherry re-entered the kitchen. By standing close to
the window one caught a glimpse of the trees in Bloomsbury Square and
through their bare branches of the sky beyond.

"There's nothing much to do for the next half hour, till Cook comes
back. I'll see to the door if you'd like a run out?" suggested Mrs.
Pennycherry.

"It would be nice," agreed the girl so soon as she had recovered power
of speech; "it's just the time of day I like."

"Don't be longer than the half hour," added Mrs. Pennycherry.

Forty-eight Bloomsbury Square, assembled after dinner in the
drawing-room, discussed the stranger with that freedom and frankness
characteristic of Forty-eight Bloomsbury Square, towards the absent.

"Not what I call a smart young man," was the opinion of Augustus
Longcord, who was something in the City.

"Thpeaking for mythelf," commented his partner Isidore, "hav'n'th any
uthe for the thmart young man. Too many of him, ath it ith."

"Must be pretty smart if he's one too many for you," laughed his
partner.

There was this to be said for the repartee of Forty-eight Bloomsbury
Square: it was simple of construction and easy of comprehension.

"Well it made me feel good just looking at him," declared Miss Kite, the
highly coloured. "It was his clothes, I suppose--made me think of Noah
and the ark--all that sort of thing."

"It would be clothes that would make you think--if anything," drawled
the languid Miss Devine. She was a tall, handsome girl, engaged at the
moment in futile efforts to recline with elegance and comfort combined
upon a horsehair sofa. Miss Kite, by reason of having secured the only
easy-chair, was unpopular that evening; so that Miss Devine's remark
received from the rest of the company more approbation than perhaps it
merited.

"Is that intended to be clever, dear, or only rude?" Miss Kite requested
to be informed.

"Both," claimed Miss Devine.

"Myself? I must confess," shouted the tall young lady's father, commonly
called the Colonel, "I found him a fool."

"I noticed you seemed to be getting on very well together," purred his
wife, a plump, smiling little lady.

"Possibly we were," retorted the Colonel. "Fate has accustomed me to the
society of fools."

"Isn't it a pity to start quarrelling immediately after dinner, you
two," suggested their thoughtful daughter from the sofa, "you'll have
nothing left to amuse you for the rest of the evening."

"He didn't strike me as a conversationalist," said the lady who was
cousin to a baronet; "but he did pass the vegetables before he helped
himself. A little thing like that shows breeding."

"Or that he didn't know you and thought maybe you'd leave him half a
spoonful," laughed Augustus the wit.

"What I can't make out about him--" shouted the Colonel.

The stranger entered the room.

The Colonel, securing the evening paper, retired into a corner. The
highly coloured Kite, reaching down from the mantelpiece a paper fan,
held it coyly before her face. Miss Devine sat upright on the horse-hair
sofa, and rearranged her skirts.

"Know anything?" demanded Augustus of the stranger, breaking the
somewhat remarkable silence.

The stranger evidently did not understand. It was necessary for
Augustus, the witty, to advance further into that odd silence.

"What's going to pull off the Lincoln handicap? Tell me, and I'll go out
straight and put my shirt upon it."

"I think you would act unwisely," smiled the stranger; "I am not an
authority upon the subject."

"Not! Why they told me you were Captain Spy of the _Sporting Life_--in
disguise."

It would have been difficult for a joke to fall more flat. Nobody
laughed, though why Mr. Augustus Longcord could not understand, and
maybe none of his audience could have told him, for at Forty-eight
Bloomsbury Square Mr. Augustus Longcord passed as a humorist. The
stranger himself appeared unaware that he was being made fun of.

"You have been misinformed," assured him the stranger.

"I beg your pardon," said Mr. Augustus Longcord.

"It is nothing," replied the stranger in his sweet low voice, and passed
on.

"Well what about this theatre," demanded Mr. Longcord of his friend
and partner; "do you want to go or don't you?" Mr. Longcord was feeling
irritable.

"Goth the ticketh--may ath well," thought Isidore.

"Damn stupid piece, I'm told."

"Motht of them thupid, more or leth. Pity to wathte the ticketh," argued
Isidore, and the pair went out.

"Are you staying long in London?" asked Miss Kite, raising her practised
eyes towards the stranger.

"Not long," answered the stranger. "At least I do not know. It depends."

An unusual quiet had invaded the drawing-room of Forty-eight Bloomsbury
Square, generally noisy with strident voices about this hour. The
Colonel remained engrossed in his paper. Mrs. Devine sat with her plump
white hands folded on her lap, whether asleep or not it was impossible
to say. The lady who was cousin to a baronet had shifted her chair
beneath the gasolier, her eyes bent on her everlasting crochet work. The
languid Miss Devine had crossed to the piano, where she sat fingering
softly the tuneless keys, her back to the cold barely-furnished room.

"Sit down!" commanded saucily Miss Kite, indicating with her fan the
vacant seat beside her. "Tell me about yourself. You interest me." Miss
Kite adopted a pretty authoritative air towards all youthful-looking
members of the opposite sex. It harmonised with the peach complexion and
the golden hair, and fitted her about as well.

"I am glad of that," answered the stranger, taking the chair suggested.
"I so wish to interest you."

"You're a very bold boy." Miss Kite lowered her fan, for the purpose of
glancing archly over the edge of it, and for the first time encountered
the eyes of the stranger looking into hers. And then it was that Miss
Kite experienced precisely the same curious sensation that an hour or so
ago had troubled Mrs. Pennycherry when the stranger had first bowed to
her. It seemed to Miss Kite that she was no longer the Miss Kite that,
had she risen and looked into it, the fly-blown mirror over the marble
mantelpiece would, she knew, have presented to her view; but quite
another Miss Kite--a cheerful, bright-eyed lady verging on middle age,
yet still good-looking in spite of her faded complexion and somewhat
thin brown locks. Miss Kite felt a pang of jealousy shoot through her;
this middle-aged Miss Kite seemed, on the whole, a more attractive
lady. There was a wholesomeness, a broadmindedness about her that
instinctively drew one towards her. Not hampered, as Miss Kite herself
was, by the necessity of appearing to be somewhere between eighteen and
twenty-two, this other Miss Kite could talk sensibly, even brilliantly:
one felt it. A thoroughly "nice" woman this other Miss Kite; the real
Miss Kite, though envious, was bound to admit it. Miss Kite wished to
goodness she had never seen the woman. The glimpse of her had rendered
Miss Kite dissatisfied with herself.

"I am not a boy," explained the stranger; "and I had no intention of
being bold."

"I know," replied Miss Kite. "It was a silly remark. Whatever induced me
to make it, I can't think. Getting foolish in my old age, I suppose."

The stranger laughed. "Surely you are not old."

"I'm thirty-nine," snapped out Miss Kite. "You don't call it young?"

"I think it a beautiful age," insisted the stranger; "young enough not
to have lost the joy of youth, old enough to have learnt sympathy."

"Oh, I daresay," returned Miss Kite, "any age you'd think beautiful.
I'm going to bed." Miss Kite rose. The paper fan had somehow got itself
broken. She threw the fragments into the fire.

"It is early yet," pleaded the stranger, "I was looking forward to a
talk with you."

"Well, you'll be able to look forward to it," retorted Miss Kite.
"Good-night."

The truth was, Miss Kite was impatient to have a look at herself in the
glass, in her own room with the door shut. The vision of that other Miss
Kite--the clean-looking lady of the pale face and the brown hair had
been so vivid, Miss Kite wondered whether temporary forgetfulness might
not have fallen upon her while dressing for dinner that evening.

The stranger, left to his own devices, strolled towards the loo table,
seeking something to read.

"You seem to have frightened away Miss Kite," remarked the lady who was
cousin to a baronet.

"It seems so," admitted the stranger.

"My cousin, Sir William Bosster," observed the crocheting lady, "who
married old Lord Egham's niece--you never met the Eghams?"

"Hitherto," replied the stranger, "I have not had that pleasure."

"A charming family. Cannot understand--my cousin Sir William, I mean,
cannot understand my remaining here. 'My dear Emily'--he says the same
thing every time he sees me: 'My dear Emily, how can you exist among the
sort of people one meets with in a boarding-house.' But they amuse me."

A sense of humour, agreed the stranger, was always of advantage.

"Our family on my mother's side," continued Sir William's cousin in her
placid monotone, "was connected with the Tatton-Joneses, who when King
George the Fourth--" Sir William's cousin, needing another reel of
cotton, glanced up, and met the stranger's gaze.

"I'm sure I don't know why I'm telling you all this," said Sir William's
cousin in an irritable tone. "It can't possibly interest you."

"Everything connected with you interests me," gravely the stranger
assured her.

"It is very kind of you to say so," sighed Sir William's cousin, but
without conviction; "I am afraid sometimes I bore people."

The polite stranger refrained from contradiction.

"You see," continued the poor lady, "I really am of good family."

"Dear lady," said the stranger, "your gentle face, your gentle voice,
your gentle bearing, all proclaim it."

She looked without flinching into the stranger's eyes, and gradually a
smile banished the reigning dulness of her features.

"How foolish of me." She spoke rather to herself than to the stranger.
"Why, of course, people--people whose opinion is worth troubling
about--judge of you by what you are, not by what you go about saying you
are."

The stranger remained silent.

"I am the widow of a provincial doctor, with an income of just two
hundred and thirty pounds per annum," she argued. "The sensible thing
for me to do is to make the best of it, and to worry myself about these
high and mighty relations of mine as little as they have ever worried
themselves about me."

The stranger appeared unable to think of anything worth saying.

"I have other connections," remembered Sir William's cousin; "those of
my poor husband, to whom instead of being the 'poor relation' I could
be the fairy god-mama. They are my people--or would be," added Sir
William's cousin tartly, "if I wasn't a vulgar snob."

She flushed the instant she had said the words and, rising, commenced
preparations for a hurried departure.

"Now it seems I am driving you away," sighed the stranger.

"Having been called a 'vulgar snob,'" retorted the lady with some heat,
"I think it about time I went."

"The words were your own," the stranger reminded her.

"Whatever I may have thought," remarked the indignant dame, "no
lady--least of all in the presence of a total stranger--would have
called herself--" The poor dame paused, bewildered. "There is something
very curious the matter with me this evening, that I cannot understand,"
she explained, "I seem quite unable to avoid insulting myself."

Still surrounded by bewilderment, she wished the stranger good-night,
hoping that when next they met she would be more herself. The stranger,
hoping so also, opened the door and closed it again behind her.

"Tell me," laughed Miss Devine, who by sheer force of talent was
contriving to wring harmony from the reluctant piano, "how did you
manage to do it? I should like to know."

"How did I do what?" inquired the stranger.

"Contrive to get rid so quickly of those two old frumps?"

"How well you play!" observed the stranger. "I knew you had genius for
music the moment I saw you."

"How could you tell?"

"It is written so clearly in your face."

The girl laughed, well pleased. "You seem to have lost no time in
studying my face."

"It is a beautiful and interesting face," observed the stranger.

She swung round sharply on the stool and their eyes met.

"You can read faces?"

"Yes."

"Tell me, what else do you read in mine?"

"Frankness, courage--"

"Ah, yes, all the virtues. Perhaps. We will take them for granted." It
was odd how serious the girl had suddenly become. "Tell me the reverse
side."

"I see no reverse side," replied the stranger. "I see but a fair girl,
bursting into noble womanhood."

"And nothing else? You read no trace of greed, of vanity, of sordidness,
of--" An angry laugh escaped her lips. "And you are a reader of faces!"

"A reader of faces." The stranger smiled. "Do you know what is written
upon yours at this very moment? A love of truth that is almost fierce,
scorn of lies, scorn of hypocrisy, the desire for all things pure,
contempt of all things that are contemptible--especially of such things
as are contemptible in woman. Tell me, do I not read aright?"

I wonder, thought the girl, is that why those two others both hurried
from the room? Does everyone feel ashamed of the littleness that is in
them when looked at by those clear, believing eyes of yours?

The idea occurred to her: "Papa seemed to have a good deal to say to you
during dinner. Tell me, what were you talking about?"

"The military looking gentleman upon my left? We talked about your
mother principally."

"I am sorry," returned the girl, wishful now she had not asked the
question. "I was hoping he might have chosen another topic for the first
evening!"

"He did try one or two," admitted the stranger; "but I have been about
the world so little, I was glad when he talked to me about himself. I
feel we shall be friends. He spoke so nicely, too, about Mrs. Devine."

"Indeed," commented the girl.

"He told me he had been married for twenty years and had never regretted
it but once!"

Her black eyes flashed upon him, but meeting his, the suspicion died
from them. She turned aside to hide her smile.

"So he regretted it--once."

"Only once," explained the stranger, "in a passing irritable mood. It
was so frank of him to admit it. He told me--I think he has taken a
liking to me. Indeed he hinted as much. He said he did not often get an
opportunity of talking to a man like myself--he told me that he and your
mother, when they travel together, are always mistaken for a honeymoon
couple. Some of the experiences he related to me were really quite
amusing." The stranger laughed at recollection of them--"that even here,
in this place, they are generally referred to as 'Darby and Joan.'"

"Yes," said the girl, "that is true. Mr. Longcord gave them that name,
the second evening after our arrival. It was considered clever--but
rather obvious I thought myself."

"Nothing--so it seems to me," said the stranger, "is more beautiful
than the love that has weathered the storms of life. The sweet, tender
blossom that flowers in the heart of the young--in hearts such as
yours--that, too, is beautiful. The love of the young for the young,
that is the beginning of life. But the love of the old for the old, that
is the beginning of--of things longer."

"You seem to find all things beautiful," the girl grumbled.

"But are not all things beautiful?" demanded the stranger.

The Colonel had finished his paper. "You two are engaged in a very
absorbing conversation," observed the Colonel, approaching them.

"We were discussing Darbies and Joans," explained his daughter. "How
beautiful is the love that has weathered the storms of life!"

"Ah!" smiled the Colonel, "that is hardly fair. My friend has been
repeating to cynical youth the confessions of an amorous husband's
affection for his middle-aged and somewhat--" The Colonel in playful
mood laid his hand upon the stranger's shoulder, an action that
necessitated his looking straight into the stranger's eyes. The Colonel
drew himself up stiffly and turned scarlet.

Somebody was calling the Colonel a cad. Not only that, but was
explaining quite clearly, so that the Colonel could see it for himself,
why he was a cad.

"That you and your wife lead a cat and dog existence is a disgrace to
both of you. At least you might have the decency to try and hide it from
the world--not make a jest of your shame to every passing stranger. You
are a cad, sir, a cad!"

Who was daring to say these things? Not the stranger, his lips had not
moved. Besides, it was not his voice. Indeed it sounded much more like
the voice of the Colonel himself. The Colonel looked from the stranger
to his daughter, from his daughter back to the stranger. Clearly they
had not heard the voice--a mere hallucination. The Colonel breathed
again.

Yet the impression remaining was not to be shaken off. Undoubtedly it
was bad taste to have joked to the stranger upon such a subject. No
gentleman would have done so.

But then no gentleman would have permitted such a jest to be possible.
No gentleman would be forever wrangling with his wife--certainly
never in public. However irritating the woman, a gentleman would have
exercised self-control.

Mrs. Devine had risen, was coming slowly across the room. Fear laid
hold of the Colonel. She was going to address some aggravating remark
to him--he could see it in her eye--which would irritate him into savage
retort.

Even this prize idiot of a stranger would understand why boarding-house
wits had dubbed them "Darby and Joan," would grasp the fact that the
gallant Colonel had thought it amusing, in conversation with a table
acquaintance, to hold his own wife up to ridicule.

"My dear," cried the Colonel, hurrying to speak first, "does not this
room strike you as cold? Let me fetch you a shawl."

It was useless: the Colonel felt it. It had been too long the custom of
both of them to preface with politeness their deadliest insults to each
other. She came on, thinking of a suitable reply: suitable from her
point of view, that is. In another moment the truth would be out. A
wild, fantastic possibility flashed through the Colonel's brain: If to
him, why not to her?

"Letitia," cried the Colonel, and the tone of his voice surprised her
into silence, "I want you to look closely at our friend. Does he not
remind you of someone?"

Mrs. Devine, so urged, looked at the stranger long and hard. "Yes," she
murmured, turning to her husband, "he does, who is it?"

"I cannot fix it," replied the Colonel; "I thought that maybe you would
remember."

"It will come to me," mused Mrs. Devine. "It is someone--years ago,
when I was a girl--in Devonshire. Thank you, if it isn't troubling you,
Harry. I left it in the dining-room."

It was, as Mr. Augustus Longcord explained to his partner Isidore,
the colossal foolishness of the stranger that was the cause of all the
trouble. "Give me a man, who can take care of himself--or thinks he
can," declared Augustus Longcord, "and I am prepared to give a good
account of myself. But when a helpless baby refuses even to look at what
you call your figures, tells you that your mere word is sufficient for
him, and hands you over his cheque-book to fill up for yourself--well,
it isn't playing the game."

"Auguthuth," was the curt comment of his partner, "you're a fool."

"All right, my boy, you try," suggested Augustus.

"Jutht what I mean to do," asserted his partner.

"Well," demanded Augustus one evening later, meeting Isidore ascending
the stairs after a long talk with the stranger in the dining-room with
the door shut.

"Oh, don't arth me," retorted Isidore, "thilly ath, thath what he ith."

"What did he say?"

"What did he thay! talked about the Jewth: what a grand rathe they
were--how people mithjudged them: all that thort of rot.

"Thaid thome of the motht honorable men he had ever met had been Jewth.
Thought I wath one of 'em!"

"Well, did you get anything out of him?"

"Get anything out of him. Of courthe not. Couldn't very well thell the
whole rathe, ath it were, for a couple of hundred poundth, after that.
Didn't theem worth it."

There were many things Forty-eight Bloomsbury Square came gradually
to the conclusion were not worth the doing:--Snatching at the gravy;
pouncing out of one's turn upon the vegetables and helping oneself to
more than one's fair share; manoeuvering for the easy-chair; sitting on
the evening paper while pretending not to have seen it--all such-like
tiresome bits of business. For the little one made out of it, really
it was not worth the bother. Grumbling everlastingly at one's food;
grumbling everlastingly at most things; abusing Pennycherry behind her
back; abusing, for a change, one's fellow-boarders; squabbling with
one's fellow-boarders about nothing in particular; sneering at one's
fellow-boarders; talking scandal of one's fellow-boarders; making
senseless jokes about one's fellow-boarders; talking big about oneself,
nobody believing one--all such-like vulgarities. Other boarding-houses
might indulge in them: Forty-eight Bloomsbury Square had its dignity to
consider.

The truth is, Forty-eight Bloomsbury Square was coming to a very good
opinion of itself: for the which not Bloomsbury Square so much as
the stranger must be blamed. The stranger had arrived at Forty-eight
Bloomsbury Square with the preconceived idea--where obtained from
Heaven knows--that its seemingly commonplace, mean-minded, coarse-fibred
occupants were in reality ladies and gentlemen of the first water; and
time and observation had apparently only strengthened this absurd idea.
The natural result was, Forty-eight Bloomsbury Square was coming round
to the stranger's opinion of itself.

Mrs. Pennycherry, the stranger would persist in regarding as a lady born
and bred, compelled by circumstances over which she had no control to
fill an arduous but honorable position of middle-class society--a sort
of foster-mother, to whom were due the thanks and gratitude of her
promiscuous family; and this view of herself Mrs. Pennycherry now clung
to with obstinate conviction. There were disadvantages attaching, but
these Mrs. Pennycherry appeared prepared to suffer cheerfully. A lady
born and bred cannot charge other ladies and gentlemen for coals and
candles they have never burnt; a foster-mother cannot palm off upon her
children New Zealand mutton for Southdown. A mere lodging-house-keeper
can play these tricks, and pocket the profits. But a lady feels she
cannot: Mrs. Pennycherry felt she no longer could.

To the stranger Miss Kite was a witty and delightful conversationalist
of most attractive personality. Miss Kite had one failing: it was lack
of vanity. She was unaware of her own delicate and refined beauty. If
Miss Kite could only see herself with his, the stranger's eyes, the
modesty that rendered her distrustful of her natural charms would fall
from her. The stranger was so sure of it Miss Kite determined to put
it to the test. One evening, an hour before dinner, there entered the
drawing-room, when the stranger only was there and before the gas
was lighted, a pleasant, good-looking lady, somewhat pale, with
neatly-arranged brown hair, who demanded of the stranger if he knew her.
All her body was trembling, and her voice seemed inclined to run away
from her and become a sob. But when the stranger, looking straight into
her eyes, told her that from the likeness he thought she must be Miss
Kite's younger sister, but much prettier, it became a laugh instead: and
that evening the golden-haired Miss Kite disappeared never to show her
high-coloured face again; and what perhaps, more than all else, might
have impressed some former habitue of Forty-eight Bloomsbury Square
with awe, it was that no one in the house made even a passing inquiry
concerning her.

Sir William's cousin the stranger thought an acquisition to any
boarding-house. A lady of high-class family! There was nothing outward
or visible perhaps to tell you that she was of high-class family. She
herself, naturally, would not mention the fact, yet somehow you felt
it. Unconsciously she set a high-class tone, diffused an atmosphere of
gentle manners. Not that the stranger had said this in so many words;
Sir William's cousin gathered that he thought it, and felt herself in
agreement with him.

For Mr. Longcord and his partner, as representatives of the best type
of business men, the stranger had a great respect. With what unfortunate
results to themselves has been noted. The curious thing is that the Firm
appeared content with the price they had paid for the stranger's good
opinion--had even, it was rumoured, acquired a taste for honest men's
respect--that in the long run was likely to cost them dear. But we all
have our pet extravagance.

The Colonel and Mrs. Devine both suffered a good deal at first from
the necessity imposed upon them of learning, somewhat late in life, new
tricks. In the privacy of their own apartment they condoled with one
another.

"Tomfool nonsense," grumbled the Colonel, "you and I starting billing
and cooing at our age!"

"What I object to," said Mrs. Devine, "is the feeling that somehow I am
being made to do it."

"The idea that a man and his wife cannot have their little joke together
for fear of what some impertinent jackanapes may think of them! it's
damn ridiculous," the Colonel exploded.

"Even when he isn't there," said Mrs. Devine, "I seem to see him looking
at me with those vexing eyes of his. Really the man quite haunts me."

"I have met him somewhere," mused the Colonel, "I'll swear I've met him
somewhere. I wish to goodness he would go."

A hundred things a day the Colonel wanted to say to Mrs. Devine, a
hundred things a day Mrs. Devine would have liked to observe to the
Colonel. But by the time the opportunity occurred--when nobody else was
by to hear--all interest in saying them was gone.

"Women will be women," was the sentiment with which the Colonel consoled
himself. "A man must bear with them--must never forget that he is a
gentleman."

"Oh, well, I suppose they're all alike," laughed Mrs. Devine to herself,
having arrived at that stage of despair when one seeks refuge in
cheerfulness. "What's the use of putting oneself out--it does no good,
and only upsets one." There is a certain satisfaction in feeling you
are bearing with heroic resignation the irritating follies of
others. Colonel and Mrs. Devine came to enjoy the luxury of much
self-approbation.

But the person seriously annoyed by the stranger's bigoted belief in
the innate goodness of everyone he came across was the languid,
handsome Miss Devine. The stranger would have it that Miss Devine was a
noble-souled, high-minded young woman, something midway between a Flora
Macdonald and a Joan of Arc. Miss Devine, on the contrary, knew herself
to be a sleek, luxury-loving animal, quite willing to sell herself to
the bidder who could offer her the finest clothes, the richest foods,
the most sumptuous surroundings. Such a bidder was to hand in the person
of a retired bookmaker, a somewhat greasy old gentleman, but exceedingly
rich and undoubtedly fond of her.

Miss Devine, having made up her mind that the thing had got to be done,
was anxious that it should be done quickly. And here it was that
the stranger's ridiculous opinion of her not only irritated but
inconvenienced her. Under the very eyes of a person--however
foolish--convinced that you are possessed of all the highest attributes
of your sex, it is difficult to behave as though actuated by only the
basest motives. A dozen times had Miss Devine determined to end the
matter by formal acceptance of her elderly admirer's large and flabby
hand, and a dozen times--the vision intervening of the stranger's grave,
believing eyes--had Miss Devine refused decided answer. The stranger
would one day depart. Indeed, he had told her himself, he was but a
passing traveller. When he was gone it would be easier. So she thought
at the time.

One afternoon the stranger entered the room where she was standing
by the window, looking out upon the bare branches of the trees in
Bloomsbury Square. She remembered afterwards, it was just such another
foggy afternoon as the afternoon of the stranger's arrival three months
before. No one else was in the room. The stranger closed the door, and
came towards her with that curious, quick-leaping step of his. His long
coat was tightly buttoned, and in his hands he carried his old felt hat
and the massive knotted stick that was almost a staff.

"I have come to say good-bye," explained the stranger. "I am going."

"I shall not see you again?" asked the girl.

"I cannot say," replied the stranger. "But you will think of me?"

"Yes," she answered with a smile, "I can promise that."

"And I shall always remember you," promised the stranger, "and I wish
you every joy--the joy of love, the joy of a happy marriage."

The girl winced. "Love and marriage are not always the same thing," she
said.

"Not always," agreed the stranger, "but in your case they will be one."

She looked at him.

"Do you think I have not noticed?" smiled the stranger, "a gallant,
handsome lad, and clever. You love him and he loves you. I could not
have gone away without knowing it was well with you."

Her gaze wandered towards the fading light.

"Ah, yes, I love him," she answered petulantly. "Your eyes can see
clearly enough, when they want to. But one does not live on love, in our
world. I will tell you the man I am going to marry if you care to know."
She would not meet his eyes. She kept her gaze still fixed upon the
dingy trees, the mist beyond, and spoke rapidly and vehemently: "The man
who can give me all my soul's desire--money and the things that money
can buy. You think me a woman, I'm only a pig. He is moist, and breathes
like a porpoise; with cunning in place of a brain, and the rest of him
mere stomach. But he is good enough for me."

She hoped this would shock the stranger and that now, perhaps, he would
go. It irritated her to hear him only laugh.

"No," he said, "you will not marry him."

"Who will stop me?" she cried angrily.

"Your Better Self."

His voice had a strange ring of authority, compelling her to turn and
look upon his face. Yes, it was true, the fancy that from the very
first had haunted her. She had met him, talked to him--in silent country
roads, in crowded city streets, where was it? And always in talking
with him her spirit had been lifted up: she had been--what he had always
thought her.

"There are those," continued the stranger (and for the first time she
saw that he was of a noble presence, that his gentle, child-like eyes
could also command), "whose Better Self lies slain by their own hand
and troubles them no more. But yours, my child, you have let grow too
strong; it will ever be your master. You must obey. Flee from it and it
will follow you; you cannot escape it. Insult it and it will chastise
you with burning shame, with stinging self-reproach from day to day."
The sternness faded from the beautiful face, the tenderness crept back.
He laid his hand upon the young girl's shoulder. "You will marry your
lover," he smiled. "With him you will walk the way of sunlight and of
shadow."

And the girl, looking up into the strong, calm face, knew that it would
be so, that the power of resisting her Better Self had passed away from
her for ever.

"Now," said the stranger, "come to the door with me. Leave-takings
are but wasted sadness. Let me pass out quietly. Close the door softly
behind me."

She thought that perhaps he would turn his face again, but she saw
no more of him than the odd roundness of his back under the tightly
buttoned coat, before he faded into the gathering fog.

Then softly she closed the door.



