

THE IDIOT




I


For some weeks after the happy event which transformed the popular Mrs.
Smithers into the charming Mrs. John Pedagog all went well at that lady's
select home for single gentlemen. It was only proper that during the
honey-moon, at least, of the happy couple hostilities between the Idiot
and his fellow-boarders should cease. It was expecting too much of
mankind, however, to look for a continued armistice, and the morning
arrived when Nature once more reasserted herself, and trouble began. Just
what it was that prompted the remark no one knows, but it happened that
the Idiot did say that he thought that, after all, life on a canal-boat
had its advantages. Mr. Pedagog, who had come into the dining-room in a
slightly irritable frame of mind, induced perhaps by Mrs. Pedagog's
insistence that as he was now part proprietor of the house he should be
a little more prompt in making his contributions towards its maintenance,
chose to take the remark as implying a reflection upon the way things
were managed in the household.

"Humph!" he said. "I had hoped that your habit of airing your idiotic
views had been put aside for once and for all."

"Very absurd hope, my dear sir," observed the Idiot. "Views that are not
aired become musty. Why shouldn't I give them an atmospheric opportunity
once in a while?"

"Because they are the sort of views to which suffocation is the most
appropriate end," snapped the School-Master. "Any man who asserts, as you
have asserted, that life on a canal-boat has its advantages, ought to go
further, and prove his sincerity by living on one."

"I can't afford it," said the Idiot, meekly. "It isn't cheap by any
manner of means. In the first place, you can't live happily on a
canal-boat unless you can afford to keep horses. In fact, canal-boat life
is a combination of the most expensive luxuries, since it combines
yachting and driving with domesticity. Nevertheless, if you will put your
mind on it, you will find that with a canal-boat for your home you can do
a great many things that you can't do with a house."

"I decline to put my mind on a canal-boat," said Mr. Pedagog, sharply,
passing his coffee back to Mrs. Pedagog for another lump of sugar,
thereby contributing to that good lady's discomfiture, since before their
marriage the mere fact that the coffee had been poured by her fair hand
had given it all the sweetness it needed; or at least that was what the
School-Master had said, and more than once at that.

"You are under no obligation to do so," the Idiot returned. "Though if I
had a mind like yours I'd put it on a canal-boat and have it towed away
somewhere out of sight. These other gentlemen, however, I think, will
agree with me when I say that the mere fact that a canal-boat can be
moved about the country, and is in no sense a fixture anywhere, shows
that as a dwelling-place it is superior to a house. Take this house, for
instance. This neighborhood used to be the best in town. It is still far
from being the worst neighborhood in town, but it is, as it has been for
several years, deteriorating. The establishment of a Turkish bath on one
corner and a grocery-store on the other has taken away much of that air
of refinement which characterized it when the block was devoted to
residential purposes entirely. Now just suppose for a moment that this
street were a canal, and that this house were a canal-boat. The canal
could run down as much as it pleased, the neighborhood could deteriorate
eternally, but it could not affect the value of this house as the home of
refined people as long as it was possible to hitch up a team of horses to
the front stoop and tow it into a better locality. I'd like to wager
every man at this table that Mrs. Pedagog wouldn't take five minutes to
make up her mind to tow this house up to a spot near Central Park, if it
were a canal-boat and the streets were water instead of a mixture of
water, sand, and Belgian blocks."

"No takers," said the Bibliomaniac.

"Tutt-tutt-tutt," ejaculated Mr. Pedagog.

[Illustration: "THE NUISANCE OF HAVING TO PAY"]

"You seem to lose sight of another fact," said the Idiot, warming up to
his subject. "If man had had the sense in the beginning to adopt the
canal-boat system of life, and we were used to that sort of thing, it
would not be so hard upon us in summer-time, when we have to live in
hotels in order that we and our families may reap the benefits of a
period of country life. We could simply drive off to that section of the
country where we desired to be. Hotels would not be needed if a man could
take his house along with him into the fields, and one phase of life
which has more bad than good in it would be entirely obliterated. There
is nothing more disturbing to the serenity of a domestic man's mind than
the artificial manner of living that prevails in most summer hotels. The
nuisance of having to pay bills every Monday morning under the penalty of
losing one's luggage would be obviated, and all the comforts of home
would be directly within reach. The trouble incident upon getting the
trunks packed and the children ready for a long day's journey by rail,
and the fatigue arising from such a journey, would be reduced to a
minimum. The troubles attendant upon going into a far country, and
leaving one's house in the sole charge of a lot of servants for a month
or two every year, would be done away with entirely; and if at any time
it became necessary to discharge one of these servants, she could be put
off the boat in an instant, and then the boat could be pushed out into
the middle of the canal, so that the discharged domestic could not
possibly get aboard again and take her revenge by smashing your crockery
and fixtures. That is one of the worst features of living in a stationary
house. You are entirely at the mercy of vindictive servants. They know
precisely where you live, and you cannot escape them. They can come back
when there is no man around, and raise several varieties of Ned with your
wife and children. With a movable house, such as the canal-boat would be,
you could always go off and leave your family in perfect safety."

[Illustration: "SHE COULD NOT POSSIBLY GET ABOARD AGAIN"]

"How about safety in a storm?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

"Safety in a storm?" echoed the Idiot. "That seems an absurd sort of a
question to one who knows anything about canal-boats. I, for one, never
heard of a canal-boat being seriously damaged in a storm as long as it
was anchored in the canal proper. It certainly isn't any more dangerous
to be in a canal-boat in a storm than it is to be in a house that
offers resistance to the winds, and is shaken from roof to cellar at
every blast. More houses have been blown from their foundations than
canal-boats sunk, provided ordinary care has been taken to protect
them."

"And you think the canal-boat would be healthy?" asked the Doctor. "How
about dampness and all that?"

"That is a professional question," returned the Idiot, "which I think you
could answer better than I. I don't see why a canal-boat shouldn't be
healthy, however. The dampness would not amount to very much. It would be
outside of one's dwelling, and not within it, as is the case with so many
houses. A canal-boat having no cellar could not have a damp one, and if
by some untoward circumstance it should spring a leak, the water could
be pumped out at once and the leak plugged up. However this might be,
I'll offer another wager to this board on that point, and that is that
more people die in houses than on canal-boats."

"We'd rather give you our money right out," retorted the Doctor.

"Thank you," said the Idiot. "But I don't need money. I don't like money.
Money is responsible for more extravagance than any other commodity in
existence. Besides, it and I are not intimate enough to get along very
well together, and when I have any I immediately do my level best to rid
myself of it. But to return to our canal-boat, I note a look of
disapproval in Mr. Whitechoker's eyes. He doesn't seem to think any
more of my scheme than do the rest of you--which I regret, since I
believe that he would be the gainer if land edifices were supplanted by
the canal system as proposed by myself. Take church on a rainy morning,
for instance. A great many people stay at home from church on rainy
mornings just because they do not want to venture out in the wet. Suppose
we all lived in canal-boats? Would not people be deprived of this flimsy
pretext for staying at home if their homes could be towed up to the
church door? Or, better yet, granting that the churches followed out the
same plan, and were themselves constructed like canal-boats, how easy it
would be for the sexton to drive the church around the town and collect
the absentees. In the same manner it would be glorious for men like
ourselves, who have to go to their daily toil. For a consideration, Mrs.
Pedagog could have us driven to our various places of business every
morning, returning for us in the evening. Think how fine it would be for
me, for instance, instead of having to come home every night in an
overcrowded elevated train or on a cable-car, to have the office-boy come
and announce, 'Mrs. Pedagog's Select Home for Gentlemen is at the door,
Mr. Idiot.' I could step right out of my office into my charming little
bedroom up in the bow, and the time usually expended on the cars could be
devoted to dressing for tea. Then we could stop in at the court-house for
our legal friend; and as for Doctor Capsule, wouldn't he revel in driving
this boarding-house about town on his daily rounds among his patients?"

"What would become of my office hours?" asked the Doctor. "If this house
were whirling giddily all about the city from morning until night, I
don't know what would become of my office patients."

"They might die a little sooner or live a little longer, that is all,"
said the Idiot. "If they weren't able to find the house at all, however,
I think it would be better for us, for much as I admire you, Doctor, I
think your office hours are a nuisance to the rest of us. I had to elbow
my way out of the house this morning between a double line of sufferers
from mumps and influenza, and other pleasingly afflicted patients of
yours, and I didn't like it very much."

"I don't believe they liked it much either," returned the Doctor. "One
man with a sprained ankle told me about you. You shoved him in passing."

"Well, you can apologize to him in my behalf," returned the Idiot; "but
you might add that he must expect very much the same treatment whenever
he and a boy with mumps stand between me and the door. Sprained ankles
aren't contagious, and I preferred shoving him to the other alternative."

The Doctor was silent, and the Idiot rose to go. "Where will the house be
this evening about six-thirty, Mrs. Pedagog?" he asked, as he pushed his
chair back from the table.

"Where? Why, here, of course," returned the landlady.

"Why, yes--of course," observed the Idiot, with an impatient gesture.
"How foolish of me! I've really been so wrapped up in my canal-boat ideal
that I came to believe that it might possibly be real and not a dream,
after all. I almost believed that perhaps I should find that the house
had been towed somewhere up into Westchester County on my return, so that
we might all escape the city's tax on personal property, which I am told
is unusually high this year."

With which sally the Idiot kissed his hand to Mr. Pedagog and retired
from the scene.




II


"Let's write a book," suggested the Idiot, as he took his place at the
board and unfolded his napkin.

"What about?" asked the Doctor, with a smile at the idea of the Idiot's
thinking of embarking on literary pursuits.

"About four hundred pages long," said the Idiot. "I feel inspired."

"You are inspired," said the School-Master. "In your way you are a
genius. I really never heard of such a variegated Idiot as you are in all
my experience, and that means a great deal, I can tell you, for in the
course of my career as an instructor of youth I have encountered many
idiots."

"Were they idiots before or after having drank at the fount of your
learning?" asked the Idiot, placidly.

Mr. Pedagog glared, and the Idiot was apparently satisfied. To make Mr.
Pedagog glare appeared to be one of the chiefest of his ambitions.

"You will kindly remember, Mr. Idiot," said Mrs. Pedagog at this point,
"that Mr. Pedagog is my husband, and such insinuations at my table are
distinctly out of place."

"I ask your pardon, Mrs. Pedagog," rejoined the offender, meekly.
"Nevertheless, as apart from the question in hand as to whether Mr.
Pedagog inspires idiocy or not, I should like to get the views of this
gathering on the point you make regarding the table. _Is_ this your
table? Is it not rather the table of those who sit about it to regale
their inner man with the good things under which I remember once or twice
in my life to have heard it groan? To my mind, the latter is the truth.
It is _our_ table, because we buy it, and I am forced to believe that
some of us pay for it. I am prepared to admit that if Mr. Brief, for
instance, is delinquent in his weekly payments, his interest in the table
reverts to you until he shall have liquidated, and he is not privileged
to say a word that you do not approve of; but I, for instance, who since
January 1st have been compelled to pay in advance, am at least sole
lessee, and for the time being proprietor of the portion for which I have
paid. You have sold it to me. I have entered into possession, and while
in possession, as a matter of right and not on sufferance, haven't I the
privilege of freedom of speech?"

"You certainly exercise the privilege whether you have it or not,"
snapped Mr. Pedagog.

"Well, I believe in exercise," said the Idiot. "Exercise brings strength,
and if exercising the privilege is going to strengthen it, exercise it I
shall, if I have to hire a gymnasium for the purpose. But to return to
Mrs. Pedagog's remark. It brings up another question that has more or
less interested me. Because Mrs. Smithers married Mr. Pedagog, do we lose
all of our rights in Mr. Pedagog? Before the happy event that reduced our
number from ten to nine--"

"We are still ten, are we not?" asked Mr. Whitechoker, counting the
guests.

"Not if Mr. Pedagog and the late Mrs. Smithers have become one," said the
Idiot. "But, as I was saying, before the happy event that reduced our
number from ten to nine we were permitted to address our friend Pedagog
in any terms we saw fit, and whenever he became sufficiently interested
to indulge in repartee we were privileged to return it. Have we
relinquished that privilege? I don't remember to have done so."

"It's a question worthy of your giant intellect," said Mr. Pedagog,
scornfully. "For myself, I do not at all object to anything you may
choose to say to me or of me. Your assaults are to me as water is to a
duck's back."

"I am sorry," said the Idiot. "I hate family disagreements, and here we
have Mrs. Pedagog taking one side and Mr. Pedagog the other. But whatever
decision may ultimately be reached, of one thing Mrs. Pedagog must be
assured. I on principle side against Mr. Pedagog, and if it be the wish
of my good landlady that I shall refrain from playing intellectual
battledore and shuttlecock with her husband, whom we all revere, I
certainly shall refrain. Hereafter if I indulge in anything that in any
sense resembles repartee with our landlord, I wish it distinctly
understood that an apology goes with it."

"That's all right, my boy," said the School-Master. "You mean well. You
are a little new, that's all, and we all understand you."

"I don't understand him," growled the Doctor, still smarting under the
recollection of former breakfast-table discomfitures. "I wish we could
get him translated."

"If you prescribed for me once or twice I think it likely I should be
translated in short order," retorted the Idiot. "I wonder how I'd go
translated into French?"

"You couldn't be expressed in French," put in the Lawyer. "It would take
some barbarian tongue to do you justice."

"Very well," said the Idiot. "Proceed. Do me justice."

"I can't begin to," said Mr. Brief, angrily.

"That's what I thought," said the Idiot. "That's the reason why you
always do me such great injustice. You lawyers always have to be doing
something, even if it is only holding down a chair so that it won't blow
out of your office window. If you haven't any justice to mete out, you
take another tack and dispense injustice with lavish hand. However, I'll
forgive you if you'll tell me one thing. What's libel, Mr. Brief?"

"None of your business," growled the Lawyer.

"A very good general definition," said the Idiot, approvingly. "If
there's any business in the world that I should hate to have known as
mine it is that of libel. I think, however, your definition is not
definite. What I wanted to know was just how far I could go with remarks
at this table and be safe from prosecution."

"Nobody would ever prosecute you, for two reasons," said the lawyer. "In
a civil action for money damages a verdict against you for ten cents
wouldn't be worth a rap, because the chances are you couldn't pay. In a
criminal action your conviction would be a bad thing, because you would
be likely to prove a corrupting influence in any jail in creation.
Besides, you'd be safe before a jury, anyhow. You are just the sort of
idiot that the intelligent jurors of to-day admire, and they'd acquit you
of any crime. A man has a right to a trial at the hands of a jury of his
peers. I don't think even in a jury-box twelve idiots equal to yourself
could be found, so don't worry."

"Thanks. Have a cigarette?" said the Idiot, tossing one over to the
Lawyer. "It's all I have. If I had a half-dollar I should pay you for
your opinion; but since I haven't, I offer you my all. The temperature of
my coffee seems to have fallen, Mrs. Pedagog. Will you kindly let me have
another cup?"

"Certainly," said Mrs. Pedagog. "Mary, get the Idiot another cup."

Mary did as she was told, placing the empty bit of china at Mrs.
Pedagog's side.

"It is for the Idiot, Mary," said Mrs. Pedagog, coldly. "Take it to him."

"Empty, ma'am?" asked the maid.

"Certainly, Mary," said the Idiot, perceiving Mrs. Pedagog's point. "I
asked for another cup, not for more coffee."

[Illustration: "CERTAINLY. I ASKED FOR ANOTHER CUP"]

Mrs. Pedagog smiled quietly at her own joke. At hair-splitting she could
give the Idiot points.

"I am surprised that Mary should have thought I wanted more coffee,"
continued the Idiot, in an aggrieved tone. "It shows that she too thinks
me out of my mind."

"You are not out of your mind," said the Bibliomaniac. "It would be a
good thing if you were. In replenishing your mental supply you might have
the luck to get better quality."

"I probably should have the luck," said the Idiot. "I have had a great
store of it in my life. From the very start I have had luck. When I think
that I was born myself, and not you, I feel as if I had had more than my
share of good-fortune--more luck than the law allows. How much luck does
the law allow, Mr. Brief?"

"Bosh!" said Mr. Brief, with a scornful wave of his hand, as if he
were ridding himself of a troublesome gnat. "Don't bother me with such
mind-withering questions."

"All right," said the Idiot. "I'll ask you an easier one. Why does not
the world recognize matrimony?"

Mr. Whitechoker started. Here, indeed, was a novel proposition.

"I--I--must confess," said he, "that of all the idiotic questions
I--er--I have ever had the honor of hearing asked that takes the--"

"Cake?" suggested the Idiot.

"--palm!" said Mr. Whitechoker, severely.

"Well, perhaps so," said the Idiot. "But matrimony is the science, or the
art, or whatever you call it, of making two people one, is it not?"

"It certainly is," said Mr. Whitechoker. "But what of it?"

"The world does not recognize the unity," said the Idiot. "Take our good
proprietors, for instance. They were made one by yourself, Mr.
Whitechoker. I had the pleasure of being an usher at the ceremony,
yielding the position of best man gracefully, as is my wont, to the
Bibliomaniac. He was best man, but not the better man, by a simple
process of reasoning. Now no one at this board disputes that Mr. and Mrs.
Pedagog are one, but how about the world? Mr. Pedagog takes Mrs. Pedagog
to a concert. Are they one there?"

"Why not?" asked Mr. Brief.

"That's what I want to know--why not? The world, as represented by the
ticket-taker at the door, says they are not--or implies that they are
not, by demanding tickets for two. They attempt to travel out to Niagara
Falls. The railroad people charge them two fares; the hackman charges
them two fares; the hotel bills are made out for two people. It is the
same wherever they go in the world, and I regret to say that even in our
own home there is a disposition to regard them as two. When I spoke of
there being nine persons here instead of ten, Mr. Whitechoker himself
disputed my point--and yet it was not so much his fault as the fault of
Mr. and Mrs. Pedagog themselves. Mrs. Pedagog seems to cast doubt upon
the unity by providing two separate chairs for the two halves that make
up the charming entirety. Two cups are provided for their coffee. Two
forks, two knives, two spoons, two portions of all the delicacies of the
season which are lavished upon us out of season--generally after it--fall
to their lot. They do not object to being called a happy _couple_, when
they should be known as a happy single. Now what I want to know is why
the world does not accept the shrinkage which has been pronounced valid
by the church and is recognized by the individual? Can any one here tell
me that?"

[Illustration: "DEMANDS TICKETS FOR TWO"]

No one could, apparently. At least no one endeavored to. The Idiot looked
inquiringly at all, and then, receiving no reply to his question, he rose
from the table.

"I think," he said, as he started to leave the room--"I think we ought to
write that book. If we made it up of the things you people don't know, it
would be one of the greatest books of the century. At any rate, it would
be great enough in bulk to fill the biggest library in America."




III


"I wish I were beginning life all over again," said the Idiot one spring
morning, as he took his accustomed place at Mrs. Pedagog's table.

"I wish you were," said Mr. Pedagog from behind his newspaper. "Then your
parents would have you shut up in a nursery, and it is even conceivable
that you would be receiving those disciplinary attentions with a slipper
that you seem to me so frequently to deserve, were you at this present
moment in the nursery stage of your development."

"My!" ejaculated the Idiot. "What a wonder you are, Mr. Pedagog! It is a
good thing you are not a justice in a criminal court."

"And what, may I venture to ask," said Mr. Pedagog, glancing at the Idiot
over his spectacles--"what has given rise to that extraordinary remark,
the connection of which with anything that has been said or done this
morning is distinctly not apparent?"

"I only meant that a man who was so given over to long sentences as you
are would probably make too severe a judge in a criminal court," replied
the Idiot, meekly. "Do you make use of the same phraseology in the
class-room that you dazzle us with, I should like to know?"

"And why not, pray?" said Mr. Pedagog.

"No special reason," said the Idiot; "only it does seem to me that an
instructor of youth ought to be more careful in his choice of adverbs
than you appear to be. Of course Doctor Bolus here is under no obligation
to speak more grammatically or correctly than he does. People call him in
to prescribe, not to indulge in rhetorical periods, and he can write his
prescriptions in a sort of intuitive Latin and nobody be the wiser, but
you, who are said to be sowing the seeds of knowledge in the brain of
youth, should be more careful."

"Hear the grammarian talk!" returned Mr. Pedagog. "Listen to this
embryonic Samuel Johnson the Second. What have I said that so offends the
linguistic taste of Lindley Murray, Jun.?"

"Nothing," returned the Idiot. "I cannot say that you have said anything.
I never heard you say anything in my life; but while you can no doubt
find good authority for making use of the words 'distinctly not
apparent,' you ought not to throw such phrases around carelessly. The
thing which is distinct is apparent, therefore to say 'distinctly not
apparent' to a mind that is not given to analysis sounds strange. You
might as well say of a beautiful girl that she is plainly pretty, meaning
of course that she is evidently pretty; but those who are unacquainted
with the idiomatic peculiarities of your speech might ask you if you
meant that she was pretty in a plain sort of way. Suppose, too, you were
writing a novel, and, in a desire to give your reader a fair idea of the
personal appearance of a homely but good creature, you should say, 'It
cannot be denied that Rosamond Follansbee was pretty plain?' It wouldn't
take a very grave error of the types to change your entire meaning. To
save a line on a page, for instance, it might become necessary to
eliminate a single word; and if that word should chance to be the word
'plain' in the sentence I have given, your homely but good person would
be set down as being undeniably pretty. Which shows, it seems to me, that
too great care cannot be exercised in the making of selections from our
vocabu--"

"You are the worst I _ever_ knew!" snapped Mr. Pedagog.

"Which only proves," observed the Idiot, "that you have not heeded the
Scriptural injunction that you should know thyself. Are those buckwheat
cakes or doilies?"

Whether the question was heard or not is not known. It certainly was not
answered, and silence reigned for a few minutes. Finally Mrs. Pedagog
spoke, and in the manner of one who was somewhat embarrassed. "I am in an
embarrassing position," said she.

"Good!" said the Idiot, _sotto-voce_, to the genial gentleman who
occasionally imbibed. "There is hope for the landlady yet. If she can be
embarrassed she is still human--a condition I was beginning to think she
wotted not of."

"She whatted what?" queried the genial gentleman, not quite catching the
Idiot's words.

"Never mind," returned the Idiot. "Let's hear how she ever came to be
embarrassed."

"I have had an application for my first-floor suite, and I don't know
whether I ought to accept it or not," said the landlady.

"She has a conscience, too," whispered the Idiot; and then he added,
aloud, "And wherein lies the difficulty, Mrs. Pedagog?"

"The applicant is an actor; Junius Brutus Davenport is his name."

"A tragedian or a comedian?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

"Or first walking gentleman, who knows every railroad tie in the
country?" put in the Idiot.

"That I do not know," returned the landlady. "His name sounds familiar
enough, though. I thought perhaps some of you gentlemen might know of
him."

"I have heard of Junius Brutus," observed the Doctor, chuckling slightly
at his own humor, "and I've heard of Davenport, but Junius Brutus
Davenport is a combination with which I am not familiar."

"Well, I can't see why it should make any difference whether the man is a
tragedian, or a comedian, or a familiar figure to railroad men," said Mr.
Whitechoker, firmly. "In any event, he would be an extremely objec--"

"It makes a great deal of difference," said the Idiot. "I've met
tragedians, and I've met comedians, and I've met New York Central stars,
and I can assure you they each represent a distinct type. The tragedians,
as a rule, are quiet meek individuals, with soft low voices, in private
life. They are more timid than otherwise, though essentially amiable.
I knew a tragedian once who, after killing seventeen Indians, a
road-agent, and a gross of cowboys between eight and ten P.M.
every night for sixteen weeks, working six nights a week, was afraid of a
mild little soft-shell crab that lay defenceless on a plate before him on
the evening of the seventh night of the last week. Tragedians make
agreeable companions, I can tell you; and if J. Brutus Davenport is a
tragedian, I think Mrs. Pedagog would do well to let him have the suite,
provided, of course, that he pays for it in advance."

"I was about to observe, when our friend interrupted me," said Mr.
Whitechoker, with dignity, "that in any event an actor at this board
would be to me an extremely objec--"

"Now the comedians," resumed the Idiot, ignoring Mr. Whitechoker's
remark--"the comedians are very different. They are twice as bloodthirsty
as the murderers of the drama, and, worse than that, they are given to
rehearsing at all hours of the day and night. A tragedian is a hard
character only on the stage, but the comedian is the comedian always.
If we had one of those fellows in our midst, it would not be very long
before we became part of the drama ourselves. Mrs. Pedagog would find
herself embarrassed once an hour, instead of, as at present, once a
century. Mr. Whitechoker would hear of himself as having appeared by
proxy in a roaring farce before our comedian had been with us two months.
The wise sayings of our friend the School-Master would be spoken nightly
from the stage, to the immense delight of the gallery gods, and to the
edification of the orchestra circle, who would wonder how so much
information could have got into the world and they not know it before.
The out-of-town papers would literally teem with witty extracts from our
comedian's plays, which we should immediately recognize as the dicta of
my poor self."

[Illustration: "THEY ARE GIVEN TO REHEARSING AT ALL HOURS"]

"All of which," put in Mr. Whitechoker, "but proves the truth of my
assertion that such a person would be an extremely objec--"

"Then, as I said before," continued the Idiot, "he is continually
rehearsing, and his objectionableness as a fellow-boarder would be
greater or less, according to his play. If he were impersonating a
shiftless wanderer, who shows remarkable bravery at a hotel fire, we
should have to be prepared at any time to hear the fire-engines rushing
up to the front door, and to see our comedian scaling the fire-escape
with Mrs. Pedagog and her account-books in his arms, simply in the line
of rehearsal. If he were impersonating a detective after a criminal
masquerading as a good citizen, the School-Master would be startled some
night by a hoarse voice at his key-hole exclaiming: 'Ha! ha! I have him
now. There is no escape save by the back window, and that's so covered
o'er with dust 'twere suffocation sure to try it.' I hesitate to say what
would happen if he were a tank comedian."

[Illustration: "'HA! HA! I HAVE HIM NOW!'"]

"Perhaps," said Mr. Whitechoker, with a trifle more impatience than was
compatible with his calling--"perhaps you will hesitate long enough for
me to state what I have been trying to state ever since this soliloquy
of yours began--that in any event, whether this person be a tragedian, or
a comedian, or a walking gentleman, or a riding gentleman in a circus, I
object to his being admitted to this circle, and I deem it well to say
right here that as he comes in at the front door I go out at the back. As
a clergyman, I do not approve of the stage."

"That ought to settle it," said the Idiot. "Mr. Whitechoker is too good
a friend to us all here for us to compel him to go out of that back door
into the rather limited market-garden Mrs. Pedagog keeps in the yard. My
indirect plea for the admission of Mr. Junius Brutus Davenport was based
entirely upon my desire to see this circle completed or nearer completion
than it is at present. We have all the professions represented here but
the stage, and why exclude it, granting that no one objects? The men
whose lives are given over to the amusement of mankind, and who are
willing to place themselves in the most outrageous situations night after
night in order that we may for the time being seem to be lifted out of
the unpleasant situations into which we have got ourselves, are in my
opinion doing a noble work. The theatre enables us to woo forgetfulness
of self successfully for a few brief hours, and I have seen the time when
an hour or two of relief from actual cares has resulted in great good.
Nevertheless, the gentleman is not elected; and if Mrs. Pedagog will
kindly refill my cup, I will ask you to join me in draining a toast to
the health of the pastor of this flock, whose conscience, paradoxical as
it may seem, is the most frequently worn and yet the least thread-bare
of the consciences represented at this table."

This easy settlement of her difficulty was so pleasing to Mrs. Pedagog
that the Idiot's request was graciously acceded to, and Mr. Whitechoker's
health was drank in coffee, after which the Idiot requested the genial
gentleman who occasionally imbibed to join him privately in eating
buckwheat cakes to the health of Mr. Davenport.

"I haven't any doubt that he is worthy of the attention," he said; "and
if you will lend me the money to buy the tickets, I'll take you around
to the Criterion to-night, where he is playing. I don't know whether he
plays Hamlet or A Hole in the Roof; but, at any rate, we can have a good
time between the acts."




IV


"I see the men are at work on the pavements this morning," said the
School-Master, gazing out through the window at a number of laborers at
work in the street.

"Yes," said the Idiot, calmly, "and I think Mrs. Pedagog ought to sue the
Department of Public Works for libel. If she hasn't a case no maligned
person ever had."

"What are you saying, sir?" queried the landlady, innocently.

"I say," returned the Idiot, pointing out into the street, "that you
ought to sue the Department of Public Works for libel. They've got their
sign right up against your house. _No Thorough Fare_ is what it says.
That's libel, isn't it, Mr. Brief?"

"It is certainly a fatal criticism of a boarding-house," observed Mr.
Brief, with a twinkle in his eye, "but Mrs. Pedagog could hardly secure
damages on that score."

"I don't know about that," returned the Idiot. "As I understand it, it is
an old maxim of the law that the greater the truth the greater the libel.
Mrs. Pedagog ought to receive a million----By-the-way, what have we this
morning?"

"We have steak and fried potatoes, sir," replied Mrs. Pedagog, frigidly.
"And I desire to add, that one who criticises the table as much as you do
would do well to get his meals outside."

"That, Mrs. Pedagog, is not the point. The difficulty I find here lies in
getting my meals inside," said the Idiot.

"Mary, you may bring in the mush," observed Mrs. Pedagog, pursing her
lips, as she always did when she wished to show that she was offended.

"Yes, Mary," put in the School-Master; "let us have the mush as quickly
as possible--and may it not be quite such mushy mush as the remarks we
have just been favored with by our talented friend the Idiot."

"You overwhelm me with your compliments, Mr. Pedagog," replied the Idiot,
cheerfully. "A flatterer like you should live in a flat."

"Has your friend completed his article on old jokes yet?" queried the
Bibliomaniac, with a smile and some apparent irrelevance.

[Illustration: "HAS YOUR FRIEND COMPLETED HIS ARTICLE ON OLD JOKES?"]

"Yes and no," said the Idiot. "He has completed his labors on it by
giving it up. He is a very thorough sort of a fellow, and he intended
to make the article comprehensive, but he found he couldn't, because,
judging from comments of men like you, for instance, he was forced to
conclude that there never was a _new_ joke. But, as I was saying the
other morning----"

"Do you really remember what you say?" sneered Mr. Pedagog. "You must
have a great memory for trifles."

"Sir, I shall never forget you," said the Idiot. "But to revert to what
I was saying the other morning, I'd like to begin life all over again, so
that I could prepare myself for the profession of architecture. It's the
greatest profession in the world, and one which is surest to bring
immortality to its successful follower. A man may write a splendid book,
and become a great man for a while and within certain limits, but the
chances are that some other man will come along later and supplant him.
Then the book's sale will die out after a time, and with this will come
a diminution of its author's reputation, in extent anyway. An actor or a
great preacher becomes only a name after his death, but the architect who
builds a cathedral or a fine public building really erects a monument to
his own memory."

"He does if he can build it so that it will stay up," said the
Bibliomaniac. "I think you, however, are better off as you are. If you
had a more extended reputation or a lasting name you would probably be
locked up in some retreat; or if you were not, posterity would want to
know why."

"I am locked up in a retreat of Nature's making," said the Idiot, with a
sigh. "Nature has set around me certain limitations which, while they are
not material, might as well be so as far as my ability to soar above them
is concerned--and it's well she has. If it were otherwise, my life would
not be safe or bearable in this company. As it is, I am happy and not at
all afraid of the effects your jealousy of me might entail if I were any
better than the rest of you."

"I like that," said Mr. Pedagog.

"I thought you would," said the Idiot. "That's why I said it. I aim to
please, and for once seem to have hit the bull's-eye. Mary, kindly break
open this biscuit for me."

"Have you ideas on the subject of architecture that you so desire to
become an architect?" queried Mr. Whitechoker, who was always full of
sympathy for aspiring natures.

"A few," said the Idiot.

Mr. Pedagog laughed outright.

"Let's test his ideas," he said, in an amused way. "Take a cathedral, for
instance. Suppose, Mr. Idiot, a man should come to you and say: 'Idiot,
we have a fund of $800,000 in our hands, actual cash. We think of
building a cathedral, and we think of employing you to draw up our plans.
Give us some idea of what we should do.' Do you mean to tell me that you
could say anything reasonable or intelligent to that man?"

"Well, that depends upon what you call reasonable and intelligent. I have
never been able to find out what you mean by those terms," the Idiot
answered, slowly. "But I could tell him something that I consider
reasonable and intelligent."

"From your own point of view, then, as to reasonableness and
intelligence, what should you say to him?"

"I'd make him out a plan providing for the investment of his $800,000 in
five-per-cent, gold bonds, which would bring him in an income of $40,000
a year; after which I should call his attention to the fact that $40,000
a year would enable him to take 10,000 poor children out of this
sweltering city into the country, to romp and drink fresh milk and eat
wholesome food for two weeks every summer from now until the end of time,
which would build up a human structure that might be of more benefit to
the world than any pile of bricks, marble, and wrought-iron I or any
other architect could conceive of," said the Idiot. "The structure would
stand up, too."

"You call that architecture, do you?" said Mr. Pedagog.

"Yes," said the Idiot, "of the renaissance order. But that, of course,
you term idiocy--and maybe it is. I like to be that kind of an idiot. I
do not claim to be able to build a cathedral, however. I don't suppose
I could even build a boarding-house like this, but what I should like to
do in architecture would be to put up a $5000 dwelling-house for $5000.
That's a thing that has never been done, and I think I might be able to
do it. If I did, I'd patent the plan and make a fortune. Then I should
like to know enough about the science of planning a building to find out
whether my model hotel is practicable or not."

"You have a model hotel in your mind, eh?" said the Bibliomaniac.

"It must be a very small hotel if it's in his mind," said the Doctor.

"That's tantamount to saying that it isn't anywhere," said Mr. Pedagog.

"Well, it's a great hotel just the same," said the Idiot. "Although I
presume it would be expensive to build. It would have movable rooms, in
the first place. Each room would be constructed like an elevator, with
appliances at hand for moving it up and down. The great thing about this
would be that persons could have a room on any floor they wanted it, so
long as they got the room in the beginning. A second advantage would lie
in the fact, that if you were sleeping in a room next door to another in
which there was a crying baby, you could pull the rope and go up two or
three flights until you were free from the noise. Then in case of fire
the room in which the fire started could be lowered into a sliding tank
large enough to immerse the whole thing in, which I should have
constructed in the cellar. If the whole building were to catch fire,
there would be no loss of life, because all the rooms could be lowered
to the ground-floor, and the occupants could step right out upon solid
ground. Then again, if you were down on the ground-floor, and desired to
get an extended view of the surrounding country, it would be easy to
raise your room to the desired elevation. Why, there's no end to the
advantages to be gained from such an arrangement."

"It's a fine idea," said Mr. Pedagog, "and one worthy of your mammoth
intellect. It couldn't possibly cost more than a million of dollars to
erect such a hotel, could it?"

"No," said the Idiot. "And that is cheap alongside some of the hotels
they are putting up nowadays."

"It could be built on less than four hundred acres of ground, too,
I presume?" said the Bibliomaniac, with a wink at the Doctor.

"Certainly," said the Idiot, meekly.

"And if anybody fell sick in one of the rooms," said the Doctor, "and
needed a change of air, you could have a tower over each, I suppose, so
that the room could be elevated high enough to secure the different
quality in the ether?"

"Undoubtedly," said the Idiot. "Although that would add materially to the
expense. A scarlet-fever patient, however, in a hotel like that could
very easily be isolated from the rest of the house by the maintenance of
what might be called the hospital floor."

"Superb!" said the Doctor. "I wonder you haven't spoken to some
architectural friend about it."

"I have," said the Idiot. "You must remember that young fellow with a
black mustache I had here to dinner last Saturday night."

"Yes, I remember him," said the Doctor. "Is he an architect?"

"He is--and a good one. He can take a brown-stone dwelling and turn it
into a colonial mansion with a pot of yellow paint. He's a wonder. I
submitted the idea to him."

"And what was his verdict?"

"I don't like to say," said the Idiot, blushing a little.

"Ha! ha!" laughed Mr. Pedagog. "I shouldn't think you would like to say.
I guess we know what he said."

"I doubt it," said the Idiot; "but if you guess right, I'll tell you."

"He said you had better go and live in a lunatic asylum," said Mr.
Pedagog, with a chuckle.

"Not he," returned the Idiot, nibbling at his biscuit. "On the contrary.
He advised me to stop living in one. He said contact with the rest of you
was affecting my brain."

This time Mr. Pedagog did not laugh, but mistaking his coffee-cup for a
piece of toast, bit a small section out of its rim; and in the midst of
Mrs. Pedagog's expostulation, which followed the School-Master's careless
error, the Idiot and the Genial Old Gentleman departed, with smiles on
their faces which were almost visible at the back of their respective
necks.

[Illustration: THEY DEPARTED]




V


"Hullo!" said the Idiot, as he began his breakfast. "This isn't Friday
morning, is it? I thought it was Tuesday."

"So it is Tuesday," put in the School-Master.

"Then this fish is a little extra treat, is it?" observed the Idiot,
turning with a smile to the landlady.

"Fish? That isn't fish, sir," returned the good lady. "That is liver."

"Oh, is it?" said the Idiot, apologetically. "Excuse me, my dear Mrs.
Pedagog. I thought from its resistance that it was fried sole. Have you
a hatchet handy?" he added, turning to the maid.

"My piece is tender enough. I can't see what you want," said the
School-Master, coldly.

"I'd like your piece," replied the Idiot, suavely. "That is, if it really
is tender enough."

"Don't pay any attention to him, my dear," said the School-Master to the
landlady, whose ire was so very much aroused that she was about to make
known her sentiments on certain subjects.

"No, Mrs. Pedagog," said the Idiot, "don't pay any attention to me, I
beg of you. Anything that could add to the jealousy of Mr. Pedagog would
redound to the discomfort of all of us. Besides, I really do not object
to the liver. I need not eat it. And as for staying my appetite, I always
stop on my way down-town after breakfast for a bite or two anyhow."

There was silence for a moment.

"I wonder why it is," began the Idiot, after tasting his coffee--"I
wonder why it is Friday is fish-day all over the world, anyhow? Do you
happen to be learned enough in piscatorial science to enlighten me on
that point, Doctor?"

"No," returned the physician, gruffly. "I've never looked into the
matter."

"I guess it's because Friday is an unlucky day," said the Idiot. "Just
think of all the unlucky things that may happen before and after eating
fish, as well as during the process. In the first place, before eating,
you go off and fish all day, and have no luck--don't catch a thing. You
fall in the water perhaps, and lose your watch, or your fish-hook
catches in your coat-tails, with the result that you come near casting
yourself instead of the fly into the brook or the pond, as the case may
be. Perhaps the hook doesn't stop with the coat-tails, but goes on in,
and catches you. That's awfully unlucky, especially when the hook is made
of unusually barby barbed wire.

[Illustration: "YOU FISH ALL DAY, AND HAVE NO LUCK"]

"Then, again, you may go fishing on somebody else's preserves, and get
arrested, and sent to jail overnight, and hauled up the next morning, and
have to pay ten dollars fine for poaching. Think of Mr. Pedagog being
fined ten dollars for poaching! Awfully unfortunate!"

"Kindly leave me out of your calculations," returned Mr. Pedagog, with a
flush of indignation.

"Certainly, if you wish it," said the Idiot. "We'll hand Mr. Brief over
to the police, and let _him_ be fined for poaching on somebody else's
preserves--although that's sort of impossible, too, because Mrs. Pedagog
never lets us see preserves of any kind."

"We had brandied peaches last Sunday night," said the landlady,
indignantly.

"Oh yes, so we did," returned the Idiot. "That must have been what the
Bibliomaniac had taken," he added, turning to the genial gentleman who
occasionally imbibed. "You know, we thought he'd been--ah--he'd been
absorbing."

"To what do you refer?" asked the Bibliomaniac, curtly.

"To the brandied peaches," returned the Idiot. "Do not press me further,
please, because we like you, old fellow, and I don't believe anybody
noticed it but ourselves."

"Noticed what? I want to know what you noticed and when you noticed it,"
said the Bibliomaniac, savagely. "I don't want any nonsense, either. I
just want a plain statement of facts. What did you notice?"

"Well, if you must have it," said the Idiot, slowly, "my friend who
imbibes and I were rather pained on Sunday night to observe that
you--that you had evidently taken something rather stronger than cold
water, tea, or Mr. Pedagog's opinions."

"It's a libel, sir!--a gross libel!" retorted the Bibliomaniac. "How did
I show it? That's what I want to know. How--did--I--show--it? Speak up
quick, and loud too. How did I show it?"

"Well, you went up-stairs after tea."

"Yes, sir, I did."

"And my friend who imbibes and I were left down in the front hall, and
while we were talking there you put your head over the banisters and
asked, 'Who's that down there?' Remember that?"

"Yes, sir, I do. And you replied, 'Mr. Auburnose and myself.'"

"Yes. And then you asked, 'Who are the other two?'"

"Well, I did. What of it?"

"Mr. Auburnose and I were there alone. That's what of it. Now I put a
charitable construction on the matter and say it was the peaches, when
you fly off the handle like one of Mrs. Pedagog's coffee-cups."

"Sir!" roared the Bibliomaniac, jumping from his chair. "You are the
greatest idiot I know."

"Sir!" returned the Idiot, "you flatter me."

But the Bibliomaniac was not there to hear. He had rushed from the room,
and during the deep silence that ensued he could be heard throwing things
about in the chamber overhead, and in a very few moments the banging of
the front door and scurrying down the brown-stone steps showed that he
had gone out of doors to cool off.

[Illustration: HE COULD BE HEARD THROWING THINGS ABOUT]

"It is too bad," said the Idiot, after a while, "that he has such a
quick temper. It doesn't do a bit of good to get mad that way. He'll be
uncomfortable all day long, and over what? Just because I attempted to
say a good word for him, and announce the restoration of my confidence in
his temperance qualities, he cuts up a high-jinks that makes everybody
uncomfortable.

"But to resume about this fish business," continued the Idiot. "Fish--"

"Oh, fish be hanged!" said the Doctor, impatiently. "We've had enough of
fish."

"Very well," returned the idiot; "as you wish. Hanging isn't the best
treatment for fish, but we'll let that go. I never cared for the finny
tribe myself, and if Mrs. Pedagog can be induced to do it, I for one am
in favor of keeping shad, shark, and shrimps out of the house
altogether."




VI


The Idiot was unusually thoughtful--a fact which made the School-Master
and the Bibliomaniac unusually nervous. Their stock criticism of him was
that he was thoughtless; and yet when he so far forgot his natural
propensities as to meditate, they did not like it. It made them uneasy.
They had a haunting fear that he was conspiring with himself against
them, and no man, not even a callous school-master or a confirmed
bibliomaniac, enjoys feeling that he is the object of a conspiracy. The
thing to do, then, upon this occasion, seemed obviously to interrupt his
train of thought--to put obstructions upon his mental track, as it were,
and ditch the express, which they feared was getting up steam at that
moment to run them down.

"You don't seem quite yourself this morning, sir," said the Bibliomaniac.

"Don't I?" queried the Idiot. "And whom do I seem to be?"

"I mean that you seem to have something on your mind that worries you,"
said the Bibliomaniac.

"No, I haven't anything on my mind," returned the Idiot. "I was thinking
about you and Mr. Pedagog--which implies a thought not likely to use up
much of my gray matter."

"Do you think your head holds any gray matter?" put in the Doctor.

"Rather verdant, I should say," said Mr. Pedagog.

"Green, gray, or pink," said the Idiot, "choose your color. It does
not affect the fact that I was thinking about the Bibliomaniac and Mr.
Pedagog. I have a great scheme in hand, which only requires capital
and the assistance of those two gentlemen to launch it on the sea of
prosperity. If any of you gentlemen want to get rich and die in comfort
as the owner of your homes, now is your chance."

"In what particular line of business is your scheme?" asked Mr.
Whitechoker. He had often felt that he would like to die in comfort,
and to own a little house, even if it had a large mortgage on it.

"Journalism," said the Idiot. "There is a pile of money to be made out
of journalism, particularly if you happen to strike a new idea. Ideas
count."

"How far up do your ideas count--up to five?" questioned Mr. Pedagog,
with a tinge of sarcasm in his tone.

"I don't know about that," returned the Idiot. "The idea I have hold
of now, however, will count up into the millions if it can only be set
going, and before each one of those millions will stand a big capital S
with two black lines drawn vertically through it--in other words, my idea
holds dollars, but to get the crop you've got to sow the seed. Plant a
thousand dollars in my idea, and next year you'll reap two thousand.
Plant that, and next year you'll have four thousand, and so on. At that
rate millions come easy."

"I'll give you a dollar for the idea," said the Bibliomaniac.

"No, I don't want to sell. You'll do to help develop the scheme. You'll
make a first-rate tool, but you aren't the workman to manage the tool. I
will go as far as to say, however, that without you and Mr. Pedagog, or
your equivalents in the animal kingdom, the idea isn't worth the fabulous
sum you offer."

"You have quite aroused my interest," said Mr. Whitechoker. "Do you
propose to start a new paper?"

"You are a good guesser," replied the Idiot. "That is a part of the
scheme--but it isn't the idea. I propose to start a new paper in
accordance with the plan which the idea contains."

"Is it to be a magazine, or a comic paper, or what?" asked the
Bibliomaniac.

"Neither. It's a daily."

"That's nonsense," said Mr. Pedagog, putting his spoon into the
condensed-milk can by mistake. "There isn't a single scheme in daily
journalism that hasn't been tried--except printing an evening paper in
the morning."

"That's been tried," said the Idiot. "I know of an evening paper the
second edition of which is published at mid-day. That's an old dodge, and
there's money in it, too--money that will never be got out of it. But I
really have a grand scheme. So many of our dailies, you know, go in for
every horrid detail of daily events that people are beginning to tire of
them. They contain practically the same things day after day. So many
columns of murder, so many beautiful suicides, so much sport, a modicum
of general intelligence, plenty of fires, no end of embezzlements,
financial news, advertisements, and head-lines. Events, like history,
repeat themselves, until people have grown weary of them. They want
something new. For instance, if you read in your morning paper that
a man has shot another man, you know that the man who was shot was an
inoffensive person who never injured a soul, stood high in the community
in which he lived, and leaves a widow with four children. On the other
hand, you know without reading the account that the murderer shot his
victim in self-defence, and was apprehended by the detectives late last
night; that his counsel forbid him to talk to the reporters, and that it
is rumored that he comes of a good family living in New England.

"If a breach of trust is committed, you know that the defaulter was the
last man of whom such an act would be suspected, and, except in the one
detail of its location and sect, that he was prominent in some church.
You can calculate to a cent how much has been stolen by a glance at the
amount of space devoted to the account of the crime. Loaf of bread, two
lines. Thousand dollars, ten lines. Hundred thousand dollars,
half-column. Million dollars, a full column. Five million dollars,
half the front page, wood-cut of the embezzler, and two editorials, one
leader and one paragraph.

"And so with everything. We are creatures of habit. The expected always
happens, and newspapers are dull because the events they chronicle are
dull."

"Granting the truth of this," put in the School-Master, "what do you
propose to do?"

"Get up a newspaper that will devote its space to telling what hasn't
happened."

"That's been done," said the Bibliomaniac.

"To a much more limited extent than we think," returned the Idiot. "It
has never been done consistently and truthfully."

"I fail to see how a newspaper can be made to prevaricate truthfully,"
asserted Mr. Whitechoker. To tell the truth, he was greatly disappointed
with the idea, because he could not in the nature of things become one of
its beneficiaries.

[Illustration: "HE WAS NOT MURDERED"]

"I haven't suggested prevarication," said the Idiot. "Put on your front
page, for instance, an item like this: 'George Bronson, colored, aged
twenty-nine, a resident of Thompson Street, was caught cheating at poker
last night. He was not murdered.' There you tell what has not happened.
There is a variety about it. It has the charm of the unexpected. Then you
might say: 'Curious incident on Wall Street yesterday. So-and-so, who
was caught on the bear side of the market with 10,000 shares of J. B. &
S. K. W., paid off all his obligations in full, and retired from business
with $1,000,000 clear.' Or we might say, 'Superintendent Smithers, of the
St. Goliath's Sunday-school, who is also cashier in the Forty-eighth
National Bank, has not absconded with $4,000,000.'"

[Illustration: "SUPERINTENDENT SMITHERS HAS NOT ABSCONDED"]

"Oh, that's a rich idea," put in the School-Master. "You'd earn
$1,000,000 in libel suits the first year."

"No, you wouldn't, either," said the Idiot. "You don't libel a man
when you say he hasn't murdered anybody. Quite the contrary, you call
attention to his conspicuous virtue. You are in reality commending those
who refrain from criminal practice, instead of delighting those who are
fond of departing from the paths of Christianity by giving them
notoriety."

"But I fail to see in what respect Mr. Pedagog and I are essential to
your scheme," said the Bibliomaniac.

"I must confess to some curiosity on my own part on that point," added
the School-Master.

"Why, it's perfectly clear," returned the Idiot, with a conciliating
smile as he prepared to depart. "You both know so much that isn't so,
that I rather rely on you to fill up."




VII


A new boarder had joined the circle about Mrs. Pedagog's breakfast-table.
He had what the Idiot called a three-ply name--which was Richard
Henderson Warren--and he was by profession a poet. Whether it was this
that made it necessary for him to board or not, the rewards of the muse
being rather slender, was known only to himself, and he showed no
disposition to enlighten his fellow-boarders on the subject. His success
as a poet Mrs. Pedagog found it hard to gauge; for while the postman left
almost daily numerous letters, the envelopes of which showed that they
came from the various periodicals of the day, it was never exactly clear
whether or not the missives contained remittances or rejected
manuscripts, though the fact that Mr. Warren was the only boarder in the
house who had requested to have a waste-basket added to the furniture of
his room seemed to indicate that they contained the latter. To this
request Mrs. Pedagog had gladly acceded, because she had a notion that
therein at some time or another would be found a clew to the new
boarder's past history--or possibly some evidence of such duplicity
as the good lady suspected he might be guilty of. She had read that Byron
was profligate, and that Poe was addicted to drink, and she was impressed
with the idea that poets generally were bad men, and she regarded the
waste-basket as a possible means of protecting herself against any such
idiosyncrasies of her new-found genius as would operate to her
disadvantage if not looked after in time.

This waste-basket she made it her daily duty to empty, and in the privacy
of her own room. Half-finished "ballads, songs, and snatches" she perused
before consigning them to the flames or to the large jute bag in the
cellar, for which the ragman called two or three times a year. Once Mrs.
Pedagog's heart almost stopped beating when she found at the bottom of
the basket a printed slip beginning, "_The Editor regrets that the
enclosed lines are unavailable_," and closing with about thirteen
reasons, any one or all of which might have been the main cause of the
poet's disappointment. Had it not been for the kindly clause in the
printed slip that insinuated in graceful terms that this rejection did
not imply a lack of literary merit in the contribution itself, the good
lady, knowing well that there was even less money to be made from
rejected than from accepted poetry, would have been inclined to request
the poet to vacate the premises. The very next day, however, she was glad
she had not requested the resignation of the poet from the laureateship
of her house; for the same basket gave forth another printed slip from
another editor, begging the poet to accept the enclosed check, with
thanks for his contribution, and asking him to deposit it as soon as
practicable--which was pleasing enough, since it implied that the poet
was the possessor of a bank account.

Now Mrs. Pedagog was consumed with curiosity to know for how large a sum
the check called--which desire was gratified a few days later, when the
inspired boarder paid his week's bill with three one-dollar bills and a
check, signed by a well-known publisher, for two dollars.

[Illustration: THE INSPIRED BOARDER PAID HIS BILL]

By the boarders themselves the poet was regarded with much interest.
The School-Master had read one or two of his effusions in the Fireside
Corner of the journal he received weekly from his home up in New
England--effusions which showed no little merit, as well as indicating
that Mr. Warren wrote for a literary syndicate; Mr. Whitechoker had known
of him as the young man who was to have written a Christmas carol for his
Sunday-school a year before, and who had finished and presented the
manuscript shortly after New-Year's day; while to the Idiot, Mr. Warren's
name was familiar as that of a frequent contributor to the funny papers
of the day.

"I was very much amused by your poem in the last number of the
_Observer_, Mr. Warren," said the Idiot, as they sat down to breakfast
together.

"Were you, indeed?" returned Mr. Warren. "I am sorry to hear that, for it
was intended to be a serious effort."

"Of course it was, Mr. Warren, and so it appeared," said the
School-Master, with an indignant glance at the Idiot. "It was a very
dignified and stately bit of work, and I must congratulate you upon it."

"I didn't mean to give offence," said the Idiot. "I've read so much of
yours that was purely humorous that I believe I'd laugh at a dirge if you
should write one; but I really thought your lines in the _Observer_ were
a burlesque. You had the same thought that Rossetti expresses in 'The
Woodspurge':

   'The wind flapped loose, the wind was still,
    Shaken out dead from tree to hill;
    I had walked on at the wind's will,
    I sat now, for the wind was still.'

That's Rossetti, if you remember. Slightly suggestive of 'Blow Ye Winds
of the Morning! Blow! Blow! Blow!' but more or less pleasing."

"I recall the poem you speak of," said Warren, with dignity; "but the
true poet, sir--and I hope I have some claim to be considered as
such--never so far forgets himself as to burlesque his masters."

"Well, I don't know what to call it, then, when a poet takes the same
thought that has previously been used by his masters and makes a funny
poem--"

"But," returned the Poet, warmly, "it was not a funny poem."

"It made me laugh," retorted the Idiot, "and that is more than half the
professedly funny poems we get nowadays can do. Therefore I say it was a
funny poem, and I don't see how you can deny that it was a burlesque of
Rossetti."

"Well, I do deny it _in toto_."

"I don't know anything about denying it _in toto_," rejoined the Idiot,
"but I'd deny it in print if I were you. I know plenty of people who
think it was a burlesque, and I overheard one man say--he is a Rossetti
crank--that you ought to be ashamed of yourself for writing it."

"There is no use of discussing the matter further," said the Poet. "I am
innocent of any such intent as you have ascribed to me, and if people say
I have burlesqued Rossetti they say what is not true."

"Did you ever read that little poem of Swinburne's called 'The Boy at the
Gate'?" asked the Idiot, to change the subject.

"I have no recollection of it," said the Poet, shortly.

"The name sounds familiar," put in Mr. Whitechoker, anxious not to be
left out of a literary discussion.

"I have read it, but I forget just how it goes," vouchsafed the
School-Master, forgetting for a moment the Robert Elsmere episode and its
lesson.

"It goes something like this," said the Idiot:

   "Sombre and sere the slim sycamore sighs;
    Lushly the lithe leaves lie low o'er the land;
    Whistles the wind with its whisperings wise,
    Grewsomely gloomy and garishly grand.
    So doth the sycamore solemnly stand,
    Wearily watching in wondering wait;
    So it has stood for six centuries, and
    Still it is waiting the boy at the gate."

"No; I never read the poem," said Mr. Whitechoker, "but I'd know it was
Swinburne in a minute. He has such a command of alliterative language."

"Yes," said the Poet, with an uneasy glance at the Idiot. "It is
Swinburnian; but what was the poem about?"

"'The boy at the gate,'" said the Idiot. "The idea was that the sycamore
was standing there for centuries waiting for the boy who never turns up."

"It really is a beautiful thought," put in Mr. Whitechoker. "It is, I
presume, an allegory to contrast faithful devotion and constancy with
unfaithfulness and fickleness. Such thoughts occur only to the wholly
gifted. It is only to the poetic temperament that the conception of such
a thought can come coupled with the ability to voice it in fitting terms.
There is a grandeur about the lines the Idiot has quoted that betrays the
master-mind."

"Very true," said the School-Master, "and I take this opportunity to say
that I am most agreeably surprised in the Idiot. It is no small thing
even to be able to repeat a poet's lines so carefully, and with so great
lucidity, and so accurately, as I can testify that he has just done."

"Don't be too pleased, Mr. Pedagog," said the Idiot, dryly. "I only
wanted to show Mr. Warren that you and Mr. Whitechoker, mines of
information though you are, have not as yet worked up a corner on
knowledge to the exclusion of the rest of us." And with these words the
Idiot left the table.

"He is a queer fellow," said the School-Master. "He is full of pretence
and hollowness, but he is sometimes almost brilliant."

"What you say is very true," said Mr. Whitechoker. "I think he has just
escaped being a smart man. I wish we could take him in hand, Mr. Pedagog,
and make him more of a fellow than he is."

Later in the day the Poet met the Idiot on the stairs. "I say," he said,
"I've looked all through Swinburne, and I can't find that poem."

"I know you can't," returned the Idiot, "because it isn't there.
Swinburne never wrote it. It was a little thing of my own. I was only
trying to get a rise out of Mr. Pedagog and his Reverence with it. You
have frequently appeared impressed by the undoubtedly impressive manner
of these two gentlemen. I wanted to show you what their opinions were
worth."

[Illustration: "I KNOW YOU CAN'T, BECAUSE IT ISN'T THERE"]

"Thank you," returned the Poet, with a smile. "Don't you want to go
into partnership with me and write for the funny papers? It would be
a splendid thing for me--your ideas are so original."

"And I can see fun in everything, too," said the Idiot, thoughtfully.

"Yes," returned the Poet. "Even in my serious poems."

Which remark made the Idiot blush a little, but he soon recovered his
composure and made a firm friend of the Poet.

The first fruits of the partnership have not yet appeared, however.

As for Messrs. Whitechoker and Pedagog, when they learned how they had
been deceived, they were so indignant that they did not speak to the
Idiot for a week.




VIII


It was Sunday morning, and Mr. Whitechoker, as was his wont on the first
day of the week, appeared at the breakfast table severe as to his mien.

"Working on Sunday weighs on his mind," the Idiot said to the
Bibliomaniac, "but I don't see why it should. The luxury of rest
that he allows himself the other six days of the week is surely an
atonement for the hours of labor he puts in on Sunday."

But it was not this that on Sunday mornings weighed on the mind of the
Reverend Mr. Whitechoker. He appeared more serious of visage then because
he had begun to think of late that his fellow-boarders lived too much in
the present, and ignored almost totally that which might be expected to
come. He had been revolving in his mind for several weeks the question as
to whether it was or was not his Christian duty to attempt to influence
the lives of these men with whom the chances of life had brought him in
contact. He had finally settled it to his own satisfaction that it was
his duty so to do, and he had resolved, as far as lay in his power, to
direct the conversation at Sunday morning's breakfast into spiritual
rather than into temporal matters.

So, as Mrs. Pedagog was pouring the coffee, Mr. Whitechoker began:

"Do you gentlemen ever pause in your every-day labors and thought to let
your minds rest upon the future--the possibilities it has in store for
us, the consequences which--"

"No mush, thank you," said the Idiot. Then turning to Mr. Whitechoker, he
added: "I can't answer for the other gentlemen at this board, but I can
assure you, Mr. Whitechoker, that I often do so. It was only last night,
sir, that my genial friend who imbibes and I were discussing the future
and its possibilities, and I venture to assert that there is no more
profitable food for reflection anywhere in the larders of the mind than
that."

"Larders of the mind is excellent," said the School-Master, with a touch
of sarcasm in his voice. "Perhaps you would not mind opening the door to
your mental pantry, and letting us peep within at the stores you keep
there. I am sure that on the subject in hand your views cannot fail to be
original as well as edifying."

"I am also sure," said Mr. Whitechoker, somewhat surprised to hear the
Idiot speak as he did, having sometimes ventured to doubt if that
flippant-minded young man ever reflected on the serious side of life--"I
am also sure that it is most gratifying to hear that you have done some
thinking on the subject."

"I am glad you are gratified, Mr. Whitechoker," replied the Idiot, "but
I am far from taking undue credit to myself because I reflect upon the
future and its possibilities. I do not see how any man can fail to be
interested in the subject, particularly when he considers the great
strides science has made in the last twenty years."

"I fail to see," said the School-Master, "what the strides of science
have to do with it."

"You fail to see so often, Mr. Pedagog," returned the Idiot, "that I
would advise your eyes to make an assignment in favor of your pupils."

"I must confess," put in Mr. Whitechoker, blandly, "that I too am
somewhat--er--somewhat--"

"Somewhat up a tree as to science's connection with the future?" queried
the Idiot.

"You have my meaning, but hardly the phraseology I should have chosen,"
replied the minister.

"My style is rather epigrammatic," said the Idiot, suavely. "I appreciate
the flattery implied by your noticing it. But science has everything to
do with it. It is science that is going to make the future great. It is
science that has annihilated distance, and the annihilation has just
begun. Twenty years ago it was hardly possible for a man standing on one
side of the street to make himself heard on the other, the acoustic
properties of the atmosphere not being what they should be. To-day
you can stand in the pulpit of your church, and by means of certain
scientific apparatus make yourself heard in Boston, New Orleans, or San
Francisco. Has this no bearing on the future? The time will come, Mr.
Whitechoker, when your missionaries will be able to sit in their
comfortable rectories, and ring up the heathen in foreign climes, and
convert them over the telephone, without running the slightest danger of
falling into the soup, which expression I use in its literal rather than
in its metaphorical sense."

[Illustration: "YOU CAN MAKE YOURSELF HEARD IN SAN FRANCISCO"]

"But--" interrupted Mr. Whitechoker.

"Now wait, please," said the Idiot. "If science can annihilate degrees of
distance, who shall say that before many days science may not annihilate
degrees of time? If San Francisco, thousands of miles distant, can be
brought within range of the ear, why cannot 1990 be brought before the
mind's eye? And if 1990 can be brought before the mind's eye, what is to
prevent the invention of a prophetograph which shall enable us to cast a
horoscope which shall reach all around eternity and half-way back, if not
further?"

[Illustration: THE PROPHETOGRAPH]

"You do not understand me," said Mr. Whitechoker. "When I speak of the
future, I do not mean the temporal future."

"I know exactly what you mean," said the Idiot. "I've dealt in futures,
and I am familiar with all kinds. It is you, sir, that do not understand
me. My claim is perfectly plausible, and in its results is bound to make
the world better. Do you suppose that any man who, by the aid of my
prophetograph, sees that on a certain date in the future he will be
hanged for murder is going to fail to provide himself with an alibi in
regard to that particular murder, and must we not admit that having
provided himself with that alibi he will of necessity avoid bloodshed,
and so avoid the gallows? That's reasonable. So in regard to all the
thousand and one other peccadilloes that go to make this life a sinful
one. Science, by a purely logical advance along the lines already mapped
out for itself, and in part already traversed, will enable men to avoid
the pitfalls and reap only the windfalls of life; we shall all see what
terrible consequences await on a single misstep, and we shall not make
the misstep. Can you still claim that science and the future have nothing
to do with each other?"

"You are talking of matters purely temporal," said Mr. Whitechoker. "I
have reference to our spiritual future."

"And the two," observed the Idiot, "are so closely allied that we cannot
separate them. The proverb about looking after the pennies and letting
the pounds take care of themselves applies here. I believe that if I take
care of my temporal future--which, by-the-way, does not exist--my
spiritual future will take care of itself; and if science places the
hereafter before us--and you admit that even now it is before us--all we
have to do is to take advantage of our opportunities, and mend our lives
accordingly."

"But if science shows you what is to come," said the School-Master, "it
must show your fate with perfect accuracy, or it ceases to be science, in
which event your entertaining notions as to reform and so on are entirely
fallacious."

"Not at all," said the Idiot. "We are approaching the time when science,
which is much more liberal than any other branch of knowledge, will
sacrifice even truth itself for the good of mankind."

"You ought to start a paradox company," suggested the Doctor.

"Either that or make himself the nucleus of an insane asylum," observed
the School-Master, viciously. "I never knew a man with such maniacal
views as those we have heard this morning."

"There is a great deal, Mr. Pedagog, that you have never known," returned
the Idiot. "Stick by me, and you'll die with a mind richly stored."

Whereat the School-Master left the table with such manifest impatience
that Mr. Whitechoker was sorry he had started the conversation.

The genial gentleman who occasionally imbibed and the Idiot withdrew to
the latter's room, where the former observed:

"What are you driving at, anyhow? Where did you get those crazy ideas?"

"I ate a Welsh-rarebit last night, and dreamed 'em," returned the Idiot.

"I thought as much," said his companion. "What deuced fine things dreams
are, anyhow!"




IX


Breakfast was very nearly over, and it was of such exceptionally good
quality that very few remarks had been made. Finally the ball was set
rolling by the Lawyer.

"How many packs of cigarettes do you smoke a day?" he asked, as the Idiot
took one from his pocket and placed it at the side of his coffee-cup.

"Never more than forty-six," said the Idiot. "Why? Do you think of
starting a cigarette stand?"

"Not at all," said Mr. Brief. "I was only wondering what chance you had
to live to maturity, that's all. Your maturity period will be in about
eight hundred and sixty years from now, the way I calculate, and it
seemed to me that, judging from the number of cigarettes you smoke, you
were not likely to last through more than two or three of those years."

"Oh, I expect to live longer than that," said the Idiot. "I think I'm
good for at least four years. Don't you, Doctor?"

"I decline to have anything to say about your case," retorted the Doctor,
whose feeling towards the Idiot was not surpassingly affectionate.

"In that event I shall probably live five years more," said the Idiot.

The Doctor's lip curled, but he remained silent.

"You'll live," put in Mr. Pedagog, with a chuckle. "The good die young."

"How did you happen to keep alive all this time then, Mr. Pedagog?" asked
the Idiot.

"I have always eschewed tobacco in every form, for one thing," said Mr.
Pedagog.

"I am surprised," put in the Idiot. "That's really a bad habit, and I
marvel greatly that you should have done it."

The School-Master frowned, and looked at the Idiot over the rims of his
glasses, as was his wont when he was intent upon getting explanations.

"Done what?" he asked, severely.

"Chewed tobacco," replied the Idiot. "You just said that one of the
things that has kept you lingering in this vale of tears was that you
have always chewed tobacco. I never did that, and I never shall do it,
because I deem it a detestable diversion."

"I didn't say anything of the sort," retorted Mr. Pedagog, getting red in
the face. "I never said that I chewed tobacco in any form."

"Oh, come!" said the Idiot, with well-feigned impatience, "what's the use
of talking that way? We all heard what you said, and I have no doubt that
it came as a shock to every member of this assemblage. It certainly was a
shock to me, because, with all my weaknesses and bad habits, I think
tobacco-chewing unutterably bad. The worst part of it is that you chew it
in every form. A man who chews chewing-tobacco only may some time throw
off the habit, but when one gets to be such a victim to it that he chews
up cigars and cigarettes and plugs of pipe tobacco, it seems to me he is
incurable. It is not only a bad habit then; it amounts to a vice."

Mr. Pedagog was getting apoplectic. "You know well enough that I never
said the words you attribute to me," he said, sternly.

"Really, Mr. Pedagog," returned the Idiot, with an irritating shake of
his head, as if he were confidentially hinting to the School-Master to
keep quiet--"really you pain me by these futile denials. Nobody forced
you into the confession. You made it entirely of your own volition. Now
I ask you, as a man and brother, what's the use of saying anything more
about it? We believe you to be a person of the strictest veracity, but
when you say a thing before a tableful of listeners one minute, and deny
it the next, we are forced to one of two conclusions, neither of which is
pleasing. We must conclude that either, repenting your confession, you
sacrifice the truth, or that the habit to which you have confessed has
entirely destroyed your perception of the moral question involved. Undue
use of tobacco has, I believe, driven men crazy. Opium-eating has
destroyed all regard for truth in one whose word had always been regarded
as good as a government bond. I presume the undue use of tobacco can
accomplish the same sad result. By-the-way, did you ever try opium?"

"Opium is ruin," said the Doctor, Mr. Pedagog's indignation being so
great that he seemed to be unable to find the words he was evidently
desirous of hurling at the Idiot.

"It is, indeed," said the Idiot. "I knew a man once who smoked one little
pipeful of it, and, while under its influence, sat down at his table and
wrote a story of the supernatural order that was so good that everybody
said he must have stolen it from Poe or some other master of the weird,
and now nobody will have anything to do with him. Tobacco, however, in
the sane use of it, is a good thing. I don't know of anything that is
more satisfying to the tired man than to lie back on a sofa, of an
evening, and puff clouds of smoke and rings into the air. One of the
finest dreams I ever had came from smoking. I had blown a great mountain
of smoke out into the room, and it seemed to become real, and I climbed
to its summit and saw the most beautiful country at my feet--a country in
which all men were happy, where there were no troubles of any kind, where
no whim was left ungratified, where jealousies were not, and where every
man who made more than enough to live on paid the surplus into the common
treasury for the use of those who hadn't made quite enough. It was a
national realization of the golden rule, and I maintain that if smoking
were bad nothing so good, even in the abstract form of an idea, could
come out of it."

"That's a very nice thought," said the Poet. "I'd like to put that into
verse. The idea of a people dividing up their surplus of wealth among the
less successful strugglers is beautiful."

"You can have it," said the Idiot, with a pleased smile. "I don't write
poetry of that kind myself unless I work hard, and I've found that when
the poet works hard he produces poems that read hard. You are welcome to
it. Another time I was dreaming over my cigar, after a day of the hardest
kind of trouble at the office. Everything had gone wrong with me, and I
was blue as indigo. I came home here, lit a cigar, and threw myself down
upon my bed and began to puff. I felt like a man in a deep pit, out of
which there was no way of getting. I closed my eyes for a second, and to
all intents and purposes I lay in that pit. And then what did tobacco do
for me? Why, it lifted me right out of my prison. I thought I was sitting
on a rock down in the depths. The stars twinkled tantalizingly above me.
They invited me to freedom, knowing that freedom was not attainable. Then
I blew a ring of smoke from my mouth, and it began to rise slowly at
first, and then, catching in a current of air, it flew upward more
rapidly, widening constantly, until it disappeared in the darkness above.
Then I had a thought. I filled my mouth as full of smoke as possible, and
blew forth the greatest ring you ever saw, and as it started to rise I
grasped it in my two hands. It struggled beneath my weight, lengthened
out into an elliptical link, and broke, and let me down with a dull thud.
Then I made two rings, grasping one with my left hand and the other with
my right--"

[Illustration: "I GRASPED IT IN MY TWO HANDS"]

"And they lifted you out of the pit, I suppose?" sneered the
Bibliomaniac.

"I do not say that they did," said the Idiot, calmly. "But I do know that
when I opened my eyes I wasn't in the pit any longer, but up-stairs in my
hall-bedroom."

"How awfully mysterious!" said the Doctor, satirically.

"Well, I don't approve of smoking," said Mr. Whitechoker. "I agree with
the London divine who says it is the pastime of perdition. It is not
prompted by natural instincts. It is only the habit of artificial
civilization. Dogs and horses and birds get along without it. Why
shouldn't man?"

"Hear! hear!" cried Mr. Pedagog, clapping his hands approvingly.

"Where? where?" put in the Idiot. "That's a great argument. Dog's don't
put up in boarding-houses. Is the boarding-house, therefore, the result
of a degraded, artificial civilization? I have seen educated horses that
didn't smoke, but I have never seen an educated horse, or an uneducated
one, for that matter, that had even had the chance to smoke, or the kind
of mouth that would enable him to do it in case he had the chance. I
have also observed that horses don't read books, that birds don't eat
mutton-chops, that dogs don't go to the opera, that donkeys don't play
the piano--at least, four-legged donkeys don't--so you might as well
argue that since horses, dogs, birds, and donkeys get along without
literature, music, mutton-chops, and piano-playing--"

"You've covered music," put in the Lawyer, who liked to be precise.

"True; but piano-playing isn't always music," returned the Idiot.
"You might as well argue because the beasts and the birds do without
these things man ought to. Fish don't smoke, neither do they join the
police-force, therefore man should neither smoke nor become a guardian
of the peace."

[Illustration: "PIANO-PLAYING ISN'T ALWAYS MUSIC"]

"Nevertheless it is a pastime of perdition," insisted Mr. Whitechoker.

"No, it isn't," retorted the Idiot. "Smoking is the business of
perdition. It smokes because it has to."

"There! there!" remonstrated Mr. Pedagog.

"You mean hear! hear! I presume," said the Idiot.

"I mean that you have said enough!" remarked Mr. Pedagog, sharply.

"Very well," said the Idiot. "If I have convinced you all I am satisfied,
not to say gratified. But really, Mr. Pedagog," he added, rising to leave
the room, "if I were you I'd give up the practice of chewing--"

"Hold on a minute, Mr. Idiot," said Mr. Whitechoker, interrupting. He was
desirous that Mr. Pedagog should not be further irritated. "Let me ask
you one question. Does your old father smoke?"

"No," said the Idiot, leaning easily over the back of his chair--"no.
What of it?"

"Nothing at all--except that perhaps if he could get along without it you
might," suggested the clergyman.

"He couldn't get along without it if he knew what good tobacco was," said
the Idiot.

"Then why don't you introduce him to it?" asked the Minister.

"Because I do not wish to make him unhappy," returned the Idiot, softly.
"He thinks his seventy years have been the happiest years that any mortal
ever had, and if now in his seventy-first year he discovered that during
the whole period of his manhood he had been deprived through ignorance of
so great a blessing as a good cigar, he'd become like the rest of us,
living in anticipation of delights to come, and not finding approximate
bliss in living over the past. Trust me, my dear Mr. Whitechoker, to look
after him. He and my mother and my life are all I have."

The Idiot left the room, and Mr. Pedagog put in a greater part of the
next half-hour in making personal statements to the remaining boarders to
the effect that the word he used was eschewed, and not the one attributed
to him by the Idiot.

Strange to say, most of them were already aware of that fact.




X


"The progress of invention in this country has been very remarkable,"
said Mr. Pedagog, as he turned his attention from a scientific weekly he
had been reading to a towering pile of buckwheat cakes that Mary had just
brought in. "An Englishman has just discovered a means by which a ship in
distress at sea can write for help on the clouds."

"Extraordinary!" said Mr. Whitechoker.

"It might be more so," observed the Idiot, coaxing the platterful of
cakes out of the School-Master's reach by a dexterous movement of his
hand. "And it will be more so some day. The time is coming when the
moon itself will be used by some enterprising American to advertise his
soap business. I haven't any doubt that the next fifty years will develop
a stereopticon by means of which a picture of a certain brand of cigar
may be projected through space until it seems to be held between the
teeth of the man in the moon, with a printed legend below it stating
that this is _Tooforfivers Best, Rolled from Hand-made Tobacco, Warranted
not to Crock or Fade, and for sale by All Tobacconists at Eighteen for a
Dime_."

[Illustration: "THE MOON ITSELF WILL BE USED"]

"You would call that an advance in invention, eh?" asked the
School-Master.

"Why not?" queried the Idiot.

"Do you consider the invention which would enable man to debase nature to
the level of an advertising medium an advance?"

"I should not consider the use of the moon for the dissemination of good
news a debasement. If the cigars were good--and I have no doubt that some
one will yet invent a cheap cigar that is good--it would benefit the
human race to be acquainted with that fact. I think sometimes that the
advertisements in the newspapers and the periodicals of the day are of
more value to the public than the reading-matter, so-called, that stands
next to them. I don't see why you should sneer at advertising. I should
never have known you, for instance, Mr. Pedagog, had it not been for Mrs.
Pedagog's advertisement offering board and lodging to single gentlemen
for a consideration. Nor would you have met Mrs. Smithers, now your
estimable wife, yourself, had it not been for that advertisement. Why,
then, do you sneer at the ladder upon which you have in a sense climbed
to your present happiness? You are ungrateful."

"How you do ramify!" said Mr. Pedagog. "I believe there is no subject in
the world which you cannot connect in some way or another with every
other subject in the world. A discussion of the merits of Shakespeare's
sonnets could be turned by your dexterous tongue in five minutes into a
quarrel over the comparative merits of cider and cod-liver oil as
beverages, with you, the chances are, the advocate of cod-liver oil as
a steady drink."

"Well, I must say," said the Idiot, with a smile, "it has been my
experience that cod-liver oil is steadier than cider. The cod-liver
oils I have had the pleasure of absorbing have been evenly vile, while
the ciders that I have drank have been of a variety of goodness, badness,
and indifferentness which has brought me to the point where I never touch
it. But to return to inventions, since you desire to limit our discussion
to a single subject, I think it is about the most interesting field of
speculation imaginable."

"There you are right," said Mr. Pedagog, approvingly. "There is
absolutely no limit to the possibilities involved. It is almost within
the range of possibilities that some man may yet invent a buckwheat cake
that will satisfy your abnormal craving for that delicacy, which the
present total output of this table seems unable to do."

Here Mr. Pedagog turned to his wife, and added: "My dear, will you
request the cook hereafter to prepare individual cakes for us? The Idiot
has so far monopolized all that have as yet appeared."

"It appears to me," said the Idiot at this point, "that _you_ are the
ramifier, Mr. Pedagog. Nevertheless, ramify as much as you please. I can
follow you--at a safe distance, of course--in the discussion of anything,
from Edison to flapjacks. I think your suggestion regarding individual
cakes is a good one. We might all have separate griddles, upon which
Gladys, the cook, can prepare them, and on these griddles might be cast
in bold relief the crest of each member of this household, so that every
man's cake should, by an easy process in the making, come off the fire
indelibly engraved with the evidence of its destiny. Mr. Pedagog's iron,
for instance, might have upon it a school-book rampant, or a large head
in the same condition. Mr. Whitechoker's cake-mark might be a pulpit
rampant, based upon a vestryman dormant. The Doctor might have a lozengy
shield with a suitable tincture, while my genial friend who occasionally
imbibes could have a barry shield surmounted by a small effigy of
Gambrinus."

"You appear to know something of heraldry," said the poet, with a look of
surprise.

"I know something of everything," said the Idiot, complacently.

"It's a pity you don't know everything about something," sneered the
Doctor.

"I would suggest," said the School-Master, dryly, "that a little rampant
jackass would make a good crest for your cakes."

"That's a very good idea," said the Idiot. "I do not know but that a
jackass rampant would be about as comprehensive of my virtues as anything
I might select. The jackass is a combination of all the best qualities.
He is determined. He minds his own business. He doesn't indulge in
flippant conversation. He is useful. Has no vices, never pretends to be
anything but a jackass, and most respectfully declines to be ridden by
Tom, Dick, and Harry. I accept the suggestion of Mr. Pedagog with thanks.
But we are still ramifying. Let us get back to inventions. Now I fully
believe that the time is coming when some inventive genius will devise a
method whereby intellect can be given to those who haven't any. I believe
that the time is coming when the secrets of the universe will be yielded
up to man by nature."

[Illustration: "DECLINES TO BE RIDDEN"]

"And then?" queried Mr. Brief.

"Then some man will try to improve on the secrets of the universe. He
will try to invent an apparatus by means of which the rotation of the
world may be made faster or slower, according to his will. If he has but
one day, for instance, in which to do a stated piece of work, and he
needs two, he will put on some patent brake and slow the world up until
the distance travelled in one hour shall be reduced one-half, so that one
hour under the old system will be equivalent to two; or if he is
anticipating some joy, some diversion in the future, the same smart
person will find a way to increase the speed of the earth so that the
hours will be like minutes. Then he'll begin fooling with gravitation,
and he will discover a new-fashioned lodestone, which can be carried in
one's hat to counter-act the influence of the centre of gravity when one
falls out of a window or off a precipice, the result of which will be
that the person who falls off one of these high places will drop down
slowly, and not with the rapidity which at the present day is responsible
for the dreadful outcome of accidents of that sort. Then, finally--"

"You pretend to be able to penetrate to the finality, do you?" asked the
Clergyman.

"Why not? It is as easy to imagine the finality as it is to go half-way
there," returned the Idiot. "Finally he will tackle some elementary
principle of nature, and he'll blow the world to smithereens."

There was silence at the table. This at least seemed to be a tenable
theory. That man should have the temerity to take liberties with
elementary principles was quite within reason, man being an animal of
rare conceit, and that the result would bring about destruction was not
at all at variance with probability.

"I believe it's happened once or twice already," said the Idiot.

"Do you really?" asked Mr. Pedagog, with a show of interest. "Upon what
do you base this belief?"

"Well, take Africa," said the Idiot. "Take North America. What do we
find? We find in the sands of the Sahara a great statue, which we call
the Sphinx, and about which we know nothing, except that it is there and
that it keeps its mouth shut. We find marvellous creations in engineering
that to-day surpass anything that we can do. The Sphinx, when discovered,
was covered by sand. Now I believe that at one time there were people
much further advanced in science than ourselves, who made these wonderful
things, who knew how to do things that we don't even dream of doing, and
I believe that they, like this creature I have predicted, got fooling
with the centre of gravity, and that the world slipped its moorings for a
period of time, during which time it tumbled topsy-turvey into space, and
that banks and banks of sand and water and ice thrown out of position
simply swept on and over the whole surface of the globe continuously
until the earth got into the grip of the rest of the universe once more
and started along in a new orbit. We know that where we are high and dry
to-day the ocean must once have rolled. We know that where the world is
now all sunshine and flowers great glaciers stood. What caused all this
change? Nothing else, in my judgment, than the monkeying of man with the
forces of nature. The poles changed, and it wouldn't surprise me a bit
that, if the north pole were ever found and could be thawed out, we
should find embedded in that great sea of ice evidences of a former
civilization, just as in the Saharan waste evidences of the same thing
have been found. I know of a place out West that is literally strewn with
oyster-shells, and yet no man living has the slightest idea how they came
there. It may have been the Massachusetts Bay of a pre-historic time, for
all we know. It may have been an antediluvian Coney Island, for all the
world knows. Who shall say that this little upset of mine found here an
oyster-bed, shook all the oysters out of their bed into space, and left
their clothes high and dry in a locality which, but for those garments,
would seem never to have known the oyster in his prime? Off in
Westchester County, on the top of a high hill, lies a rock, and in the
uppermost portion of that rock is a so-called pot-hole, made by nothing
else than the dropping of water of a brook and the swirling of pebbles
therein. It is now beyond the reach of anything in the shape of water
save that which falls from the heavens. It is certain that this pot-hole
was never made by a boy with a watering-pot, by a hired man with a hose,
by a workman with a drill, or by any rain-storm that ever fell in
Westchester County. There must at some time or another have been a
stream there; and as streams do not flow uphill and bore pot-holes on
mountain-tops, there must have been a valley there. Some great cataclysm
took place. For that cataclysm nature must be held responsible mainly.
But what prompted nature to raise hob with Westchester County millions of
years ago, and to let it sleep like Rip Van Winkle ever since? Nature
isn't a freak. She is depicted as a woman, but in spite of that she is
not whimsical. She does not act upon impulses. There must have been some
cause for her behavior in turning valleys into hills, in transforming
huge cities into wastes of sand, and oyster-beds into shell quarries; and
it is my belief that man was the contributing cause. He tapped the earth
for natural gas; he bored in and he bored out, and he bored nature to
death, and then nature rose up and smote him and his cities and his
oyster-beds, and she'll do it again unless we go slow."

"There is a great deal in what you say," said Mr. Whitechoker.

"Very true," said Mrs. Pedagog. "But I wish he'd stop saying it. The last
three dozen cakes have got cold as ice while he was talking, and I can't
afford such reckless waste."

"Nor we, Mrs. Pedagog," said the Idiot, with a pleasant smile; "for, as I
was saying to the Bibliomaniac this morning, your buckwheat cakes are, to
my mind, the very highest development of our modern civilization, and to
have even one of them wasted seems to me to be a crime against Nature
herself, for which a second, third, or fourth shaking up of this earth
would be an inadequate punishment."

This remark so pleased Mrs. Pedagog that she ordered the cook to send up
a fresh lot of cakes; and the guests, after eating them, adjourned to
their various duties with light hearts, and digestions occupied with work
of great importance.




XI


"I wonder what would have happened if Columbus had not discovered
America?" said the Bibliomaniac, as the company prepared to partake of
the morning meal.

"He would have gone home disappointed," said the Idiot, with a look of
surprise on his face, which seemed to indicate that in his opinion the
Bibliomaniac was very dull-witted not to have solved the problem for
himself. "He would have gone home disappointed, and we would now be
foreigners, like most other Americans. Mr. Pedagog would doubtless be
instructing the young scions of the aristocracy of Tipperary, Mr.
Whitechoker would be Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bibliomaniac would be
raising bulbs in Holland, and----"

[Illustration: "THE BIBLIOMANIAC WOULD BE RAISING BULBS"]

"And you would be wandering about with the other wild men of Borneo at
the present time," put in the School-Master.

"No," said the Idiot. "Not quite. I should be dividing my time up between
Holland, France, Switzerland, and Spain."

"You are an international sort of Idiot, eh?" queried the Lawyer, with a
chuckle at his own wit.

"Say rather a cosmopolitan Idiot," said the Idiot. "Among my ancestors
I number individuals of various nations, though I suppose that if we go
back far enough we were all in the same boat as far as that is concerned.
One of my great-great-grandfathers was a Scotchman, one of them was a
Dutchman, another was a Spaniard, a fourth was a Frenchman. What the
others were I don't know. It's a nuisance looking up one's ancestors,
I think. They increase so as you go back into the past. Every man
has had two grandfathers, four great-grandfathers, eight
great-great-grandfathers, sixteen great-great-great-grandfathers,
thirty-two fathers raised to the fourth power of great-grandness, and
so on, increasing in number as you go further back, until it is hardly
possible for any one to throw a brick into the pages of history without
hitting somebody who is more or less responsible for his existence. I
dare say there is a streak of Julius Cæsar in me, and I haven't a doubt
that if our friend Mr. Pedagog here were to take the trouble to
investigate, he would find that Cæsar and Cassius and Brutus could be
numbered among his early progenitors--and now that I think of it,
I must say that in my estimation he is an unusually amiable man,
considering how diverse the nature of these men were. Think of it for
a minute. Here a man unites in himself Cæsar and Cassius and Brutus,
two of whom killed the third, and then, having quarrelled together,
went out upon a battle-field and slaughtered themselves, after making
extemporaneous remarks, for which this miserable world gives Shakespeare
all the credit. It's worse than the case of a friend of mine, one of
whose grandfathers was French and the other German."

"How did it affect him?" asked Mr. Whitechoker.

"It made him distrust himself," said the Idiot, with a smile, "and for
that reason he never could get on in the world. When his Teutonic nature
suggested that he do something, his Gallic blood would rise up and spoil
everything, and _vice versa_. He was eternally quarrelling with himself.
He was a victim to internal disorder of the worst sort."

"And what, pray, finally became of him?" asked the Clergyman.

"He shot himself in a duel," returned the Idiot, with a wink at the
genial old gentleman who occasionally imbibed. "It was very sad."

"I've known sadder things," said Mr. Pedagog, wearily. "Your elaborate
jokes, for instance. They are enough to make strong men weep."

"You flatter me, Mr. Pedagog," said the Idiot. "I have never in all my
experience as a cracker of jests made a man laugh until he cried, but I
hope to some day. But, really, do you know I think Columbus is an
immensely overrated man. If you come down to it, what did he do? He went
out to sea in a ship and sailed for three months, and when he least
expected it ran slam-bang up against the Western Hemisphere. It was like
shooting at a barn door with a Gatling gun. He was bound to hit it sooner
or later."

"You don't give him any credit for tenacity of purpose or good judgment,
then?" asked Mr. Brief.

"Of course I do. Plenty of it. He stuck to his ship like a hero who
didn't know how to swim. His judgment was great. He had too much sense
to go back to Spain without any news of something, because he fully
understood that unless he had something to show for the trip, there would
have been a great laugh on Queen Isabella for selling her jewels to
provide for a ninety-day yacht cruise for him and a lot of common
sailors, which would never have done. So he kept on and on, and finally
some unknown lookout up in the bow discovered America. Then Columbus
went home and told everybody that if it hadn't been for his own eagle eye
emigration wouldn't have been invented, and world's fairs would have been
local institutions. Then they got up a parade in which the King and Queen
graciously took part, and Columbus became a great man. Meanwhile the
unknown lookout who did discover the land was knocking about the town and
thinking he was a very lucky fellow to get an extra glass of grog. It
wasn't anything more than the absolute justice of fate that caused the
new land to be named America and not Columbia. It really ought to have
been named after that fellow up in the bow."

"But, my dear Idiot," put in the Bibliomaniac, "the scheme itself was
Columbus's own. He evolved the theory that the earth is round like a
ball."

"To quote Mr. Pedagog--" began the Idiot.

"You can't quote me in your own favor," snapped the School-Master.

"Wait until I have finished," said the Idiot. "I was only going to quote
you by saying 'Tutt!' that's all; and so I repeat, in the words of Mr.
Pedagog, tutt, tutt! Evolved the theory? Why, man, how could he help
evolving the theory? There was the sun rising in the east every morning
and setting in the west every night. What else was there to believe? That
somebody put the sun out every night, and sneaked back east with it under
cover of darkness?"

"But you forget that the wise men of the day laughed at his idea," said
Mr. Pedagog, surveying the Idiot after the fashion of a man who has dealt
an adversary a stinging blow.

"That only proves what I have always said," replied the Idiot. "Wise men
can't find fun in anything but stern facts. Wise men always do laugh at
truth. Whenever I advance some new proposition, you sit up there next to
Mrs. Pedagog and indulge in tutt-tutterances of the most intolerant sort.
If you had been one of the wise men of Columbus's time there isn't any
doubt in my mind that when Columbus said the earth was round, you'd have
remarked tutt, tutt, in Spanish." There was silence for a minute, and
then the Idiot began again. "There's another point about this whole
business that makes me tired," he said. "It only goes to prove the
conceit of these Europeans. Here was a great continent inhabited by
countless people. A European comes over here and is said to be the
discoverer of America and is glorified. Statues of him are scattered
broad-cast all over the world. Pictures of him are printed in the
newspapers and magazines. A dozen different varieties of portraits of
him are printed on postage-stamps as big as circus posters--and all for
what? Because he discovered a land that millions of Indians had known
about for centuries. On the other hand, when Columbus goes back to Spain
several of the native Americans trust their precious lives to his old
tubs. One of these savages must have been the first American to discover
Europe. Where are the statues of the Indian who discovered Europe? Where
are the postage-stamps showing how he looked on the day when Europe first
struck his vision? Where is anybody spending a billion of dollars getting
up a world's fair in commemoration of Lo's discovery of Europe?"

"He didn't know it was Europe," said the Bibliomaniac.

"Columbus didn't know this was America," retorted the Idiot. "In fact,
Columbus didn't know anything. He didn't know any better than to write a
letter to Queen Isabella and mail it in a keg that never turned up. He
didn't even know how to steer his old boat into a real solid continent,
instead of getting ten days on the island. He was an awfully wise man. He
saw an island swarming with Indians, and said, 'Why, this must be India!'
And worst of all, if his pictures mean anything, he didn't even know
enough to choose his face and stick to it. Don't talk Columbus to me
unless you want to prove that luck is the greatest factor of success."

[Illustration: "DIDN'T KNOW ENOUGH TO CHOOSE HIS OWN FACE"]

"Ill-luck is sometimes a factor of success," said Mr. Pedagog. "You are a
success as an Idiot, which appears to me to be extremely unfortunate."

"I don't know about that," said the Idiot. "I adapt myself to my company,
and of course--"

"Then you are a school-master among school-masters, a lawyer among
lawyers, and so forth?" queried the Bibliomaniac.

"What are you when your company is made up of widely diverse characters?"
asked Mr. Brief before the Idiot had a chance to reply to the
Bibliomaniac's question.

"I try to be a widely diverse character myself."

"And, trying to sit on many stools, fall and become just an Idiot," said
Mr. Pedagog.

"That's according to the way you look at it. I put my company to the test
in the crucible of my mind. I analyze the characters of all about me, and
whatever quality predominates in the precipitate, that I become. Thus in
the presence of my employer and his office-boy I become a mixture of
both--something of the employer, something of an office-boy. I run
errands for my employer, and boss the office-boy. With you gentlemen I
go through the same process. The Bibliomaniac, the School-Master, Mr.
Brief, and the rest of you have been cast into the crucible, and I have
tried to approximate the result."

"And are an Idiot," said the School-Master.

"It is your own name for me, gentlemen," returned the Idiot. "I presume
you have recognized your composite self, and have chosen the title
accordingly."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You were a little hard on me this morning, weren't you?" asked the
genial old gentleman who occasionally imbibed, that evening, when he and
the Idiot were discussing the morning's chat. "I didn't like to say
anything about it, but I don't think you ought to have thrown me into the
crucible with the rest."

"I wish you had spoken," said the Idiot, warmly. "It would have given me
a chance to say that the grain of sense that once or twice a year leavens
the lump of my idiocy is directly due to the ingredient furnished by
yourself. Here's to you, old man. If you and I lived alone together, what
a wise man I should be!"

And then the genial old gentleman went to the cupboard and got out a
bottle of port-wine that he had been preserving in cobwebs for ten years.
This he opened, and as he did so he said, "I've been keeping this for
years, my boy. It was dedicated in my youth to the thirst of the first
man who truly appreciated me. Take it all."

"I'll divide with you," returned the Idiot, with a smile. "For really,
old fellow, I think you--ah--I think you appreciate yourself as much as
I do."




XII


"I wonder what it costs to run a flat?" said the Idiot, stirring his
coffee with the salt-spoon--a proceeding which seemed to indicate that he
was thinking of something else.

"Don't you keep an expense account?" asked the Bibliomaniac, slyly.

"Hee-hee!" laughed Mrs. Pedagog.

"First-rate joke," said the Idiot, with a smile. "But really, now,
I should like to know for how little an apartment could be run. I am
interested."

Mrs. Pedagog stopped laughing at once. The Idiot's words were ominous.
She did not always like his views, but she did like his money, and she
was not at all anxious to lose him as a boarder.

"It's very expensive," she said, firmly. "I shouldn't ever advise any
one to undertake living in a flat. Rents are high. Butcher bills are
enormous, because the butchers have to pay commissions, not only to the
cook, so that she'll use twice as much lard as she can, and give away
three or four times as much to the poor as she ought, but janitors have
to be seen to, and elevator-boys, and all that. Groceries come high for
the same reason. Oh, no! Flat life isn't the life for anybody, I say.
Give me a good, first-class boarding-house. Am I not right, John?"

[Illustration: "JANITORS HAVE TO BE SEEN TO"]

"Yes, indeed," said Mr. Pedagog. "Every time. I lived in a flat once,
and it was an awful nuisance. Above me lived a dancing-master who gave
lessons at every hour of the day in the room directly over my study,
so that I was always being disturbed at my work, while below me was a
music-teacher who was practising all night, so that I could hardly sleep.
Worst of all, on the same floor with me was a miserable person of
convivial tendencies, who always mistook my door for his when he came
home after midnight, and who gave some quite estimable people two
floors below to believe that it was I, and not he, who sang comic songs
between three and four o'clock in the morning. There has not been too
much love lost between the Idiot and myself, but I cannot be so
vindictive as to recommend him to live in a flat."

"I can bear testimony to the same effect," put in Mr. Brief, who was two
weeks in arrears, and anxious to conciliate his landlady.

"Testimony to the effect that Mr. Pedagog sang comic songs in the early
morning?" said the Idiot. "Nonsense! I don't believe it. I have lived in
this house for two years with Mr. Pedagog, and I've never heard him raise
his voice in song yet."

"I didn't mean anything of the sort," retorted Mr. Brief. "You know I
didn't."

"Don't apologize to me," said the Idiot. "Apologize to Mr. Pedagog. He is
the man you have wronged."

"What did he say?" put in Mr. Pedagog, with a stern look at Mr. Brief. "I
didn't hear what he said."

"I didn't say anything," said the lawyer, "except that I could bear
testimony to the effect that your experience with flat life was similar
to mine. This young person, with his customary nerve, tries to make it
appear that I said you sang comic songs in the early morning."

"I try to do nothing of the sort," said the Idiot. "I simply expressed my
belief that in spite of what you said Mr. Pedagog was innocent, and I do
so because my experience with him has taught me that he is not the kind
of man who would do that sort of thing. He has neither time, voice, nor
inclination. He has an ear--two of them, in fact--and an impressionable
mind, but--"

"Oh, tutt!" interrupted the School-Master. "When I need a defender, you
may spare yourself the trouble of flying to my rescue."

"I know I _may_," said the Idiot, "but with me it's a question of can and
can't. I'm willing to attack you personally, but while I live no other
shall do so. Wherefore I tell Mr. Brief plainly, and to his face, that if
he says you ever sang a comic song he says what is not so. You might hum
one, but sing it--never!"

"We were talking of flats, I believe," said Mr. Whitechoker.

"Yes," said the Idiot, "and these persons have changed it from flat talk
to sharp talk."

"Well, anyhow," put in Mr. Brief, "I lived in a flat once, and it was
anything but pleasant. I lost a case once for the simple and only reason
that I lived in a flat. It was a case that required a great deal of
strategy on my part, and I invited my client to my home to unfold my plan
of action. I got interested in the scheme as I unfolded it, and spoke in
my usual impassioned manner, as though addressing a jury, and, would you
believe it, the opposing counsel happened to be visiting a friend on the
next floor, and my eloquence floated up through the air-shaft, and gave
our whole plan of action away. We were routed on the point we had
supposed would pierce the enemy's armor and lay him at our feet, for the
wholly simple reason that that abominable air-shaft had made my strategic
move a matter of public knowledge."

[Illustration: "MY ELOQUENCE FLOATED UP THE AIR-SHAFT"]

"That's a good idea for a play," said the Idiot. "A roaring farce could
be built up on that basis. Villain and accomplice on one floor, innocent
victim on floor above. Plot floats up air-shaft. Innocent victim
overhears; villain and accomplice say 'ha ha' for three acts and take
a back seat in the fourth, with a grand transformation showing the
conspirators in the county jail as a finale. Write it up with lots of
live-stock wandering in and out, bring in janitors and elevator-boys
and butchers, show up some of the humors of flat life, if there be any
such, call it _A Hole in the Flat_, and put it on the stage. Nine hundred
nights is the very shortest run it could have, which at fifty dollars a
night for the author is $45,000 in good hard dollars. Mr. Poet, the idea
is yours for a fiver. Say the word."

"Thanks," said the Poet, with a smile; "I'm not a dramatist."

"Then I'll have to do it myself," said the Idiot. "And if I do, good-bye
Shakespeare."

"That's so," said Mr. Pedagog. "Nothing could more effectually ruin the
dramatic art than to have you write a play. People, seeing your work,
would say, here, this will never do. The stage must be discouraged at all
costs. A hypocrite throws the ministry into disgrace, an ignoramus brings
shame upon education, and an unpopular lawyer gives the bar a bad name. I
think you are just the man to ruin Shakespeare."

"Then I'll give up my ambition to become a playwright and stick to
idiocy," said the Idiot. "But to come back to flats. Your feeling in
regard to them is entirely different from that of a friend of mine, who
has lived in one for ten years. He thinks flat life is ideal. His
children can't fall down-stairs, because there aren't any stairs to fall
down. His roof never leaks, because he hasn't any roof to leak; and when
he and his family want to go off anywhere, all he has to do is to lock
his front door and go. Burglars never climb into his front window,
because they are all eight flights up. Damp cellars don't trouble him,
because they are too far down to do him any injury, even if they
overflow. The cares of house-keeping are reduced to a minimum. His cook
doesn't spend all her time in the front area flirting with the postman,
because there isn't any front area to his flat; and in a social way his
wife is most delightfully situated, because most of her friends live in
the same building, and instead of having to hire a carriage to go calling
in, all she has to do is to take the elevator and go from one floor to
another. If he pines for a change of scene, he is high enough up in the
air to get it by looking out of his windows, over the tops of other
buildings, into the green fields to the north, or looking westward into
the State of New Jersey. Instead of taking a drive through the Park, or
a walk, all he and his wife need to do is to take a telescope and follow
some little sylvan path with their eyes. Then, as for expense, he finds
that he saves money by means of a co-operative scheme. For instance, if
he wants shad for dinner, and he and his wife cannot eat a whole one, he
goes shares on the shad and its cost with his neighbors above and below."

"Yes, and his neighbors above and below borrow tea and eggs and butter
and ice and other things whenever they run short, so that in that way he
loses all he saves," said Mr. Pedagog, resolved not to give in.

"He does if he isn't smart," said the Idiot. "I thought of that myself,
and asked him about it, and he told me that he kept account of all that,
and always made it a point after some neighbor had borrowed two pounds
of butter from him to send in before the week was over and borrow three
pounds of butter from the neighbor. So far his books show that he is
sixteen pounds of butter, seven pounds of tea, one bottle of vanilla
extract, and a ton of ice ahead of the whole house. He is six eggs and
a box of matches behind in his egg and match account, but under the
circumstances I think he can afford it."

"But," said Mrs. Pedagog, anxious to know the worst, "why--er--why are
you so interested?"

"Well," said the Idiot, slowly, "I--er--I am contemplating a change, Mrs.
Pedagog--a change that would fill me--I say it sincerely, too--with
regret if--" The Idiot paused a minute, and his eye swept fondly about
the table. His voice was getting a little husky too, Mr. Whitechoker
noticed. "It would fill me with regret, I say, if it were not that
in taking up house-keeping I am--I am to have the assistance of a
better-half."

"What??" cried the Bibliomaniac. "You? You are going to be--to be
married?"

"Why not?" said the Idiot. "Imitation is the sincerest flattery. Mr.
Pedagog marries, and I am going to flatter him as sincerely as I can by
following in his footsteps."

"May I--may we ask to whom?" asked Mrs. Pedagog, softly.

"Certainly," said the Idiot. "To Mr. Barlow's daughter. Mr. Barlow is--or
was--my employer."

"Was? Is he not now? Are you going out of business?" asked Mr. Pedagog.

"No; but, you see, when I went to see Mr. Barlow in the matter, he told
me that he liked me very much, and he had no doubt I would make a good
husband for his daughter, but, after all, he added that I was nothing
but a confidential clerk on a small salary, and he thought his daughter
could do better."

"She couldn't find a better fellow, Mr. Idiot," said Mrs. Pedagog, and
Mr. Pedagog rose to the occasion by nodding his entire acquiescence in
the statement.

"Thank you very much," said the Idiot. "That was precisely what I told
Mr. Barlow, and I suggested a scheme to him by which his sole objection
could be got around."

"You would start in business for yourself?" said Mr. Whitechoker.

"In a sense, yes," said the Idiot. "Only the way I put it was that a good
confidential clerk would make a good partner for him, and he, after
thinking it over, thought I was right."

"It certainly was a characteristically novel way out of the dilemma,"
said Mr. Brief, with a smile.

"I thought so myself, and so did he, so it was all arranged. On the 1st
of next month I enter the firm, and on the 15th I am--ah--to be married."

The company warmly congratulated the Idiot upon his good-fortune, and he
shortly left the room, more overcome by their felicitations than he had
been by their arguments in the past.

The few days left passed quickly by, and there came a breakfast at Mrs.
Pedagog's house that was a mixture of joy and sadness--joy for his
happiness, sadness that that table should know the Idiot no more.

Among the wedding-gifts was a handsomely bound series of volumes,
including a cyclopædia, a dictionary, and a little tome of poems, the
first output of the Poet. These came together, with a card inscribed,
"From your Friends of the Breakfast Table," of whom the Idiot said, when
Mrs. Idiot asked for information:

"They, my dear, next to yourself and my parents, are the dearest friends
I ever had. We must have them up to breakfast some morning."

"Breakfast?" queried Mrs. Idiot.

"Yes, my dear," he replied, simply. "I should be afraid to meet them at
any other meal. I am always at my best at breakfast, and they--well, they
never are."


THE END




       *       *       *       *       *




BY JOHN KENDRICK BANGS


Mr. Bonaparte of Corsica.

Mr. Bangs is probably the generator of more hearty, healthful, purely
good-humored laughs than any other half-dozen men of our country
to-day.--_Interior_, Chicago.


The Idiot.

"The Idiot," continues to be as amusing and as triumphantly bright in the
volume called after his name as in "Coffee and Repartee."--_Evangelist_,
N. Y.


The Water Ghost, and Others.

The funny side of the ghost genre is brought out with originality, and,
considering the morbidity that surrounds the subject, it is a wholesome
thing to offer the public a series of tales letting in the sunlight of
laughter.--_Hartford Courant_.


Three Weeks in Politics.

The funny story is most graphically told, and he who can read this
narrative of a campaigner's trials without laughing must be a stoic
indeed.--_Philadelphia Bulletin_.


Coffee and Repartee.


Is delightfully free from conventionality; is breezy, witty, and
possessed of an originality both genial and refreshing.--_Saturday
Evening Gazette_, Boston.





A HOUSE-BOAT ON THE STYX
by John Kendrick Bangs


CHAPTER I: CHARON MAKES A DISCOVERY


Charon, the Ferryman of renown, was cruising slowly along the Styx one
pleasant Friday morning not long ago, and as he paddled idly on he
chuckled mildly to himself as he thought of the monopoly in ferriage
which in the course of years he had managed to build up.

"It's a great thing," he said, with a smirk of satisfaction--"it's a
great thing to be the go-between between two states of being; to have the
exclusive franchise to export and import shades from one state to the
other, and withal to have had as clean a record as mine has been.
Valuable as is my franchise, I never corrupted a public official in my
life, and--"

Here Charon stopped his soliloquy and his boat simultaneously.  As he
rounded one of the many turns in the river a singular object met his
gaze, and one, too, that filled him with misgiving.  It was another
craft, and that was a thing not to be tolerated.  Had he, Charon, owned
the exclusive right of way on the Styx all these years to have it
disputed here in the closing decade of the Nineteenth Century?  Had not
he dealt satisfactorily with all, whether it was in the line of ferriage
or in the providing of boats for pleasure-trips up the river?  Had he not
received expressions of satisfaction, indeed, from the most exclusive
families of Hades with the very select series of picnics he had given at
Charon's Glen Island?  No wonder, then, that the queer-looking boat that
met his gaze, moored in a shady nook on the dark side of the river,
filled him with dismay.

"Blow me for a landlubber if I like that!" he said, in a hardly audible
whisper.  "And shiver my timbers if I don't find out what she's there
for.  If anybody thinks he can run an opposition line to mine on this
river he's mightily mistaken.  If it comes to competition, I can carry
shades for nothing and still quaff the B. & G. yellow-label benzine three
times a day without experiencing a financial panic.  I'll show 'em a
thing or two if they attempt to rival me.  And what a boat!  It looks for
all the world like a Florentine barn on a canal-boat."

Charon paddled up to the side of the craft, and, standing up in the
middle of his boat, cried out,

"Ship ahoy!"

There was no answer, and the Ferryman hailed her again.  Receiving no
response to his second call, he resolved to investigate for himself; so,
fastening his own boat to the stern-post of the stranger, he clambered on
board.  If he was astonished as he sat in his ferry-boat, he was
paralyzed when he cast his eye over the unwelcome vessel he had boarded.
He stood for at least two minutes rooted to the spot.  His eye swept over
a long, broad deck, the polish of which resembled that of a ball-room
floor.  Amidships, running from three-quarters aft to three-quarters
forward, stood a structure that in its lines resembled, as Charon had
intimated, a barn, designed by an architect enamoured of Florentine
simplicity; but in its construction the richest of woods had been used,
and in its interior arrangement and adornment nothing more palatial could
be conceived.

"What's the blooming thing for?" said Charon, more dismayed than ever.
"If they start another line with a craft like this, I'm very much afraid
I'm done for after all.  I wouldn't take a boat like mine myself if there
was a floating palace like this going the same way.  I'll have to see the
Commissioners about this, and find out what it all means.  I suppose
it'll cost me a pretty penny, too, confound them!"

A prey to these unhappy reflections, Charon investigated further, and the
more he saw the less he liked it.  He was about to encounter opposition,
and an opposition which was apparently backed by persons of great
wealth--perhaps the Commissioners themselves.  It was a consoling thought
that he had saved enough money in the course of his career to enable him
to live in comfort all his days, but this was not really what Charon was
after.  He wished to acquire enough to retire and become one of the smart
set.  It had been done in that section of the universe which lay on the
bright side of the Styx, why not, therefore, on the other, he asked.

"I'm pretty well connected even if I am a boatman," he had been known to
say.  "With Chaos for a grandfather, and Erebus and Nox for parents, I've
just as good blood in my veins as anybody in Hades.  The Noxes are a
mighty fine family, not as bright as the Days, but older; and we're
poor--that's it, poor--and it's money makes caste these days.  If I had
millions, and owned a railroad, they'd call me a yacht-owner.  As I
haven't, I'm only a boatman.  Bah!  Wait and see!  I'll be giving swell
functions myself some day, and these upstarts will be on their knees
before me begging to be asked.  Then I'll get up a little aristocracy of
my own, and I won't let a soul into it whose name isn't mentioned in the
Grecian mythologies.  Mention in Burke's peerage and the Elite
directories of America won't admit anybody to Commodore Charon's house
unless there's some other mighty good reason for it."

Foreseeing an unhappy ending to all his hopes, the old man clambered
sadly back into his ancient vessel and paddled off into the darkness.
Some hours later, returning with a large company of new arrivals, while
counting up the profits of the day Charon again caught sight of the new
craft, and saw that it was brilliantly lighted and thronged with the most
famous citizens of the Erebean country.  Up in the bow was a spirit band
discoursing music of the sweetest sort.  Merry peals of laughter rang out
over the dark waters of the Styx.  The clink of glasses and the popping
of corks punctuated the music with a frequency which would have delighted
the soul of the most ardent lover of commas, all of which so overpowered
the grand master boatman of the Stygian Ferry Company that he dropped
three oboli and an American dime, which he carried as a pocket-piece,
overboard.  This, of course, added to his woe; but it was forgotten in an
instant, for some one on the new boat had turned a search-light directly
upon Charon himself, and simultaneously hailed the master of the ferry-
boat.

"Charon!" cried the shade in charge of the light.  "Charon, ahoy!"

"Ahoy yourself!" returned the old man, paddling his craft close up to the
stranger.  "What do you want?"

"You," said the shade.  "The house committee want to see you right away."

"What for?" asked Charon, cautiously.

"I'm sure I don't know.  I'm only a member of the club, and house
committees never let mere members know anything about their plans.  All I
know is that you are wanted," said the other.

"Who are the house committee?" queried the Ferryman.

"Sir Walter Raleigh, Cassius, Demosthenes, Blackstone, Doctor Johnson,
and Confucius," replied the shade.

"Tell 'em I'll be back in an hour," said Charon, pushing off.  "I've got
a cargo of shades on board consigned to various places up the river.  I've
promised to get 'em all through to-night, but I'll put on a couple of
extra paddles--two of the new arrivals are working their passage this
trip--and it won't take as long as usual.  What boat is this, anyhow?"

"The _Nancy Nox_, of Erebus."

"Thunder!" cried Charon, as he pushed off and proceeded on his way up the
river.  "Named after my mother!  Perhaps it'll come out all right yet."

More hopeful of mood, Charon, aided by the two dead-head passengers, soon
got through with his evening's work, and in less than an hour was back
seeking admittance, as requested, to the company of Sir Walter Raleigh
and his fellow-members on the house committee.  He was received by these
worthies with considerable effusiveness, considering his position in
society, and it warmed the cockles of his aged heart to note that Sir
Walter, who had always been rather distant to him since he had carelessly
upset that worthy and Queen Elizabeth in the middle of the Styx far back
in the last century, permitted him to shake three fingers of his left
hand when he entered the committee-room.

"How do you do, Charon?" said Sir Walter, affably.  "We are very glad to
see you."

"Thank you, kindly, Sir Walter," said the boatman.  "I'm glad to hear
those words, your honor, for I've been feeling very bad since I had the
misfortune to drop your Excellency and her Majesty overboard.  I never
knew how it happened, sir, but happen it did, and but for her Majesty's
kind assistance it might have been the worse for us.  Eh, Sir Walter?"

The knight shook his head menacingly at Charon.  Hitherto he had managed
to keep it a secret that the Queen had rescued him from drowning upon
that occasion by swimming ashore herself first and throwing Sir Walter
her ruff as soon as she landed, which he had used as a life-preserver.

"'Sh!" he said, _sotto voce_.  "Don't say anything about that, my man."

"Very well, Sir Walter, I won't," said the boatman; but he made a mental
note of the knight's agitation, and perceived a means by which that
illustrious courtier could be made useful to him in his scheming for
social advancement.

"I understood you had something to say to me," said Charon, after he had
greeted the others.

"We have," said Sir Walter.  "We want you to assume command of this
boat."

The old fellow's eyes lighted up with pleasure.

"You want a captain, eh?" he said.

"No," said Confucius, tapping the table with a diamond-studded
chop-stick.  "No.  We want a--er--what the deuce is it they call the
functionary, Cassius?"

"Senator, I think," said Cassius.

Demosthenes gave a loud laugh.

"Your mind is still running on Senatorships, my dear Cassius.  That is
quite evident," he said.  "This is not one of them, however.  The title
we wish Charon to assume is neither Captain nor Senator; it is Janitor."

"What's that?" asked Charon, a little disappointed.  "What does a Janitor
have to do?"

"He has to look after things in the house," explained Sir Walter.  "He's
a sort of proprietor by proxy.  We want you to take charge of the house,
and see to it that the boat is kept shipshape."

"Where is the house?" queried the astonished boatman.

"This is it," said Sir Walter.  "This is the house, and the boat too.  In
fact, it is a house-boat."

"Then it isn't a new-fangled scheme to drive me out of business?" said
Charon, warily.

"Not at all," returned Sir Walter.  "It's a new-fangled scheme to set you
up in business.  We'll pay you a large salary, and there won't be much to
do.  You are the best man for the place, because, while you don't know
much about houses, you do know a great deal about boats, and the boat
part is the most important part of a house-boat.  If the boat sinks, you
can't save the house; but if the house burns, you may be able to save the
boat.  See?"

"I think I do, sir," said Charon.

"Another reason why we want to employ you for Janitor," said Confucius,
"is that our club wants to be in direct communication with both sides of
the Styx; and we think you as Janitor would be able to make better
arrangements for transportation with yourself as boatman, than some other
man as Janitor could make with you."

"Spoken like a sage," said Demosthenes.

"Furthermore," said Cassius, "occasionally we shall want to have this
boat towed up or down the river, according to the house committee's
pleasure, and we think it would be well to have a Janitor who has some
influence with the towing company which you represent."

"Can't this boat be moved without towing?" asked Charon.

"No," said Cassius.

"And I'm the only man who can tow it, eh?"

"You are," said Blackstone.  "Worse luck."

"And you want me to be Janitor on a salary of what?"

"A hundred oboli a month," said Sir Walter, uneasily.

"Very well, gentlemen," said Charon.  "I'll accept the office on a salary
of two hundred oboli a month, with Saturdays off."

The committee went into executive session for five minutes, and on their
return informed Charon that in behalf of the Associated Shades they
accepted his offer.

"In behalf of what?" the old man asked.

"The Associated Shades," said Sir Walter.  "The swellest organization in
Hades, whose new house-boat you are now on board of.  When shall you be
ready to begin work?"

"Right away," said Charon, noting by the clock that it was the hour of
midnight.  "I'll start in right away, and as it is now Saturday morning,
I'll begin by taking my day off."




CHAPTER II: A DISPUTED AUTHORSHIP


"How are you, Charon?" said Shakespeare, as the Janitor assisted him on
board.  "Any one here to-night?"

"Yes, sir," said Charon.  "Lord Bacon is up in the library, and Doctor
Johnson is down in the billiard-room, playing pool with Nero."

"Ha-ha!" laughed Shakespeare.  "Pool, eh?  Does Nero play pool?"

"Not as well as he does the fiddle, sir," said the Janitor, with a
twinkle in his eye.

Shakespeare entered the house and tossed up an obolus.  "Heads--Bacon;
tails--pool with Nero and Johnson," he said.

The coin came down with heads up, and Shakespeare went into the
pool-room, just to show the Fates that he didn't care a tuppence for
their verdict as registered through the obolus.  It was a peculiar custom
of Shakespeare's to toss up a coin to decide questions of little
consequence, and then do the thing the coin decided he should not do.  It
showed, in Shakespeare's estimation, his entire independence of those
dull persons who supposed that in them was centred the destiny of all
mankind.  The Fates, however, only smiled at these little acts of
rebellion, and it was common gossip in Erebus that one of the trio had
told the Furies that they had observed Shakespeare's tendency to kick
over the traces, and always acted accordingly.  They never let the coin
fall so as to decide a question the way they wanted it, so that
unwittingly the great dramatist did their will after all.  It was a part
of their plan that upon this occasion Shakespeare should play pool with
Doctor Johnson and the Emperor Nero, and hence it was that the coin bade
him repair to the library and chat with Lord Bacon.

"Hullo, William," said the Doctor, pocketing three balls on the break.
"How's our little Swanlet of Avon this afternoon?"

"Worn out," Shakespeare replied.  "I've been hard at work on a play this
morning, and I'm tired."

"All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy," said Nero, grinning
broadly.

"You are a bright spirit," said Shakespeare, with a sigh.  "I wish I had
thought to work you up into a tragedy."

"I've often wondered why you didn't," said Doctor Johnson.  "He'd have
made a superb tragedy, Nero would.  I don't believe there was any kind of
a crime he left uncommitted.  Was there, Emperor?"

"Yes.  I never wrote an English dictionary," returned the Emperor, dryly.
"I've murdered everything but English, though."

"I could have made a fine tragedy out of you," said Shakespeare.  "Just
think what a dreadful climax for a tragedy it would be, Johnson, to have
Nero, as the curtain fell, playing a violin solo."

"Pretty good," returned the Doctor.  "But what's the use of killing off
your audience that way?  It's better business to let 'em live, I say.
Suppose Nero gave a London audience that little musicale he provided at
Queen Elizabeth's Wednesday night.  How many purely mortal beings, do you
think, would have come out alive?"

"Not one," said Shakespeare.  "I was mighty glad that night that we were
an immortal band.  If it had been possible to kill us we'd have died then
and there."

"That's all right," said Nero, with a significant shake of his head.  "As
my friend Bacon makes Ingo say, 'Beware, my lord, of jealousy.'  You
never could play a garden hose, much less a fiddle."

"What do you mean my attributing those words to Bacon?" demanded
Shakespeare, getting red in the face.

"Oh, come now, William," remonstrated Nero.  "It's all right to pull the
wool over the eyes of the mortals.  That's what they're there for; but as
for us--we're all in the secret here.  What's the use of putting on
nonsense with us?"

"We'll see in a minute what the use is," retorted the Avonian.  "We'll
have Bacon down here."  Here he touched an electric button, and Charon
came in answer.

"Charon, bring Doctor Johnson the usual glass of ale.  Get some ice for
the Emperor, and ask Lord Bacon to step down here a minute."

"I don't want any ice," said Nero.

"Not now," retorted Shakespeare, "but you will in a few minutes.  When we
have finished with you, you'll want an iceberg.  I'm getting tired of
this idiotic talk about not having written my own works.  There's one
thing about Nero's music that I've never said, because I haven't wanted
to hurt his feelings, but since he has chosen to cast aspersions upon my
honesty I haven't any hesitation in saying it now.  I believe it was one
of his fiddlings that sent Nature into convulsions and caused the
destruction of Pompeii--so there!  Put that on your music rack and fiddle
it, my little Emperor."

Nero's face grew purple with anger, and if Shakespeare had been anything
but a shade he would have fared ill, for the enraged Roman, poising his
cue on high as though it were a lance, hurled it at the impertinent
dramatist with all his strength, and with such accuracy of aim withal
that it pierced the spot beneath which in life the heart of Shakespeare
used to beat.

"Good shot," said Doctor Johnson, nonchalantly.  "If you had been a
mortal, William, it would have been the end of you."

"You can't kill me," said Shakespeare, shrugging his shoulders.  "I know
seven dozen actors in the United States who are trying to do it, but they
can't.  I wish they'd try to kill a critic once in a while instead of me,
though," he added.  "I went over to Boston one night last week, and,
unknown to anybody, I waylaid a fellow who was to play Hamlet that night.
I drugged him, and went to the theatre and played the part myself.  It
was the coldest house you ever saw in your life.  When the audience did
applaud, it sounded like an ice-man chopping up ice with a small pick.
Several times I looked up at the galleries to see if there were not
icicles growing on them, it was so cold.  Well, I did the best could with
the part, and next morning watched curiously for the criticisms."

"Favorable?" asked the Doctor.

"They all dismissed me with a line," said the dramatist.  "Said my
conception of the part was not Shakespearian.  And that's criticism!"

"No," said the shade of Emerson, which had strolled in while Shakespeare
was talking, "that isn't criticism; that's Boston."

"Who discovered Boston, anyhow?" asked Doctor Johnson.  "It wasn't
Columbus, was it?"

"Oh no," said Emerson.  "Old Governor Winthrop is to blame for that.  When
he settled at Charlestown he saw the old Indian town of Shawmut across
the Charles."

"And Shawmut was the Boston microbe, was it?" asked Johnson.

"Yes," said Emerson.

"Spelt with a P, I suppose?" said Shakespeare.  "P-S-H-A-W, Pshaw, M-U-T,
mut, Pshawmut, so called because the inhabitants are always muttering
pshaw.  Eh?"

"Pretty good," said Johnson.  "I wish I'd said that."

"Well, tell Boswell," said Shakespeare.  "He'll make you say it, and
it'll be all the same in a hundred years."

Lord Bacon, accompanied by Charon and the ice for Nero and the ale for
Doctor Johnson, appeared as Shakespeare spoke.  The philosopher bowed
stiffly at Doctor Johnson, as though he hardly approved of him, extended
his left hand to Shakespeare, and stared coldly at Nero.

"Did you send for me, William?" he asked, languidly.

"I did," said Shakespeare.  "I sent for you because this imperial
violinist here says that you wrote _Othello_."

"What nonsense," said Bacon.  "The only plays of yours I wrote were
_Ham_--"

"Sh!" said Shakespeare, shaking his head madly.  "Hush.  Nobody's said
anything about that.  This is purely a discussion of _Othello_."

"The fiddling ex-Emperor Nero," said Bacon, loudly enough to be heard all
about the room, "is mistaken when he attributes _Othello_ to me."

"Aha, Master Nero!" cried Shakespeare triumphantly.  "What did I tell
you?"

"Then I erred, that is all," said Nero.  "And I apologize.  But really,
my Lord," he added, addressing Bacon, "I fancied I detected your fine
Italian hand in that."

"No.  I had nothing to do with the _Othello_," said Bacon.  "I never
really knew who wrote it."

"Never mind about that," whispered Shakespeare.  "You've said enough."

"That's good too," said Nero, with a chuckle.  "Shakespeare here claims
it as his own."

Bacon smiled and nodded approvingly at the blushing Avonian.

"Will always was having his little joke," he said.  "Eh, Will?  How we
fooled 'em on _Hamlet_, eh, my boy?  Ha-ha-ha!  It was the greatest joke
of the century."

"Well, the laugh is on you," said Doctor Johnson.  "If you wrote _Hamlet_
and didn't have the sense to acknowledge it, you present to my mind a
closer resemblance to Simple Simon than to Socrates.  For my part, I
don't believe you did write it, and I do believe that Shakespeare did.  I
can tell that by the spelling in the original edition."

"Shakespeare was my stenographer, gentlemen," said Lord Bacon.  "If you
want to know the whole truth, he did write _Hamlet_, literally.  But it
was at my dictation."

"I deny it," said Shakespeare.  "I admit you gave me a suggestion now and
then so as to keep it dull and heavy in spots, so that it would seem more
like a real tragedy than a comedy punctuated with deaths, but beyond that
you had nothing to do with it."

"I side with Shakespeare," put in Emerson.  "I've seen his autographs,
and no sane person would employ a man who wrote such a villanously bad
hand as an amanuensis.  It's no use, Bacon, we know a thing or two.  I'm
a New-Englander, I am."

"Well," said Bacon, shrugging his shoulders as though the results of the
controversy were immaterial to him, "have it so if you please.  There
isn't any money in Shakespeare these days, so what's the use of
quarrelling?  I wrote _Hamlet_, and Shakespeare knows it.  Others know
it.  Ah, here comes Sir Walter Raleigh.  We'll leave it to him.  He was
cognizant of the whole affair."

"I leave it to nobody," said Shakespeare, sulkily.

"What's the trouble?" asked Raleigh, sauntering up and taking a chair
under the cue-rack.  "Talking politics?"

"Not we," said Bacon.  "It's the old question about the authorship of
_Hamlet_.  Will, as usual, claims it for himself.  He'll be saying he
wrote Genesis next."

"Well, what if he does?" laughed Raleigh.  "We all know Will and his
droll ways."

"No doubt," put in Nero.  "But the question of _Hamlet_ always excites
him so that we'd like to have it settled once and for all as to who wrote
it.  Bacon says you know."

"I do," said Raleigh.

"Then settle it once and for all," said Bacon.  "I'm rather tired of the
discussion myself."

"Shall I tell 'em, Shakespeare?" asked Raleigh.

"It's immaterial to me," said Shakespeare, airily.  "If you wish--only
tell the truth."

"Very well," said Raleigh, lighting a cigar.  "I'm not ashamed of it.  I
wrote the thing myself."

There was a roar of laughter which, when it subsided, found Shakespeare
rapidly disappearing through the door, while all the others in the room
ordered various beverages at the expense of Lord Bacon.




CHAPTER III: WASHINGTON GIVES A DINNER


It was Washington's Birthday, and the gentleman who had the pleasure of
being Father of his Country decided to celebrate it at the Associated
Shades' floating palace on the Styx, as the Elysium _Weekly Gossip_, "a
Journal of Society," called it, by giving a dinner to a select number of
friends.  Among the invited guests were Baron Munchausen, Doctor Johnson,
Confucius, Napoleon Bonaparte, Diogenes, and Ptolemy.  Boswell was also
present, but not as a guest.  He had a table off to one side all to
himself, and upon it there were no china plates, silver spoons, knives,
forks, and dishes of fruit, but pads, pens, and ink in great quantity.  It
was evident that Boswell's reportorial duties did not end with his labors
in the mundane sphere.

The dinner was set down to begin at seven o'clock, so that the guests, as
was proper, sauntered slowly in between that hour and eight.  The menu
was particularly choice, the shades of countless canvas-back ducks,
terrapin, and sheep having been called into requisition, and cooked by no
less a person than Brillat-Savarin, in the hottest oven he could find in
the famous cooking establishment superintended by the government.
Washington was on hand early, sampling the olives and the celery and the
wines, and giving to Charon final instructions as to the manner in which
he wished things served.

The first guest to arrive was Confucius, and after him came Diogenes, the
latter in great excitement over having discovered a comparatively honest
man, whose name, however, he had not been able to ascertain, though he
was under the impression that it was something like Burpin, or Turpin, he
said.

At eight the brilliant company was arranged comfortably about the board.
An orchestra of five, under the leadership of Mozart, discoursed sweet
music behind a screen, and the feast of reason and flow of soul began.

"This is a great day," said Doctor Johnson, assisting himself copiously
to the olives.

"Yes," said Columbus, who was also a guest--"yes, it is a great day, but
it isn't a marker to a little day in October I wot of."

"Still sore on that point?" queried Confucius, trying the edge of his
knife on the shade of a salted almond.

"Oh no," said Columbus, calmly.  "I don't feel jealous of Washington.  He
is the Father of his Country and I am not.  I only discovered the orphan.
I knew the country before it had a father or a mother.  There wasn't
anybody who was willing to be even a sister to it when I knew it.  But G.
W. here took it in hand, groomed it down, spanked it when it needed it,
and started it off on the career which has made it worth while for me to
let my name be known in connection with it.  Why should I be jealous of
him?"

"I am sure I don't know why anybody anywhere should be jealous of anybody
else anyhow," said Diogenes.  "I never was and I never expect to be.
Jealousy is a quality that is utterly foreign to the nature of an honest
man.  Take my own case, for instance.  When I was what they call alive,
how did I live?"

"I don't know," said Doctor Johnson, turning his head as he spoke so that
Boswell could not fail to hear.  "I wasn't there."

Boswell nodded approvingly, chuckled slightly, and put the Doctor's
remark down for publication in _The Gossip_.

"You're doubtless right, there," retorted Diogenes.  "What you don't know
would fill a circulating library.  Well--I lived in a tub.  Now, if I
believed in envy, I suppose you think I'd be envious of people who live
in brownstone fronts with back yards and mortgages, eh?"

"I'd rather live under a mortgage than in a tub," said Bonaparte,
contemptuously.

"I know you would," said Diogenes.  "Mortgages never bothered you--but I
wouldn't.  In the first place, my tub was warm.  I never saw a house with
a brownstone front that was, except in summer, and then the owner cursed
it because it was so.  My tub had no plumbing in it to get out of order.
It hadn't any flights of stairs in it that had to be climbed after
dinner, or late at night when I came home from the club.  It had no front
door with a wandering key-hole calculated to elude the key ninety-nine
times out of every hundred efforts to bring the two together and
reconcile their differences, in order that their owner may get into his
own house late at night.  It wasn't chained down to any particular
neighborhood, as are most brownstone fronts.  If the neighborhood ran
down, I could move my tub off into a better neighborhood, and it never
lost value through the deterioration of its location.  I never had to pay
taxes on it, and no burglar was ever so hard up that he thought of
breaking into my habitation to rob me.  So why should I be jealous of the
brownstone-house dwellers?  I am a philosopher, gentlemen.  I tell you,
philosophy is the thief of jealousy, and I had the good-luck to find it
out early in life."

"There is much in what you say," said Confucius.  "But there's another
side to the matter.  If a man is an aristocrat by nature, as I was, his
neighborhood never could run down.  Wherever he lived would be the swell
section, so that really your last argument isn't worth a stewed icicle."

"Stewed icicles are pretty good, though," said Baron Munchausen, with an
ecstatic smack of his lips.  "I've eaten them many a time in the polar
regions."

"I have no doubt of it," put in Doctor Johnson.  "You've eaten fried
pyramids in Africa, too, haven't you?"

"Only once," said the Baron, calmly.  "And I can't say I enjoyed them.
They are rather heavy for the digestion."

"That's so," said Ptolemy.  "I've had experience with pyramids myself."

"You never ate one, did you, Ptolemy?" queried Bonaparte.

"Not raw," said Ptolemy, with a chuckle.  "Though I've been tempted many
a time to call for a second joint of the Sphinx."

There was a laugh at this, in which all but Baron Munchausen joined.

"I think it is too bad," said the Baron, as the laughter subsided--"I
think it is very much too bad that you shades have brought mundane
prejudice with you into this sphere.  Just because some people with
finite minds profess to disbelieve my stories, you think it well to be
sceptical yourselves.  I don't care, however, whether you believe me or
not.  The fact remains that I have eaten one fried pyramid and countless
stewed icicles, and the stewed icicles were finer than any diamond-back
rat Confucius ever had served at a state banquet."

"Where's Shakespeare to-night?" asked Confucius, seeing that the Baron
was beginning to lose his temper, and wishing to avoid trouble by
changing the subject.  "Wasn't he invited, General?"

"Yes," said Washington, "he was invited, but he couldn't come.  He had to
go over the river to consult with an autograph syndicate they've formed
in New York.  You know, his autographs sell for about one thousand
dollars apiece, and they're trying to get up a scheme whereby he shall
contribute an autograph a week to the syndicate, to be sold to the
public.  It seems like a rich scheme, but there's one thing in the way.
Posthumous autographs haven't very much of a market, because the mortals
can't be made to believe that they are genuine; but the syndicate has got
a man at work trying to get over that.  These Yankees are a mighty
inventive lot, and they think perhaps the scheme can be worked.  The
Yankee _is_ an inventive genius."

"It was a Yankee invented that tale about your not being able to
prevaricate, wasn't it, George?" asked Diogenes.

Washington smiled acquiescence, and Doctor Johnson returned to
Shakespeare.

"I'd rather have a morning-glory vine than one of Shakespeare's
autographs," said he.  "They are far prettier, and quite as legible."

"Mortals wouldn't," said Bonaparte.

"What fools they be!" chuckled Johnson.

At this point the canvas-back ducks were served, one whole shade of a
bird for each guest.

"Fall to, gentlemen," said Washington, gazing hungrily at his bird.  "When
canvas-back ducks are on the table conversation is not required of any
one."

"It is fortunate for us that we have so considerate a host," said
Confucius, unfastening his robe and preparing to do justice to the fare
set before him.  "I have dined often, but never before with one who was
willing to let me eat a bird like this in silence.  Washington, here's to
you.  May your life be chequered with birthdays, and may ours be equally
well supplied with feasts like this at your expense!"

The toast was drained, and the diners fell to as requested.

"They're great, aren't they?" whispered Bonaparte to Munchausen.

"Well, rather," returned the Baron.  "I don't see why the mortals don't
erect a statue to the canvas-back."

"Did anybody at this board ever have as much canvas-back duck as he could
eat?" asked Doctor Johnson.

"Yes," said the Baron.  "I did.  Once."

"Oh, you!" sneered Ptolemy.  "You've had everything."

"Except the mumps," retorted Munchausen.  "But, honestly, I did once have
as much canvas-back duck as I could eat."

"It must have cost you a million," said Bonaparte.  "But even then they'd
be cheap, especially to a man like yourself who could perform miracles.
If I could have performed miracles with the ease which was so
characteristic of all your efforts, I'd never have died at St. Helena."

"What's the odds where you died?" said Doctor Johnson.  "If it hadn't
been at St. Helena it would have been somewhere else, and you'd have
found death as stuffy in one place as in another."

"Don't let's talk of death," said Washington.  "I am sure the Baron's
tale of how he came to have enough canvas-back is more diverting."

"I've no doubt it is more perverting," said Johnson.

"It happened this way," said Munchausen.  "I was out for sport, and I got
it.  I was alone, my servant having fallen ill, which was unfortunate,
since I had always left the filling of my cartridge-box to him, and
underestimated its capacity.  I started at six in the morning, and, not
having hunted for several months, was not in very good form, so, no game
appearing for a time, I took a few practice shots, trying to snip off the
slender tops of the pine-trees that I encountered with my bullets,
succeeding tolerably well for one who was a little rusty, bringing down
ninety-nine out of the first one hundred and one, and missing the
remaining two by such a close margin that they swayed to and fro as
though fanned by a slight breeze.  As I fired my one hundred and first
shot what should I see before me but a flock of these delicate birds
floating upon the placid waters of the bay!"

"Was this the Bay of Biscay, Baron?" queried Columbus, with a covert
smile at Ptolemy.

"I counted them," said the Baron, ignoring the question, "and there were
just sixty-eight.  'Here's a chance for the record, Baron,' said I to
myself, and then I made ready to shoot them.  Imagine my dismay,
gentlemen, when I discovered that while I had plenty of powder left I had
used up all my bullets.  Now, as you may imagine, to a man with no
bullets at hand, the sight of sixty-eight fat canvas-backs is hardly
encouraging, but I was resolved to have every one of those birds; the
question was, how shall I do it?  I never can think on water, so I
paddled quietly ashore and began to reflect.  As I lay there deep in
thought, I saw lying upon the beach before me a superb oyster, and as
reflection makes me hungry I seized upon the bivalve and swallowed him.
As he went down something stuck in my throat, and, extricating it, what
should it prove to be but a pearl of surpassing beauty.  My first thought
was to be content with my day's find.  A pearl worth thousands surely was
enough to satisfy the most ardent lover of sport; but on looking up I saw
those ducks still paddling contentedly about, and I could not bring
myself to give them up.  Suddenly the idea came, the pearl is as large as
a bullet, and fully as round.  Why not use it?  Then, as thoughts come to
me in shoals, I next reflected, 'Ah--but this is only one bullet as
against sixty-eight birds:' immediately a third thought came, 'why not
shoot them all with a single bullet?  It is possible, though not
probable.'  I snatched out a pad of paper and a pencil, made a rapid
calculation based on the doctrine of chances, and proved to my own
satisfaction that at some time or another within the following two weeks
those birds would doubtless be sitting in a straight line and paddling
about, Indian file, for an instant.  I resolved to await that instant.  I
loaded my gun with the pearl and a sufficient quantity of powder to send
the charge through every one of the ducks if, perchance, the first duck
were properly hit.  To pass over wearisome details, let me say that it
happened just as I expected.  I had one week and six days to wait, but
finally the critical moment came.  It was at midnight, but fortunately
the moon was at the full, and I could see as plainly as though it had
been day.  The moment the ducks were in line I aimed and fired.  They
every one squawked, turned over, and died.  My pearl had pierced the
whole sixty-eight."

Boswell blushed.

"Ahem!" said Doctor Johnson.  "It was a pity to lose the pearl."

"That," said Munchausen, "was the most interesting part of the story.  I
had made a second calculation in order to save the pearl.  I deduced the
amount of powder necessary to send the gem through sixty-seven and a half
birds, and my deduction was strictly accurate.  It fulfilled its mission
of death on sixty-seven and was found buried in the heart of the sixty-
eighth, a trifle discolored, but still a pearl, and worth a king's
ransom."

Napoleon gave a derisive laugh, and the other guests sat with incredulity
depicted upon every line of their faces.

"Do you believe that story yourself, Baron?" asked Confucius.

"Why not?" asked the Baron.  "Is there anything improbable in it?  Why
should you disbelieve it?  Look at our friend Washington here.  Is there
any one here who knows more about truth than he does?  He doesn't
disbelieve it.  He's the only man at this table who treats me like a man
of honor."

"He's host and has to," said Johnson, shrugging his shoulders.

"Well, Washington, let me put the direct question to you," said the
Baron.  "Say you aren't host and are under no obligation to be courteous.
Do you believe I haven't been telling the truth?"

"My dear Munchausen," said the General, "don't ask me.  I'm not an
authority.  I can't tell a lie--not even when I hear one.  If you say
your story is true, I must believe it, of course; but--ah--really, if I
were you, I wouldn't tell it again unless I could produce the pearl and
the wish-bone of one of the ducks at least."

Whereupon, as the discussion was beginning to grow acrimonious,
Washington hailed Charon, and, ordering a boat, invited his guests to
accompany him over into the world of realities, where they passed the
balance of the evening haunting a vaudeville performance at one of the
London music-halls.




CHAPTER IV: HAMLET MAKES A SUGGESTION


It was a beautiful night on the Styx, and the silvery surface of that
picturesque stream was dotted with gondolas, canoes, and other craft to
an extent that made Charon feel like a highly prosperous savings-bank.
Within the house-boat were gathered a merry party, some of whom were on
mere pleasure bent, others of whom had come to listen to a debate, for
which the entertainment committee had provided, between the venerable
patriarch Noah and the late eminent showman P. T. Barnum.  The question
to be debated was upon the resolution passed by the committee, that "The
Animals of the Antediluvian Period were Far More Attractive for Show
Purposes than those of Modern Make," and, singular to relate, the
affirmative was placed in the hands of Mr. Barnum, while to Noah had
fallen the task of upholding the virtues of the modern freak.  It is with
the party on mere pleasure bent that we have to do upon this occasion.
The proceedings of the debating-party are as yet in the hands of the
official stenographer, but will be made public as soon as they are ready.

The pleasure-seeking group were gathered in the smoking-room of the club,
which was, indeed, a smoking-room of a novel sort, the invention of an
unknown shade, who had sold all the rights to the club through a third
party, anonymously, preferring, it seemed, to remain in the Elysian
world, as he had been in the mundane sphere, a mute inglorious Edison.  It
was a simple enough scheme, and, for a wonder, no one in the world of
substantialities has thought to take it up.  The smoke was stored in
reservoirs, just as if it were so much gas or water, and was supplied on
the hot-air furnace principle from a huge furnace in the hold of the
house-boat, into which tobacco was shovelled by the hired man of the club
night and day.  The smoke from the furnace, carried through flues to the
smoking-room, was there received and stored in the reservoirs, with each
of which was connected one dozen rubber tubes, having at their ends amber
mouth-pieces.  Upon each of these mouth-pieces was arranged a small meter
registering the amount of smoke consumed through it, and for this the
consumer paid so much a foot.  The value of the plan was threefold.  It
did away entirely with ashes, it saved to the consumers the value of the
unconsumed tobacco that is represented by the unsmoked cigar ends, and it
averted the possibility of cigarettes.

Enjoying the benefits of this arrangement upon the evening in question
were Shakespeare, Cicero, Henry VIII., Doctor Johnson, and others.  Of
course Boswell was present too, for a moment, with his note-book, and
this fact evoked some criticism from several of the smokers.

"You ought to be up-stairs in the lecture-room, Boswell," said
Shakespeare, as the great biographer took his seat behind his friend the
Doctor.  "Doesn't the _Gossip_ want a report of the debate?"

"It does," said Boswell; "but the _Gossip_ endeavors always to get the
most interesting items of the day, and Doctor Johnson has informed me
that he expects to be unusually witty this evening, so I have come here."

"Excuse me for saying it, Boswell," said the Doctor, getting red in the
face over this unexpected confession, "but, really, you talk too much."

"That's good," said Cicero.  "Stick that down, Boz, and print it.  It's
the best thing Johnson has said this week."

Boswell smiled weakly, and said: "But, Doctor, you did say that, you
know.  I can prove it, too, for you told me some of the things you were
going to say.  Don't you remember, you were going to lead Shakespeare up
to making the remark that he thought the English language was the
greatest language in creation, whereupon you were going to ask him why he
didn't learn it?"

"Get out of here, you idiot!" roared the Doctor.  "You're enough to give
a man apoplexy."

"You're not going back on the ladder by which you have climbed, are you,
Samuel?" queried Boswell, earnestly.

"The wha-a-t?" cried the Doctor, angrily.  "The ladder--on which I
climbed?  You?  Great heavens!  That it should come to this! . . . Leave
the room--instantly!  Ladder!  By all that is beautiful--the ladder upon
which I, Samuel Johnson, the tallest person in letters, have climbed!  Go!
Do you hear?"

Boswell rose meekly, and, with tears coursing down his cheeks, left the
room.

"That's one on you, Doctor," said Cicero, wrapping his toga about him.  "I
think you ought to order up three baskets of champagne on that."

"I'll order up three baskets full of Boswell's remains if he ever dares
speak like that again!" retorted the Doctor, shaking with anger.  "He--my
ladder--why, it's ridiculous."

"Yes," said Shakespeare, dryly.  "That's why we laugh."

"You were a little hard on him, Doctor," said Henry VIII.  "He was a
valuable man to you.  He had a great eye for your greatness."

"Yes.  If there's any feature of Boswell that's greater than his nose and
ears, it's his great I," said the Doctor.

"You'd rather have him change his I to a U, I presume," said Napoleon,
quietly.

The Doctor waved his hand impatiently.  "Let's drop him," he said.
"Dropping one's biographer isn't without precedent.  As soon as any man
ever got to know Napoleon well enough to write him up he sent him to the
front, where he could get a little lead in his system."

"I wish I had had a Boswell all the same," said Shakespeare.  "Then the
world would have known the truth about me."

"It wouldn't if he'd relied on your word for it," retorted the Doctor.
"Hullo! here's Hamlet."

As the Doctor spoke, in very truth the melancholy Dane appeared in the
doorway, more melancholy of aspect than ever.

"What's the matter with you?" asked Cicero, addressing the new-comer.
"Haven't you got that poison out of your system yet?"

"Not entirely," said Hamlet, with a sigh; "but it isn't that that's
bothering me.  It's Fate."

"We'll get out an injunction against Fate if you like," said Blackstone.
"Is it persecution, or have you deserved it?"

"I think it's persecution," said Hamlet.  "I never wronged Fate in my
life, and why she should pursue me like a demon through all eternity is a
thing I can't understand."

"Maybe Ophelia is back of it," suggested Doctor Johnson.  "These women
have a great deal of sympathy for each other, and, candidly, I think you
behaved pretty rudely to Ophelia.  It's a poor way to show your love for
a young woman, running a sword through her father every night for pay,
and driving the girl to suicide with equal frequency, just to show
theatre-goers what a smart little Dane you can be if you try."

"'Tisn't me does all that," returned Hamlet.  "I only did it once, and
even then it wasn't as bad as Shakespeare made it out to be."

"I put it down just as it was," said Shakespeare, hotly, "and you can't
dispute it."

"Yes, he can," said Yorick.  "You made him tell Horatio he knew me well,
and he never met me in his life."

"I never told Horatio anything of the sort," said Hamlet.  "I never
entered the graveyard even, and I can prove an alibi."

"And, what's more, he couldn't have made the remark the way Shakespeare
has it, anyhow," said Yorick, "and for a very good reason.  I wasn't
buried in that graveyard, and Hamlet and I can prove an alibi for the
skull, too."

"It was a good play, just the same," said Cicero.

"Very," put in Doctor Johnson.  "It cured me of insomnia."

"Well, if you don't talk in your sleep, the play did a Christian service
to the world," retorted Shakespeare.  "But, really, Hamlet, I thought I
did the square thing by you in that play.  I meant to, anyhow; and if it
has made you unhappy, I'm honestly sorry."

"Spoken like a man," said Yorick.

"I don't mind the play so much," said Hamlet, "but the way I'm
represented by these fellows who play it is the thing that rubs me the
wrong way.  Why, I even hear that there's a troupe out in the western
part of the United States that puts the thing on with three Hamlets, two
ghosts, and a pair of blood-hounds.  It's called the Uncle-Tom-Hamlet
Combination, and instead of my falling in love with one crazy Ophelia, I
am made to woo three dusky maniacs named Topsy on a canvas ice-floe,
while the blood-hounds bark behind the scenes.  What sort of treatment is
that for a man of royal lineage?"

"It's pretty rough," said Napoleon.  "As the poet ought to have said,
'Oh, Hamlet, Hamlet, what crimes are committed in thy name!'"

"I feel as badly about the play as Hamlet does," said Shakespeare, after
a moment of silent thought.  "I don't bother much about this wild Western
business, though, because I think the introduction of the bloodhounds and
the Topsies makes us both more popular in that region than we should be
otherwise.  What I object to is the way we are treated by these so-called
first-class intellectual actors in London and other great cities.  I've
seen Hamlet done before a highly cultivated audience, and, by Jove, it
made me blush."

"Me too," sighed Hamlet.  "I have seen a man who had a walk on him that
suggested spring-halt and locomotor ataxia combined impersonating my
graceful self in a manner that drove me almost crazy.  I've heard my 'To
be or not to be' soliloquy uttered by a famous tragedian in tones that
would make a graveyard yawn at mid-day, and if there was any way in which
I could get even with that man I'd do it."

"It seems to me," said Blackstone, assuming for the moment a highly
judicial manner--"it seems to me that Shakespeare, having got you into
this trouble, ought to get you out of it."

"But how?" said Shakespeare, earnestly.  "That's the point.  Heaven knows
I'm willing enough."

Hamlet's face suddenly brightened as though illuminated with an idea.
Then he began to dance about the room with an expression of glee that
annoyed Doctor Johnson exceedingly.

"I wish Darwin could see you now," the Doctor growled.  "A kodak picture
of you would prove his arguments conclusively."

"Rail on, O philosopher!" retorted Hamlet.  "Rail on!  I mind your
railings not, for I the germ of an idea have got."

"Well, go quarantine yourself," said the Doctor.  "I'd hate to have one
of your idea microbes get hold of me."

"What's the scheme?" asked Shakespeare.

"You can write a play for _me_!" cried Hamlet.  "Make it a farce-tragedy.
Take the modern player for your hero, and let _me_ play _him_.  I'll bait
him through four acts.  I'll imitate his walk.  I'll cultivate his voice.
We'll have the first act a tank act, and drop the hero into the tank.  The
second act can be in a saw-mill, and we can cut his hair off on a buzz-
saw.  The third act can introduce a spile-driver with which to drive his
hat over his eyes and knock his brains down into his lungs.  The fourth
act can be at Niagara Falls, and we'll send him over the falls; and for a
grand climax we can have him guillotined just after he has swallowed a
quart of prussic acid and a spoonful of powdered glass.  Do that for me,
William, and you are forgiven.  I'll play it for six hundred nights in
London, for two years in New York, and round up with a one-night stand in
Boston."

"It sounds like a good scheme," said Shakespeare, meditatively.  "What
shall we call it?"

"Call it _Irving_," said Eugene Aram, who had entered.  "I too have
suffered."

"And let me be Hamlet's understudy," said Charles the First, earnestly.

"Done!" said Shakespeare, calling for a pad and pencil.

And as the sun rose upon the Styx the next morning the Bard of Avon was
to be seen writing a comic chorus to be sung over the moribund tragedian
by the shades of Charles, Aram, and other eminent deceased heroes of the
stage, with which his new play of _Irving_ was to be brought to an
appropriate close.

This play has not as yet found its way upon the boards, but any
enterprising manager who desires to consider it may address

_Hamlet_,
_The House-Boat_,
_Hades-on-the-Styx_.

He is sure to get a reply by return mail, unless Mephistopheles
interferes, which is not unlikely, since Mephistopheles is said to have
been much pleased with the manner in which the eminent tragedian has put
him before the British and American public.




CHAPTER V: THE HOUSE COMMITTEE DISCUSS THE POETS


"There's one thing this house-boat needs," wrote Homer in the complaint-
book that adorned the centre-table in the reading-room, "and that is a
Poets' Corner.  There are smoking-rooms for those who smoke, billiard-
rooms for those who play billiards, and a card-room for those who play
cards.  I do not smoke, I can't play billiards, and I do not know a trey
of diamonds from a silver salver.  All I can do is write poetry.  Why
discriminate against me?  By all means let us have a Poets' Corner, where
a man can be inspired in peace."

For four days this entry lay in the book apparently unnoticed.  On the
fifth day the following lines, signed by Samson, appeared:

"I approve of Homer's suggestion.  There should be a Poets' Corner here.
Then the rest of us could have some comfort.  While playing _vingt-et-un_
with Diogenes in the card-room on Friday evening a poetic member of this
club was taken with a most violent fancy, and it required the combined
efforts of Diogenes and myself, assisted by the janitor, to remove the
frenzied and objectionable member from the room.  The habit some of our
poets have acquired of giving way to their inspirations all over the club-
house should be stopped, and I know of no better way to accomplish this
desirable end than by the adoption of Homer's suggestion.  Therefore I
second the motion."

Of course the suggestion of two members so prominent as Homer and Samson
could not well he ignored by the house committee, and it reluctantly took
the subject in hand at an early meeting.

"I find here," said Demosthenes to the chairman, as the committee
gathered, "a suggestion from Homer and Samson that this house-boat be
provided with a Poets' Corner.  I do not know that I approve of the
suggestion myself, but in order to bring it before the committee for
debate I am willing to make a motion that the request be granted."

"Excuse me," put in Doctor Johnson, "but where do you find that
suggestion?  'Here' is not very definite.  Where _is_ 'here'?"

"In the complaint-book, which I hold in my hand," returned Demosthenes,
putting a pebble in his mouth so that he might enunciate more clearly.

A frown ruffled the serenity of Doctor Johnson's brow.

"In the complaint-book, eh?" he said, slowly.  "I thought house
committees were not expected to pay any attention to complaints in
complaint-books.  I never heard of its being done before."

"Well, I can't say that I have either," replied Demosthenes, chewing
thoughtfully on the pebble, "but I suppose complaint-books are the places
for complaints.  You don't expect people to write serial stories or
dialect poems in them, do you?"

"That isn't the point, as the man said to the assassin who tried to stab
him with the hilt of his dagger," retorted Doctor Johnson, with some
asperity.  "Of course, complaint-books are for the reception of
complaints--nobody disputes that.  What I want to have determined is
whether it is necessary or proper for the complaints to go further."

"I fancy we have a legal right to take the matter up," said Blackstone,
wearily; "though I don't know of any precedent for such action.  In all
the clubs I have known the house committees have invariably taken the
ground that the complaint-book was established to guard them against the
annoyance of hearing complaints.  This one, however, has been forced upon
us by our secretary, and in view of the age of the complainants I think
we cannot well decline to give them a specific answer.  Respect for age
is _de rigueur_ at all times, like clean hands.  I'll second the motion."

"I think the Poets' Corner entirely unnecessary," said Confucius.  "This
isn't a class organization, and we should resist any effort to make it or
any portion of it so.  In fact, I will go further and state that it is my
opinion that if we do any legislating in the matter at all, we ought to
discourage rather than encourage these poets.  They are always littering
the club up with themselves.  Only last Wednesday I came here with a
guest--no less a person than a recently deceased Emperor of China--and
what was the first sight that greeted our eyes?"

"I give it up," said Doctor Johnson.  "It must have been a catacornered
sight, whatever it was, if the Emperor's eyes slanted like yours."

"No personalities, please, Doctor," said Sir Walter Raleigh, the
chairman, rapping the table vigorously with the shade of a handsome gavel
that had once adorned the Roman Senate-chamber.

"He's only a Chinaman!" muttered Johnson.

"What was the sight that greeted your eyes, Confucius?" asked Cassius.

"Omar Khayyam stretched over five of the most comfortable chairs in the
library," returned Confucius; "and when I ventured to remonstrate with
him he lost his temper, and said I'd spoiled the whole second volume of
the Rubaiyat.  I told him he ought to do his rubaiyatting at home, and he
made a scene, to avoid which I hastened with my guest over to the
billiard-room; and there, stretched at full length on the pool-table, was
Robert Burns trying to write a sonnet on the cloth with chalk in less
time than Villon could turn out another, with two lines start, on the
billiard-table with the same writing materials.  Now I ask you,
gentlemen, if these things are to be tolerated?  Are they not rather to
be reprehended, whether I am a Chinaman or not?"

"What would you have us do, then?" asked Sir Walter Raleigh, a little
nettled.  "Exclude poets altogether?  I was one, remember."

"Oh, but not much of one, Sir Walter," put in Doctor Johnson,
deprecatingly.

"No," said Confucius.  "I don't want them excluded, but they should be
controlled.  You don't let a shoemaker who has become a member of this
club turn the library sofas into benches and go pegging away at
boot-making, so why should you let the poets turn the place into a verse
factory?  That's what I'd like to know."

"I don't know but what your point is well taken," said Blackstone,
"though I can't say I think your parallels are very parallel.  A
shoemaker, my dear Confucius, is somewhat different from a poet."

"Certainly," said Doctor Johnson.  "Very different--in fact, different
enough to make a conundrum of the question--what is the difference
between a shoemaker and a poet?  One makes the shoes and the other shakes
the muse--all the difference in the world.  Still, I don't see how we can
exclude the poets.  It is the very democracy of this club that gives it
life.  We take in everybody--peer, poet, or what not.  To say that this
man shall not enter because he is this or that or the other thing would
result in our ultimately becoming a class organization, which, as
Confucius himself says, we are not and must not be.  If we put out the
poet to please the sage, we'll soon have to put out the sage to please
the fool, and so on.  We'll keep it up, once the precedent is
established, until finally it will become a class club entirely--a
Plumbers' Club, for instance--and how absurd that would be in Hades!  No,
gentlemen, it can't be done.  The poets must and shall be preserved."

"What's the objection to class clubs, anyhow?" asked Cassius.  "I don't
object to them.  If we could have had political organizations in my day I
might not have had to fall on my sword to get out of keeping an
engagement I had no fancy for.  Class clubs have their uses."

"No doubt," said Demosthenes.  "Have all the class clubs you want, but do
not make one of this.  An Authors' Club, where none but authors are
admitted, is a good thing.  The members learn there that there are other
authors than themselves.  Poets' Clubs are a good thing; they bring poets
into contact with each other, and they learn what a bore it is to have to
listen to a poet reading his own poem.  Pugilists' Clubs are good; so are
all other class clubs; but so also are clubs like our own, which takes in
all who are worthy.  Here a poet can talk poetry as much as he wants, but
at the same time he hears something besides poetry.  We must stick to our
original idea."

"Then let us do something to abate the nuisance of which I complain,"
said Confucius.  "Can't we adopt a house rule that poets must not be
inspired between the hours of 11 A.M. and 5 P.M., or in the evening after
eight; that any poet discovered using more than five arm-chairs in the
composition of a quatrain will be charged two oboli an hour for each
chair in excess of that number; and that the billiard-marker shall be
required to charge a premium of three times the ordinary fee for tables
used by versifiers in lieu of writing-pads?"

"That wouldn't be a bad idea," said Sir Walter Raleigh.  "I, as a poet
would not object to that.  I do all my work at home, anyhow."

"There's another phase of this business that we haven't considered yet,
and it's rather important," said Demosthenes, taking a fresh pebble out
of his bonbonniere.  "That's in the matter of stationery.  This club,
like all other well-regulated clubs, provides its members with a suitable
supply of writing materials.  Charon informs me that the waste-baskets
last week turned out forty-two reams of our best correspondence paper on
which these poets had scribbled the first draft of their verses.  Now I
don't think the club should furnish the poets with the raw material for
their poems any more than, to go back to Confucius's shoemaker, it should
supply leather for our cobblers."

"What do you mean by raw material for poems?" asked Sir Walter, with a
frown.

"Pen, ink, and paper.  What else?" said Demosthenes.

"Doesn't it take brains to write a poem?" said Raleigh.

"Doesn't it take brains to make a pair of shoes?" retorted Demosthenes,
swallowing a pebble in his haste.

"They've got a right to the stationery, though," put in Blackstone.  "A
clear legal right to it.  If they choose to write poems on the paper
instead of boring people to death with letters, as most of us do, that's
their own affair."

"Well, they're very wasteful," said Demosthenes.

"We can meet that easily enough," observed Cassius.  "Furnish each
writing-table with a slate.  I should think they'd be pleased with that.
It's so much easier to rub out the wrong word."

"Most poets prefer to rub out the right word," growled Confucius.
"Besides, I shall never consent to slates in this house-boat.  The
squeaking of the pencils would be worse than the poems themselves."

"That's true," said Cassius.  "I never thought of that.  If a dozen poets
got to work on those slates at once, a fife corps wouldn't be a
circumstance to them."

"Well, it all goes to prove what I have thought all along," said Doctor
Johnson.  "Homer's idea is a good one, and Samson was wise in backing it
up.  The poets need to be concentrated somewhere where they will not be a
nuisance to other people, and where other people will not be a nuisance
to them.  Homer ought to have a place to compose in where the _vingt-et-
un_ players will not interrupt his frenzies, and, on the other hand, the
_vingt-et-un_ and other players should be protected from the wooers of
the muse.  I'll vote to have the Poets' Corner, and in it I move that
Cassius's slate idea be carried out.  It will be a great saving, and if
the corner we select be far enough away from the other corners of the
club, the squeaking of the slate-pencils need bother no one."

"I agree to that," said Blackstone.  "Only I think it should be
understood that, in granting the petition of the poets, we do not bind
ourselves to yield to doctors and lawyers and shoemakers and plumbers in
case they should each want a corner to themselves."

"A very wise idea," said Sir Walter.  Whereupon the resolution was
suitably worded, and passed unanimously.

Just where the Poets' Corner is to be located the members of the
committee have not as yet decided, although Confucius is strongly in
favor of having it placed in a dingy situated a quarter of a mile astern
of the house-boat, and connected therewith by a slight cord, which can be
easily cut in case the squeaking of the poets' slate-pencils becomes too
much for the nervous system of the members who have no corner of their
own.




CHAPTER VI: SOME THEORIES, DARWINIAN AND OTHERWISE


"I observe," said Doctor Darwin, looking up from a perusal of an asbestos
copy of the _London Times_--"I observe that an American professor has
discovered that monkeys talk.  I consider that a very interesting fact."

"It undoubtedly is," observed Doctor Livingstone, "though hardly new.  I
never said anything about it over in the other world, but I discovered
years ago in Africa that monkeys were quite as well able to hold a
sustained conversation with each other as most men are."

"And I, too," put in Baron Munchausen, "have frequently conversed with
monkeys.  I made myself a master of their idioms during my brief sojourn
in--ah--in--well, never mind where.  I never could remember the names of
places.  The interesting point is that at one period of my life I was a
master of the monkey language.  I have even gone so far as to write a
sonnet in Simian, which was quite as intelligible to the uneducated as
nine-tenths of the sonnets written in English or American."

"Do you mean to say that you could acquire the monkey accent?" asked
Doctor Darwin, immediately interested.

"In most instances," returned the Baron, suavely, "though of course not
in all.  I found the same difficulty in some cases that the German or the
Chinaman finds when he tries to speak French.  A Chinaman can no more say
Trocadero, for instance, as the Frenchman says it, than he can fly.  That
peculiar throaty aspirate the Frenchman gives to the first syllable, as
though it were spelled trhoque, is utterly beyond the Chinese--and beyond
the American, too, whose idea of the tonsillar aspirate leads him to
speak of the trochedeero, naturally falling back upon troches to help him
out of his laryngeal difficulties."

"You ought to have been on the staff of _Punch_, Baron," said Thackeray,
quietly.  "That joke would have made you immortal."

"I _am_ immortal," said the Baron.  "But to return to our discussion of
the Simian tongue: as I was saying, there were some little points about
the accent that I could never get, and, as in the case of the German and
Chinaman with the French language, the trouble was purely physical.  When
you consider that in polite Simian society most of the talkers converse
while swinging by their tails from the limb of a tree, with a sort of
droning accent, which results from their swaying to and fro, you will see
at once why it was that I, deprived by nature of the necessary apparatus
with which to suspend myself in mid-air, was unable to quite catch the
quality which gives its chief charm to monkey-talk."

"I should hardly think that a man of your fertile resources would have
let so small a thing as that stand in his way," said Doctor Livingstone.
"When a man is able to make a reputation for himself like yours, in which
material facts are never allowed to interfere with his doing what he sets
out to do, he ought not to be daunted by the need of a tail.  If you
could make a cherry-tree grow out of a deer's head, I fail to see why you
could not personally grow a tail, or anything else you might happen to
need for the attainment of your ends."

"I was not so anxious to get the accent as all that," returned the Baron.
"I don't think it is necessary for a man to make a monkey of himself just
for the pleasure of mastering a language.  Reasoning similarly, a man to
master the art of braying in a fashion comprehensible to the jackass of
average intellect should make a jackass of himself, cultivate his ears,
and learn to kick, so as properly to punctuate his sentences after the
manner of most conversational beasts of that kind."

"Then you believe that jackasses talk, too, do you?" asked Doctor Darwin.

"Why not?" said the Baron.  "If monkeys, why not donkeys?  Certainly they
do.  All creatures have some means of communicating their thoughts to
each other.  Why man in his conceit should think otherwise I don't know,
unless it be that the birds and beasts in their conceit probably think
that they alone of all the creatures in the world can talk."

"I haven't a doubt," said Doctor Livingstone, "that monkeys listening to
men and women talking think they are only jabbering."

"They're not far from wrong in most cases if they do," said Doctor
Johnson, who up to this time had been merely an interested listener.
"I've thought that many a time myself."

"Which is perhaps, in a slight degree, a confirmation of my theory," put
in Darwin.  "If Doctor Johnson's mind runs in the same channels that the
monkey's mind runs in, why may we not say that Doctor Johnson, being a
man, has certain qualities of the monkey, and is therefore, in a sense,
of the same strain?"

"You may say what you please," retorted Johnson, wrathfully, "but I'll
make you prove what you say about me."

"I wouldn't if I were you," said Doctor Livingstone, in a peace-making
spirit.  "It would not be a pleasant task for you, compelling our friend
to prove you descended from the ape.  I should think you'd prefer to make
him leave it unproved."

"Have monkeys Boswells?" queried Thackeray.

"I don't know anything about 'em," said Johnson, petulantly.

"No more do I," said Darwin, "and I didn't mean to be offensive, my dear
Johnson.  If I claim Simian ancestry for you, I claim it equally for
myself."

"Well, I'm no snob," said Johnson, unmollified.  "If you want to brag
about your ancestors, do it.  Leave mine alone.  Stick to your own
genealogical orchard."

"Well, I believe fully that we are all descended from the ape," said
Munchausen.  "There isn't any doubt in my mind that before the flood all
men had tails.  Noah had a tail.  Shem, Ham, and Japheth had tails.  It's
perfectly reasonable to believe it.  The Ark in a sense proved it.  It
would have been almost impossible for Noah and his sons to construct the
Ark in the time they did with the assistance of only two hands apiece.
Think, however, of how fast they could work with the assistance of that
third arm.  Noah could hammer a clapboard on to the Ark with two hands
while grasping a saw and cutting a new board or planing it off with his
tail.  So with the others.  We all know how much a third hand would help
us at times."

"But how do you account for its disappearance?" put in Doctor
Livingstone.  "Is it likely they would dispense with such a useful
adjunct?"

"No, it isn't; but there are various ways of accounting for its loss,"
said Munchausen.  "They may have overworked it building the Ark; Shem,
Ham, or Japheth may have had his caught in the door of the Ark and cut
off in the hurry of the departure; plenty of things may have happened to
eliminate it.  Men lose their hair and their teeth; why might not a man
lose a tail?  Scientists say that coming generations far in the future
will be toothless and bald.  Why may it not be that through causes
unknown to us we are similarly deprived of something our forefathers
had?"

"The only reason for man's losing his hair is that he wears a hat all the
time," said Livingstone.  "The Derby hat is the enemy of hair.  It is
hot, and dries up the scalp.  You might as well try to raise watermelons
in the Desert of Sahara as to try to raise hair under the modern hat.  In
fact, the modern hat is a furnace."

"Well, it's a mighty good furnace," observed Munchausen.  "You don't have
to put coal on the modern hat."

"Perhaps," interposed Thackeray, "the ancients wore their hats on their
tails."

"Well, I have a totally different theory," said Johnson.

"You always did have," observed Munchausen.

"Very likely," said Johnson.  "To be commonplace never was my ambition."

"What is your theory?" queried Livingstone.

"Well--I don't know," said Johnson, "if it be worth expressing."

"It may be worth sending by freight," interrupted Thackeray.  "Let us
have it."

"Well, I believe," said Johnson--"I believe that Adam was a monkey."

"He behaved like one," ejaculated Thackeray.

"I believe that the forbidden tree was a tender one, and therefore the
only one upon which Adam was forbidden to swing by his tail," said
Johnson.

"Clear enough--so far," said Munchausen.

"But that the possession of tails by Adam and Eve entailed a love of
swinging thereby, and that they could not resist the temptation to swing
from every limb in Eden, and that therefore, while Adam was off swinging
on other trees, Eve took a swing on the forbidden tree; that Adam,
returning, caught her in the act, and immediately gave way himself and
swung," said Johnson.

"Then you eliminate the serpent?" queried Darwin.

"Not a bit of it," Johnson answered.  "The serpent was the tail.  Look at
most snakes to-day.  What are they but unattached tails?"

"They do look it," said Darwin, thoughtfully.

"Why, it's clear as day," said Johnson.  "As punishment Adam and Eve lost
their tails, and the tail itself was compelled to work for a living and
do its own walking."

"I never thought of that," said Darwin.  "It seems reasonable."

"It is reasonable," said Johnson.

"And the snakes of the present day?" queried Thackeray.

"I believe to be the missing tails of men," said Johnson.  "Somewhere in
the world is a tail for every man and woman and child.  Where one's tail
is no one can ever say, but that it exists simultaneously with its owner
I believe.  The abhorrence man has for snakes is directly attributable to
his abhorrence for all things which have deprived him of something that
is good.  If Adam's tail had not tempted him to swing on the forbidden
tree, we should all of us have been able through life to relax from
business cares after the manner of the monkey, who is happy from morning
until night."

"Well, I can't see that it does us any good to sit here and discuss this
matter," said Doctor Livingstone.  "We can't reach any conclusion.  The
only way to settle the matter, it seems to me, is to go directly to Adam,
who is a member of this club, and ask him how it was."

"That's a great idea," said Thackeray, scornfully.  "You'd look well
going up to a man and saying, 'Excuse me, sir, but--ah--were you ever a
monkey?'"

"To say nothing of catechising a man on the subject of an old and
dreadful scandal," put in Munchausen.  "I'm surprised at you,
Livingstone.  African etiquette seems to have ruined your sense of
propriety."

"I'd just as lief ask him," said Doctor Johnson.  "Etiquette?  Bah!  What
business has etiquette to stand in the way of human knowledge?
Conventionality is the last thing men of brains should strive after, and
I, for one, am not going to be bound by it."

Here Doctor Johnson touched the electric bell, and in an instant the
shade of a buttons appeared.

"Boy, is Adam in the club-house to-day?" asked the sage.

"I'll go and see, sir," said the boy, and he immediately departed.

"Good boy that," said Thackeray.

"Yes; but the service in this club is dreadful, considering what we might
have," said Darwin.  "With Aladdin a member of this club, I don't see why
we can't have his lamp with genii galore to respond.  It certainly would
be more economical."

"True; but I, for one, don't care to fool with genii," said Munchausen.
"When one member can summon a servant who is strong enough to take
another member and do him up in a bottle and cast him into the sea, I
have no use for the system.  Plain ordinary mortal shades are good enough
for me."

As Munchausen spoke, the boy returned.

"Mr. Adam isn't here to-day, sir," he said, addressing Doctor Johnson.
"And Charon says he's not likely to be here, sir, seeing as how his
account is closed, not having been settled for three months."

"Good," said Thackeray.  "I was afraid he was here.  I don't want to have
him asked about his Eden experiences in my behalf.  That's personality."

"Well, then, there's only one other thing to do," said Darwin.
"Munchausen claims to be able to speak Simian.  He might seek out some of
the prehistoric monkeys and put the question to them."

"No, thank you," said Munchausen.  "I'm a little rusty in the language,
and, besides, you talk like an idiot.  You might as well speak of the
human language as the Simian language.  There are French monkeys who
speak monkey French, African monkeys who talk the most barbarous kind of
Zulu monkey patois, and Congo monkey slang, and so on.  Let Johnson send
his little Boswell out to drum up information.  If there is anything to
be found out he'll get it, and then he can tell it to us.  Of course he
may get it all wrong, but it will be entertaining, and we'll never know
any difference."

Which seemed to the others a good idea, but whatever came of it I have
not been informed.




CHAPTER VII: A DISCUSSION AS TO LADIES' DAY


"I met Queen Elizabeth just now on the Row," said Raleigh, as he entered
the house-boat and checked his cloak.

"Indeed?" said Confucius.  "What if you did?  Other people have met Queen
Elizabeth.  There's nothing original about that."

"True; but she made a suggestion to me about this house-boat which I
think is a good one.  She says the women are all crazy to see the inside
of it," said Raleigh.

"Thus proving that immortal woman is no different from mortal woman,"
retorted Confucius.  "They want to see the inside of everything.
Curiosity, thy name is woman."

"Well, I am sure I don't see why men should arrogate to themselves the
sole right to an investigating turn of mind," said Raleigh, impatiently.
"Why shouldn't the ladies want to see the inside of this club-house?  It
is a compliment to us that they should, and I for one am in favor of
letting them, and I am going to propose that in the Ides of March we give
a ladies' day here."

"Then I shall go South for my health in the Ides of March," said
Confucius, angrily.  "What on earth is a club for if it isn't to enable
men to get away from their wives once in a while?  When do people go to
clubs?  When they are on their way home--that's when; and the more a
man's at home in his club, the less he's at home when he's at home.  I
suppose you'll be suggesting a children's day next, and after that a
parrot's or a canary-bird's day."

"I had no idea you were such a woman-hater," said Raleigh, in
astonishment.  "What's the matter?  Were you ever disappointed in love?"

"I?  How absurd!" retorted Confucius, reddening.  "The idea of _my_ ever
being disappointed in love!  I never met the woman who could bring me to
my knees, although I was married in the other world.  What became of Mrs.
C. I never inquired.  She may be in China yet, for aught I know.  I
regard death as a divorce."

"Your wife must be glad of it," said Raleigh, somewhat ungallantly; for,
to tell the truth, he was nettled by Confucius's demeanor.  "I didn't
know, however, but that since you escaped from China and came here to
Hades you might have fallen in love with some spirit of an age subsequent
to your own--Mary Queen of Scots, or Joan of Arc, or some other spook--who
rejected you.  I can't account for your dislike of women otherwise."

"Not I," said Confucius.  "Hades would have a less classic name than it
has for me if I were hampered with a family.  But go along and have your
ladies' day here, and never mind my reasons for preferring my own society
to that of the fair sex.  I can at least stay at home that day.  What do
you propose to do--throw open the house to the wives of members, or to
all ladies, irrespective of their husbands' membership here?"

"I think the latter plan would be the better," said Raleigh.  "Otherwise
Queen Elizabeth, to whom I am indebted for the suggestion, would be
excluded.  She never married, you know."

"Didn't she?" said Confucius.  "No, I didn't know it; but that doesn't
prove anything.  When I went to school we didn't study the history of the
Elizabethan period.  She didn't have absolute sway over England, then?"

"She had; but what of that?" queried Raleigh.

"Do you mean to say that she lived and died an old maid from choice?"
demanded Confucius.

"Certainly I do," said Raleigh.  "And why should I not tell you that?"

"For a very good and sufficient reason," retorted Confucius, "which is,
in brief, that I am not a marine.  I may dislike women, my dear Raleigh,
but I know them better than you do, gallant as you are; and when you tell
me in one and the same moment that a woman holding absolute sway over men
yet lived and died an old maid, you must not be indignant if I smile and
bite the end of my thumb, which is the Chinese way of saying that's all
in your eye, Betty Martin."

"Believe it or not, you poor old back number," retorted Raleigh, hotly.
"It alters nothing.  Queen Elizabeth could have married a hundred times
over if she had wished.  I know I lost my head there completely."

"That shows, Sir Walter," said Dryden, with a grin, "how wrong you are.
You lost your head to King James.  Hi!  Shakespeare, here's a man doesn't
know who chopped his head off."

Raleigh's face flushed scarlet.  "'Tis better to have had a head and lost
it," he cried, "than never to have had a head at all!  Mark you, Dryden,
my boy, it ill befits you to scoff at me for my misfortune, for dust thou
art, and to dust thou hast returned, if word from t'other side about thy
books and that which in and on them lies be true."

"Whate'er be said about my books," said Dryden, angrily, "be they read or
be they not, 'tis mine they are, and none there be who dare dispute their
authorship."

"Thus proving that men, thank Heaven, are still sane," ejaculated Doctor
Johnson.  "To assume the authorship of Dryden would be not so much a
claim, my friend, as a confession."

"Shades of the mighty Chow!" cried Confucius.  "An' will ye hear the
poets squabble!  Egad!  A ladies' day could hardly introduce into our
midst a more diverting disputation."

"We're all getting a little high-flown in our phraseology," put in
Shakespeare at this point.  "Let's quit talking in blank-verse and come
down to business.  _I_ think a ladies' day would be great sport.  I'll
write a poem to read on the occasion."

"Then I oppose it with all my heart," said Doctor Johnson.  "Why do you
always want to make our entertainments commonplace?  Leave occasional
poems to mortals.  I never knew an occasional poem yet that was worthy of
an immortal."

"That's precisely why I want to write one occasional poem.  I'd make it
worthy," Shakespeare answered.  "Like this, for instance:

   _Most fair, most sweet, most beauteous of ladies_,
   _The greatest charm in all ye realm of Hades_.

Why, my dear Doctor, such an opportunity for rhyming Hades with ladies
should not be lost."

"That just proves what I said," said Johnson.  "Any idiot can make ladies
rhyme with Hades.  It requires absolute genius to avoid the temptation.
You are great enough to make Hades rhyme with bicycle if you choose to do
it--but no, you succumb to the temptation to be commonplace.  Bah!  One
of these modern drawing-room poets with three sections to his name
couldn't do worse."

"On general principles," said Raleigh, "Johnson is right.  We invite
these people here to see our club-house, not to give them an exhibition
of our metrical powers, and I think all exercises of a formal nature
should be frowned upon."

"Very well," said Shakespeare.  "Go ahead.  Have your own way about it.
Get out your brow and frown.  I'm perfectly willing to save myself the
trouble of writing a poem.  Writing real poetry isn't easy, as you
fellows would have discovered for yourselves if you'd ever tried it."

"To pass over the arrogant assumption of the gentleman who has just
spoken, with the silence due to a proper expression of our contempt
therefor," said Dryden, slowly, "I think in case we do have a ladies' day
here we should exercise a most careful supervision over the invitation
list.  For instance, wouldn't it be awkward for our good friend Henry the
Eighth to encounter the various Mrs. Henrys here?  Would it not likewise
be awkward for them to meet each other?"

"Your point is well taken," said Doctor Johnson.  "I don't know whether
the King's matrimonial ventures are on speaking terms with each other or
not, but under any circumstances it would hardly be a pleasing spectacle
for Katharine of Arragon to see Henry running his legs off getting cream
and cakes for Anne Boleyn; nor would Anne like it much if, on the other
hand, Henry chose to behave like a gentleman and a husband to Jane
Seymour or Katharine Parr.  I think, if the members themselves are to
send out the invitations, they should each be limited to two cards, with
the express understanding that no member shall be permitted to invite
more than one wife."

"That's going to be awkward," said Raleigh, scratching his head
thoughtfully.  "Henry is such a hot-headed fellow that he might resent
the stipulation."

"I think he would," said Confucius.  "I think he'd be as mad as a hatter
at your insinuation that he would invite any of his wives, if all I hear
of him is true; and what I've heard, Wolsey has told me."

"He knew a thing or two about Henry," said Shakespeare.  "If you don't
believe it, just read that play of mine that Beaumont and
Fletcher--er--ah--thought so much of."

"You came near giving your secret away that time, William," said Johnson,
with a sly smile, and giving the Avonian a dig between the ribs.

"Secret!  I haven't any secret," said Shakespeare, a little acridly.
"It's the truth I'm telling you.  Beaumont and Fletcher _did_ admire
_Henry the Eighth_."

"Thereby showing their conceit, eh?" said Johnson.

"Oh, of course, I didn't write anything, did I?" cried Shakespeare.
"Everybody wrote my plays but me.  I'm the only person that had no hand
in Shakespeare.  It seems to me that joke is about worn out, Doctor.  I'm
getting a little tired of it myself; but if it amuses you, why, keep it
up.  _I_ know who wrote my plays, and whatever you may say cannot affect
the facts.  Next thing you fellows will be saying that I didn't write my
own autographs?"

"I didn't say that," said Johnson, quietly.  "Only there is no internal
evidence in your autographs that you knew how to spell your name if you
did.  A man who signs his name Shixpur one day and Shikespeare the next
needn't complain if the Bank of Posterity refuses to honor his check."

"They'd honor my check quick enough these days," retorted Shakespeare.
"When a man's autograph brings five thousand dollars, or one thousand
pounds, in the auction-room, there isn't a bank in the world fool enough
to decline to honor any check he'll sign under a thousand dollars, or two
hundred pounds."

"I fancy you're right," put in Raleigh.  "But your checks or your plays
have nothing to do with ladies' day.  Let's get to some conclusion in
this matter."

"Yes," said Confucius.  "Let's.  Ladies' day is becoming a dreadful bore,
and if we don't hurry up the billiard-room will be full."

"Well, I move we get up a petition to the council to have it," said
Dryden.

"I agree," said Confucius, "and I'll sign it.  If there's one way to
avoid having ladies' day in the future, it's to have one now and be done
with it."

"All right," said Shakespeare.  "I'll sign too."

"As--er--Shixpur or Shikespeare?" queried Johnson.

"Let him alone," said Raleigh.  "He's getting sensitive about that; and
what you need to learn more than anything else is that it isn't manners
to twit a man on facts.  What's bothering you, Dryden?  You look like a
man with an idea."

"It has just occurred to me," said Dryden, "that while we can safely
leave the question of Henry the Eighth and his wives to the wisdom of the
council, we ought to pay some attention to the advisability of inviting
Lucretia Borgia.  I'd hate to eat any supper if she came within a mile of
the banqueting-hall.  If she comes you'll have to appoint a tasting
committee before I'll touch a drop of punch or eat a speck of salad."

"We might recommend the appointment of Raleigh to look after the fair
Lucretia and see that she has no poison with her, or if she has, to keep
her from dropping it into the salads," said Confucius, with a sidelong
glance at Raleigh.  "He's the especial champion of woman in this club,
and no doubt would be proud of the distinction."

"I would with most women," said Raleigh.  "But I draw the line at
Lucretia Borgia."

And so a petition was drawn up, signed, and sent to the council, and
they, after mature deliberation, decided to have the ladies' day, to
which all the ladies in Hades, excepting Lucretia Borgia and Delilah,
were to be duly invited, only the date was not specified.  Delilah was
excluded at the request of Samson, whose convincing muscles, rather than
his arguments, completely won over all opposition to his proposition.




CHAPTER VIII: A DISCONTENTED SHADE


"It seems to me," said Shakespeare, wearily, one afternoon at the
club--"that this business of being immortal is pretty dull.  Didn't
somebody once say he'd rather ride fifty years on a trolley in Europe
than on a bicycle in Cathay?"

"I never heard any such remark by any self-respecting person," said
Johnson.

"I said something like it," observed Tennyson.

Doctor Johnson looked around to see who it was that spoke.

"You?" he cried.  "And who, pray, may you be?"

"My name is Tennyson," replied the poet.

"And a very good name it is," said Shakespeare.

"I am not aware that I ever heard the name before," said Doctor Johnson.
"Did you make it yourself?"

"I did," said the late laureate, proudly.

"In what pursuit?" asked Doctor Johnson.

"Poetry," said Tennyson.  "I wrote 'Locksley Hall' and 'Come into the
Garden, Maude.'"

"Humph!" said Doctor Johnson.  "I never read 'em."

"Well, why should you have read them?" snarled Carlyle.  "They were
written after you moved over here, and they were good stuff.  You needn't
think because you quit, the whole world put up its shutters and went out
of business.  I did a few things myself which I fancy you never heard
of."

"Oh, as for that," retorted Doctor Johnson, with a smile, "I've heard of
you; you are the man who wrote the life of Frederick the Great in nine
hundred and two volumes--"

"Seven!" snapped Carlyle.

"Well, seven then," returned Johnson.  "I never saw the work, but I heard
Frederick speaking of it the other day.  Bonaparte asked him if he had
read it, and Frederick said no, he hadn't time.  Bonaparte cried,
'Haven't time?  Why, my dear king, you've got all eternity.'  'I know
it,' replied Frederick, 'but that isn't enough.  Read a page or two, my
dear Napoleon, and you'll see why.'"

"Frederick will have his joke," said Shakespeare, with a wink at Tennyson
and a smile for the two philosophers, intended, no doubt, to put them in
a more agreeable frame of mind.  "Why, he even asked me the other day why
I never wrote a tragedy about him, completely ignoring the fact that he
came along many years after I had departed.  I spoke of that, and he
said, 'Oh, I was only joking.'  I apologized.  'I didn't know that,' said
I.  'And why should you?' said he.  'You're English.'"

"A very rude remark," said Johnson.  "As if we English were incapable of
seeing a joke!"

"Exactly," put in Carlyle.  "It strikes me as the absurdest notion that
the Englishman can't see a joke.  To the mind that is accustomed to snap
judgments I have no doubt the Englishman appears to be dull of
apprehension, but the philosophy of the whole matter is apparent to the
mind that takes the trouble to investigate.  The Briton weighs everything
carefully before he commits himself, and even though a certain point may
strike him as funny, he isn't going to laugh until he has fully made up
his mind that it is funny.  I remember once riding down Piccadilly with
Froude in a hansom cab.  Froude had a copy of _Punch_ in his hand, and he
began to laugh immoderately over something.  I leaned over his shoulder
to see what he was laughing at.  'That isn't so funny,' said I, as I read
the paragraph on which his eye was resting.  'No,' said Froude.  'I
wasn't laughing at that.  I was enjoying the joke that appeared in the
same relative position in last week's issue.'  Now that's the point--the
whole point.  The Englishman always laughs over last week's _Punch_, not
this week's, and that is why you will find a file of that interesting
journal in the home of all well-to-do Britons.  It is the back number
that amuses him--which merely proves that he is a deliberative person who
weighs even his humor carefully before giving way to his emotions."

"What is the average weight of a copy of _Punch_?" drawled Artemas Ward,
who had strolled in during the latter part of the conversation.

Shakespeare snickered quietly, but Carlyle and Johnson looked upon the
intruder severely.

"We will take that question into consideration," said Carlyle.  "Perhaps
to-morrow we shall have a definite answer ready for you."

"Never mind," returned the humorist.  "You've proved your point.  Tennyson
tells me you find life here dull, Shakespeare."

"Somewhat," said Shakespeare.  "I don't know about the rest of you
fellows, but I was not cut out for an eternity of ease.  I must have
occupation, and the stage isn't popular here.  The trouble about putting
on a play here is that our managers are afraid of libel suits.  The
chances are that if I should write a play with Cassius as the hero,
Cassius would go to the first night's performance with a dagger concealed
in his toga, with which to punctuate his objections to the lines put in
his mouth.  There is nothing I'd like better than to manage a theatre in
this place, but think of the riots we'd have!  Suppose, for an instant,
that I wrote a play about Bonaparte!  He'd have a box, and when the rest
of you spooks called for the author at the end of the third act, if he
didn't happen to like the play he'd greet me with a salvo of artillery
instead of applause."

"He wouldn't if you made him out a great conqueror from start to finish,"
said Tennyson.

"No doubt," returned Shakespeare, sadly; "but in that event Wellington
would be in the other stage-box, and I'd get the greeting from him."

"Why come out at all?" asked Johnson.

"Why come out at all?" echoed Shakespeare.  "What fun is there in writing
a play if you can't come out and show yourself at the first night?  That's
the author's reward.  If it wasn't for the first-night business, though,
all would be plain sailing."

"Then why don't you begin it the second night?" drawled Ward.

"How the deuce could you?" put in Carlyle.

"A most extraordinary proposition," sneered Johnson.

"Yes," said Ward; "but wait a week--you'll see the point then."

"There isn't any doubt in my mind," said Shakespeare, reverting to his
original proposition, "that the only perfectly satisfactory life is under
a system not yet adopted in either world--the one we have quitted or
this.  There we had hard work in which our mortal limitations hampered us
grievously; here we have the freedom of the immortal with no hard work;
in other words, now that we feel like fighting-cocks, there isn't any
fighting to be done.  The great life in my estimation, would be to return
to earth and battle with mortal problems, but equipped mentally and
physically with immortal weapons."

"Some people don't know when they are well off," said Beau Brummel.  "This
strikes me as being an ideal life.  There are no tailors bills to pay--we
are ourselves nothing but memories, and a memory can clothe himself in
the shadow of his former grandeur--I clothe myself in the remembrance of
my departed clothes, and as my memory is good I flatter myself I'm the
best-dressed man here.  The fact that there are ghosts of departed unpaid
bills haunting my bedside at night doesn't bother me in the least,
because the bailiffs that in the old life lent terror to an overdue
account, thanks to our beneficent system here, are kept in the less
agreeable sections of Hades.  I used to regret that bailiffs were such
low people, but now I rejoice at it.  If they had been of a different
order they might have proven unpleasant here."

"You are right, my dear Brummel," interposed Munchausen.  "This life is
far preferable to that in the other sphere.  Any of you gentlemen who
happen to have had the pleasure of reading my memoirs must have been
struck with the tremendous difficulties that encumbered my progress.  If
I wished for a rare liqueur for my luncheon, a liqueur served only at the
table of an Oriental potentate, more jealous of it than of his one
thousand queens, I had to raise armies, charter ships, and wage warfare
in which feats of incredible valor had to be performed by myself alone
and unaided to secure the desired thimbleful.  I have destroyed empires
for a bon-bon at great expense of nervous energy."

"That's very likely true," said Carlyle.  "I should think your feats of
strength would have wrecked your imagination in time."

"Not so," said Munchausen.  "On the contrary, continuous exercise served
only to make it stronger.  But, as I was going to say, in this life we
have none of these fearful obstacles--it is a life of leisure; and if I
want a bird and a cold bottle at any time, instead of placing my life in
peril and jeopardizing the peace of all mankind to get it, I have only to
summon before me the memory of some previous bird and cold bottle, dine
thereon like a well-ordered citizen, and smoke the spirit of the best
cigar my imagination can conjure up."

"You miss my point," said Shakespeare.  "I don't say this life is worse
or better than the other we used to live.  What I do say is that a
combination of both would suit me.  In short, I'd like to live here and
go to the other world every day to business, like a suburban resident who
sleeps in the country and makes his living in the city.  For instance,
why shouldn't I dwell here and go to London every day, hire an office
there, and put out a sign something like this:

   WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
   DRAMATIST

   Plays written while you wait

I guess I'd find plenty to do."

"Guess again," said Tennyson.  "My dear boy, you forget one thing.  _You
are out of date_.  People don't go to the theatres to hear _you_, they go
to see the people who _do_ you."

"That is true," said Ward.  "And they do do you, my beloved William.  It's
a wonder to me you are not dizzy turning over in your grave the way they
do you."

"Can it be that I can ever be out of date?" asked Shakespeare.  "I know,
of course, that I have to be adapted at times; but to be wholly out of
date strikes me as a hard fate."

"You're not out of date," interposed Carlyle; "the date is out of you.
There is a great demand for Shakespeare in these days, but there isn't
any stuff."

"Then I should succeed," said Shakespeare.

"No, I don't think so," returned Carlyle.  "You couldn't stand the pace.
The world revolves faster to-day than it did in your time--men write
three or four plays at once.  This is what you might call a Type-writer
Age, and to keep up with the procession you'd have to work as you never
worked before."

"That is true," observed Tennyson.  "You'd have to learn to be
ambidextrous, so that you could keep two type-writing machines going at
once; and, to be perfectly frank with you, I cannot even conjure up in my
fancy a picture of you knocking out a tragedy with the right hand on one
machine, while your left hand is fashioning a farce-comedy on another."

"He might do as a great many modern writers do," said Ward; "go in for
the Paper-doll Drama.  Cut the whole thing out with a pair of scissors.
As the poet might have said if he'd been clever enough:

   _Oh, bring me the scissors_,
   _And bring me the glue_,
   _And a couple of dozen old plays_.
   _I'll cut out and paste_
   _A drama for you_
   _That'll run for quite sixty-two days_.

   _Oh, bring me a dress_
   _Made of satin and lace_,
   _And a book--say Joe Miller's--of wit_;
   _And I'll make the old dramatists_
   _Blue in the face_
   _With the play that I'll turn out for it_.

   _So bring me the scissors_,
   _And bring me the paste_,
   _And a dozen fine old comedies_;
   _A fine line of dresses_,
   _And popular taste_
   _I'll make a strong effort to please_.

"You draw a very blue picture, it seems to me," said Shakespeare, sadly.

"Well, it's true," said Carlyle.  "The world isn't at all what it used to
be in any one respect, and you fellows who made great reputations
centuries ago wouldn't have even the ghost of a show now.  I don't
believe Homer could get a poem accepted by a modern magazine, and while
the comic papers are still printing Diogenes' jokes the old gentleman
couldn't make enough out of them in these days to pay taxes on his tub,
let alone earning his bread."

"That is exactly so," said Tennyson.  "I'd be willing to wager too that,
in the line of personal prowess, even D'Artagnan and Athos and Porthos
and Aramis couldn't stand London for one day."

"Or New York either," said Mr. Barnum, who had been an interested
listener.  "A New York policeman could have managed that quartet with one
hand."

"Then," said Shakespeare, "in the opinion of you gentlemen, we old-time
lions would appear to modern eyes to be more or less stuffed?"

"That's about the size of it," said Carlyle.

"But you'd draw," said Barnum, his face lighting up with pleasure.  "You'd
drive a five-legged calf to suicide from envy.  If I could take you and
Caesar, and Napoleon Bonaparte and Nero over for one circus season we'd
drive the mint out of business."

"There's your chance, William," said Ward.  "You write a play for
Bonaparte and Caesar, and let Nero take his fiddle and be the orchestra.
Under Barnum's management you'd get enough activity in one season to last
you through all eternity."

"You can count on me," said Barnum, rising.  "Let me know when you've got
your plan laid out.  I'd stay and make a contract with you now, but Adam
has promised to give me points on the management of wild animals without
cages, so I can't wait.  By-by."

"Humph!" said Shakespeare, as the eminent showman passed out.  "That's a
gay proposition.  When monkeys move in polite society William Shakespeare
will make a side-show of himself for a circus."

"They do now," said Thackeray, quietly.

Which merely proved that Shakespeare did not mean what he said; for in
spite of Thackeray's insinuation as to the monkeys and polite society, he
has not yet accepted the Barnum proposition, though there can be no doubt
of its value from the point of view of a circus manager.




CHAPTER IX: AS TO COOKERY AND SCULPTURE


Robert Burns and Homer were seated at a small table in the dining-room of
the house-boat, discussing everything in general and the shade of a very
excellent luncheon in particular.

"We are in great luck to-day," said Burns, as he cut a ruddy duck in
twain.  "This bird is done just right."

"I agree with you," returned Homer, drawing his chair a trifle closer to
the table.  "Compared to the one we had here last Thursday, this is a
feast for the gods.  I wonder who it was that cooked this fowl
originally?"

"I give it up; but I suspect it was done by some man who knew his
business," said Burns, with a smack of his lips.  "It's a pity, I think,
my dear Homer, that there is no means by which a cook may become
immortal.  Cooking is as much of an art as is the writing of poetry, and
just as there are immortal poets so there should be immortal cooks.  See
what an advantage the poet has--he writes something, it goes out and
reaches the inmost soul of the man who reads it, and it is signed.  His
work is known because he puts his name to it; but this poor devil of a
cook--where is he?  He has done his work as well as the poet ever did
his, it has reached the inmost soul of the mortal who originally ate it,
but he cannot get the glory of it because he cannot put his name to it.
If the cook could sign his work it would be different."

"You have hit upon a great truth," said Homer, nodding, as he sometimes
was wont to do.  "And yet I fear that, ingenious as we are, we cannot
devise a plan to remedy the matter.  I do not know about you, but I
should myself much object if my birds and my flapjacks, and other things,
digestible and otherwise, that I eat here were served with the cook's
name written upon them.  An omelette is sometimes a picture--"

"I've seen omelettes that looked like one of Turner's sunsets,"
acquiesced Burns.

"Precisely; and when Turner puts down in one corner of his canvas,
'Turner, fecit,' you do not object, but if the cook did that with the
omelette you wouldn't like it."

"No," said Burns; "but he might fasten a tag to it, with his name written
upon that."

"That is so," said Homer; "but the result in the end would be the same.
The tags would get lost, or perhaps a careless waiter, dropping a tray
full of dainties, would get the tags of a good and bad cook mixed in
trying to restore the contents of the tray to their previous condition.
The tag system would fail."

"There is but one other way that I can think of," said Burns, "and that
would do no good now unless we can convey our ideas into the other world;
that is, for a great poet to lend his genius to the great cook, and make
the latter's name immortal by putting it into a poem.  Say, for instance,
that you had eaten a fine bit of terrapin, done to the most exquisite
point--you could have asked the cook's name, and written an apostrophe to
her.  Something like this, for instance:

   _Oh, Dinah Rudd! oh, Dinah Rudd_!
   _Thou art a cook of bluest blood_!
   _Nowhere within_
   _This world of sin_
   _Have I e'er tasted better terrapin_.
   _Do you see_?"

"I do; but even then, my dear fellow, the cook would fall short of true
fame.  Her excellence would be a mere matter of hearsay evidence," said
Homer.

"Not if you went on to describe, in a keenly analytical manner, the
virtues of that particular bit of terrapin," said Burns.  "Draw so vivid
a picture of the dish that the reader himself would taste that terrapin
even as you tasted it."

"You have hit it!" cried Homer, enthusiastically.  "It is a grand plan;
but how to introduce it--that is the question."

"We can haunt some modern poet, and give him the idea in that way,"
suggested Burns.  "He will see the novelty of it, and will possibly
disseminate the idea as we wish it to be disseminated."

"Done!" said Homer.  "I'll begin right away.  I feel like haunting to-
night.  I'm getting to be a pretty old ghost, but I'll never lose my love
of haunting."

At this point, as Homer spoke, a fine-looking spirit entered the room,
and took a seat at the head of the long table at which the regular club
dinner was nightly served.

"Why, bless me!" said Homer, his face lighting up with pleasure.  "Why,
Phidias, is that you?"

"I think so," said the new-comer, wearily; "at any rate, it's all that's
left of me."

"Come over here and lunch with us," said Homer.  "You know Burns, don't
you?"

"Haven't the pleasure," said Phidias.

The poet and the sculptor were introduced, after which Phidias seated
himself at Homer's side.

"Are you any relation to Burns the poet?" the former asked, addressing
the Scotchman.

"I _am_ Burns the poet," replied the other.

"You don't look much like your statues," said Phidias, scanning his face
critically.

"No, thank the Fates!" said Burns, warmly.  "If I did, I'd commit
suicide."

"Why don't you sue the sculptors for libel?" asked Phidias.

"You speak with a great deal of feeling, Phidias," said Homer, gravely.
"Have they done anything to hurt you?"

"They have," said Phidias.  "I have just returned from a tour of the
world.  I have seen the things they call sculpture in these degenerate
days, and I must confess--who shouldn't, perhaps--that I could have done
better work with a baseball-bat for a chisel and putty for the raw
material."

"I think I could do good work with a baseball-bat too," said Burns; "but
as for the raw material, give me the heads of the men who have sculped me
to work on.  I'd leave them so that they'd look like some of your
Parthenon frieze figures with the noses gone."

"You are a vindictive creature," said Homer.  "These men you criticise,
and whose heads you wish to sculp with a baseball-bat, have done more for
you than you ever did for them.  Every statue of you these men have made
is a standing advertisement of your books, and it hasn't cost you a
penny.  There isn't a doubt in my mind that if it were not for those
statues countless people would go to their graves supposing that the
great Scottish Burns were little rivulets, and not a poet.  What
difference does it make to you if they haven't made an Adonis of you?  You
never set them an example by making one of yourself.  If there's
deception anywhere, it isn't you that is deceived; it is the mortals.  And
who cares about them or their opinions?"

"I never thought of it in that way," said Burns.  "I hate
caricatures--that is, caricatures of myself.  I enjoy caricatures of
other people, but--"

"You have a great deal of the mortal left in you, considering that you
pose as an immortal," said Homer, interrupting the speaker.

"Well, so have I," said Phidias, resolved to stand by Burns in the
argument, "and I'm sorry for the man who hasn't.  I was a mortal once,
and I'm glad of it.  I had a good time, and I don't care who knows it.
When I look about me and see Jupiter, the arch-snob of creation, and
Mars, a little tin warrior who couldn't have fought a soldier like
Napoleon, with all his alleged divinity, I thank the Fates that they
enabled me to achieve immortality through mortal effort.  Hang hereditary
greatness, I say.  These men were born immortals.  You and I worked for
it and got it.  We know what it cost.  It was ours because we earned it,
and not because we were born to it.  Eh, Burns?"

The Scotchman nodded assent, and the Greek sculptor went on.

"I am not vindictive myself, Homer," he said.  "Nobody has hurt me, and,
on the whole, I don't think sculpture is in such a bad way, after all.
There's a shoemaker I wot of in the mortal realms who can turn the
prettiest last you ever saw; and I encountered a carver in a London
eating-house last month who turned out a slice of beef that was cut as
artistically as I could have done it myself.  What I object to chiefly is
the tendency of the times.  This is an electrical age, and men in my old
profession aren't content to turn out one _chef-d'oeuvre_ in a lifetime.
They take orders by the gross.  I waited upon inspiration.  To-day the
sculptor waits upon custom, and an artist will make a bust of anybody in
any material desired as long as he is sure of getting his pay afterwards.
I saw a life-size statue of the inventor of a new kind of lard the other
day, and what do you suppose the material was?  Gold?  Not by a great
deal.  Ivory?  Marble, even?  Not a bit of it.  He was done in lard, sir.
I have seen a woman's head done in butter, too, and it makes me
distinctly weary to think that my art should be brought so low."

"You did your best work in Greece," chuckled Homer.

"A bad joke, my dear Homer," retorted Phidias.  "I thought sculpture was
getting down to a pretty low ebb when I had to fashion friezes out of
marble; but marble is more precious than rubies alongside of butter and
lard."

"Each has its uses," said Homer.  "I'd rather have butter on my bread
than marble, but I must confess that for sculpture it is very poor stuff,
as you say."

"It is indeed," said Phidias.  "For practice it's all right to use
butter, but for exhibition purposes--bah!"

Here Phidias, to show his contempt for butter as raw material in
sculpture, seized a wooden toothpick, and with it modelled a beautiful
head of Minerva out of the pat that stood upon the small plate at his
side, and before Burns could interfere had spread the chaste figure as
thinly as he could upon a piece of bread, which he tossed to the shade of
a hungry dog that stood yelping on the river-bank.

"Heavens!" cried Burns.  "Imperious Caesar dead and turned to bricks is
as nothing to a Minerva carved by Phidias used to stay the hunger of a
ravening cur."

"Well, it's the way I feel," said Phidias, savagely.

"I think you are a trifle foolish to be so eternally vexed about it,"
said Homer, soothingly.  "Of course you feel badly, but, after all,
what's the use?  You must know that the mortals would pay more for one of
your statues than they would for a specimen of any modern sculptor's art;
yes, even if yours were modelled in wine-jelly and the other fellow's in
pure gold.  So why repine?"

"You'd feel the same way if poets did a similarly vulgar thing," retorted
Phidias; "you know you would.  If you should hear of a poet to-day
writing a poem on a thin layer of lard or butter, you would yourself be
the first to call a halt."

"No, I shouldn't," said Homer, quietly; "in fact, I wish the poets would
do that.  We'd have fewer bad poems to read; and that's the way you
should look at it.  I venture to say that if this modern plan of making
busts and friezes in butter had been adopted at an earlier period, the
public places in our great cities and our national Walhallas would seem
less like repositories of comic art, since the first critical rays of a
warm sun would have reduced the carven atrocities therein to a spot on
the pavement.  The butter school of sculpture has its advantages, my boy,
and you should be crowning the inventor of the system with laurel, and
not heaping coals of fire upon his brow."

"That," said Burns, "is, after all, the solid truth, Phidias.  Take the
brass caricatures of me, for instance.  Where would they be now if they
had been cast in lard instead of in bronze?"

Phidias was silent a moment.

"Well," he said, finally, as the value of the plan dawned upon his mind,
"from that point of view I don't know but what you are right, after all;
and, to show that I have spoken in no vindictive spirit, let me propose a
toast.  Here's to the Butter Sculptors.  May their butter never give
out."

The toast was drained to the dregs, and Phidias went home feeling a
little better.




CHAPTER X: STORY-TELLERS' NIGHT


It was Story-tellers' Night at the house-boat, and the best talkers of
Hades were impressed into the service.  Doctor Johnson was made chairman
of the evening.

"Put him in the chair," said Raleigh.  "That's the only way to keep him
from telling a story himself.  If he starts in on a tale he'll make it a
serial sure as fate, but if you make him the medium through which other
story-tellers are introduced to the club he'll be finely epigrammatic.  He
can be very short and sharp when he's talking about somebody else.
Personality is his forte."

"Great scheme," said Diogenes, who was chairman of the entertainment
committee.  "The nights over here are long, but if Johnson started on a
story they'd have to reach twice around eternity and halfway back to give
him time to finish all he had to say."

"He's not very witty, in my judgment," said Carlyle, who since his
arrival in the other world has manifested some jealousy of Solomon and
Doctor Johnson.

"That's true enough," said Raleigh; "but he's strong, and he's bound to
say something that will put the audience in sympathy with the man that he
introduces, and that's half the success of a Story-tellers' Night.  I've
told stories myself.  If your audience doesn't sympathize with you you'd
be better off at home putting the baby to bed."

And so it happened.  Doctor Johnson was made chairman, and the evening
came.  The Doctor was in great form.  A list of the story-tellers had
been sent him in advance, and he was prepared.  The audience was about as
select a one as can be found in Hades.  The doors were thrown open to the
friends of the members, and the smoke-furnace had been filled with a very
superior quality of Arcadian mixture which Scott had brought back from a
haunting-trip to the home of "The Little Minister," at Thrums.

"Friends and fellow-spooks," the Doctor began, when all were seated on
the visionary camp-stools--which, by the way, are far superior to those
in use in a world of realities, because they do not creak in the midst of
a fine point demanding absolute silence for appreciation--"I do not know
why I have been chosen to preside over this gathering of phantoms; it is
the province of the presiding officer on occasions of this sort to say
pleasant things, which he does not necessarily endorse, about the sundry
persons who are to do the story-telling.  Now, I suppose you all know me
pretty well by this time.  If there is anybody who doesn't, I'll be glad
to have him presented after the formal work of the evening is over, and
if I don't like him I'll tell him so.  You know that if I can be counted
upon for any one thing it is candor, and if I hurt the feelings of any of
these individuals whom I introduce to-night, I want them distinctly to
understand that it is not because I love them less, but that I love truth
more.  With this--ah--blanket apology, as it were, to cover all possible
emergencies that may arise during the evening, I will begin.  The first
speaker on the programme, I regret to observe, is my friend Goldsmith.
Affairs of this kind ought to begin with a snap, and while Oliver is a
most excellent writer, as a speaker he is a pebbleless Demosthenes.  If I
had had the arrangement of the programme I should have had Goldsmith tell
his story while the rest of us were down-stairs at supper.  However, we
must abide by our programme, which is unconscionably long, for otherwise
we will never get through it.  Those of you who agree with me as to the
pleasure of listening to my friend Goldsmith will do well to join me in
the grill-room while he is speaking, where, I understand, there is a very
fine line of punches ready to be served.  Modest Noll, will you kindly
inflict yourself upon the gathering, and send me word when you get
through, if you ever do, so that I may return and present number two to
the assembly, whoever or whatever he may be?"

With these words the Doctor retired, and poor Goldsmith, pale with fear,
rose up to speak.  It was evident that he was quite as doubtful of his
ability as a talker as was Johnson.

"I'm not much of a talker, or, as some say, speaker," he said.  "Talking
is not my forte, as Doctor Johnson has told you, and I am therefore not
much at it.  Speaking is not in my line.  I cannot speak or talk, as it
were, because I am not particularly ready at the making of a speech, due
partly to the fact that I am not much of a talker anyhow, and seldom if
ever speak.  I will therefore not bore you by attempting to speak, since
a speech by one who like myself is, as you are possibly aware, not a
fluent nor indeed in any sense an eloquent speaker, is apt to be a bore
to those who will be kind enough to listen to my remarks, but will read
instead the first five chapters of the _Vicar of Wakefield_."

"Who suggested any such night as this, anyhow?" growled Carlyle.  "Five
chapters of the _Vicar of Wakefield_ for a starter!  Lord save us, we'll
need a Vicar of Sleepfield if he's allowed to do this!"

"I move we adjourn," said Darwin.

"Can't something be done to keep these younger members quiet?" asked
Solomon, frowning upon Carlyle and Darwin.

"Yes," said Douglas Jerrold.  "Let Goldsmith go on.  He'll have them
asleep in ten minutes."

Meanwhile, Goldsmith was plodding earnestly through his stint, utterly
and happily oblivious of the effect he was having upon his audience.

"This is awful," whispered Wellington to Bonaparte.

"Worse than Waterloo," replied the ex-Emperor, with a grin; "but we can
stop it in a minute.  Artemas Ward told me once how a camp-meeting he
attended in the West broke up to go outside and see a dog-fight.  Can't
you and I pretend to quarrel?  A personal assault by you on me will wake
these people up and discombobulate Goldsmith.  Say the word--only don't
hit too hard."

"I'm with you," said Wellington.  Whereupon, with a great show of heat,
he roared out, "You?  Never!  I'm more afraid of a boy with a
bean-snapper that I ever was of you!" and followed up his remark by
pulling Bonaparte's camp-chair from under him, and letting the conqueror
of Austerlitz fall to the floor with a thud which I have since heard
described as dull and sickening.

The effect was instantaneous.  Compared to a personal encounter between
the two great figures of Waterloo, a reading from his own works by
Goldsmith seemed lacking in the elements essential to the holding of an
audience.  Consequently, attention was centred in the belligerent
warriors, and, by some odd mistake, when a peace-loving member of the
assemblage, realizing the indecorousness of the incident, cried out, "Put
him out! put him out!" the attendants rushed in, and, taking poor
Goldsmith by his collar, hustled him out through the door, across the
deck, and tossed him ashore without reference to the gang-plank.  This
accomplished, a personal explanation of their course was made by the
quarrelling generals, and, peace having been restored, a committee was
sent in search of Goldsmith with suitable apologies.  The good and kindly
soul returned, but having lost his book in the melee, much to his own
gratification, as well as to that of the audience, he was permitted to
rest in quiet the balance of the evening.

"Is he through?" said Johnson, poking his head in at the door when order
was restored.

"Yes, sir," said Boswell; "that is to say, he has retired permanently
from the field.  He didn't finish, though."

"Fellow-spooks," began Johnson once more, "now that you have been
delighted with the honeyed eloquence of the last speaker, it is my
privilege to present to you that eminent fabulist Baron Munchausen, the
greatest unrealist of all time, who will give you an exhibition of his
paradoxical power of lying while standing."

The applause which greeted the Baron was deafening.  He was, beyond all
doubt, one of the most popular members of the club.

"Speaking of whales," said he, leaning gracefully against the table.

"Nobody has mentioned 'em," said Johnson.

"True," retorted the Baron; "but you always suggest them by your
apparently unquenchable thirst for spouting--speaking of whales, my
friend Jonah, as well as the rest of you, may be interested to know that
I once had an experience similar to his own, and, strange to say, with
the identical whale."

Jonah arose from his seat in the back of the room.  "I do not wish to be
unpleasant," he said, with a strong effort to be calm, "but I wish to ask
if Judge Blackstone is in the room."

"I am," said the Judge, rising.  "What can I do for you?"

"I desire to apply for an injunction restraining the Baron from using my
whale in his story.  That whale, your honor, is copyrighted," said Jonah.
"If I had any other claim to the affection of mankind than the one which
is based on my experience with that leviathan, I would willingly permit
the Baron to introduce him into his story; but that whale, your honor, is
my stock in trade--he is my all."

"I think Jonah's point is well taken," said Blackstone, turning to the
Baron.  "It would be a distinct hardship, I think, if the plaintiff in
this action were to be deprived of the exclusive use of his sole
accessory.  The injunction prayed for is therefore granted.  The court
would suggest, however, that the Baron continue with his story, using
another whale for the purpose."

"It is impossible," said Munchausen, gloomily.  "The whole point of the
story depends upon its having been Jonah's whale.  Under the
circumstances, the only thing I can do is to sit down.  I regret the
narrowness of mind exhibited by my friend Jonah, but I must respect the
decision of the court."

"I must take exception to the Baron's allusion to my narrowness of mind,"
said Jonah, with some show of heat.  "I am simply defending my rights,
and I intend to continue to do so if the whole world unites in
considering my mind a mere slot scarcely wide enough for the insertion of
a nickel.  That whale was my discovery, and the personal discomfort I
endured in perfecting my experience was such that I resolved to rest my
reputation upon his broad proportions only--to sink or swim with him--and
I cannot at this late day permit another to crowd me out of his exclusive
use."

Jonah sat down and fanned himself, and the Baron, with a look of disgust
on his face, left the room.

"Up to his old tricks," he growled as he went.  "He queers everything he
goes into.  If I'd known he was a member of this club I'd never have
joined."

"We do not appear to be progressing very rapidly," said Doctor Johnson,
rising.  "So far we have made two efforts to have stories told, and have
met with disaster each time.  I don't know but what you are to be
congratulated, however, on your escape.  Very few of you, I observe, have
as yet fallen asleep.  The next number on the programme, I see, is
Boswell, who was to have entertained you with a few reminiscences; I say
was to have done so, because he is not to do so."

"I'm ready," said Boswell, rising.

"No doubt," retorted Johnson, severely, "but I am not.  You are a man
with one subject--myself.  I admit it's a good subject, but you are not
the man to treat of it--here.  You may suffice for mortals, but here it
is different.  I can speak for myself.  You can go out and sit on the
banks of the Vitriol Reservoir and lecture to the imps if you want to,
but when it comes to reminiscences of me I'm on deck myself, and I
flatter myself I remember what I said and did more accurately than you
do.  Therefore, gentlemen, instead of listening to Boswell at this point,
you will kindly excuse him and listen to me.  Ahem!  When I was a boy--"

"Excuse me," said Solomon, rising; "about how long is this--ah--this
entertaining discourse of yours to continue?"

"Until I get through," returned Johnson, wrathfully.

"Are you aware, sir, that I am on the programme?" asked Solomon.

"I am," said the Doctor.  "With that in mind, for the sake of our fellow-
spooks who are present, I am very much inclined to keep on forever.  When
I was a boy--"

Carlyle rose up at this point.

"I should like to ask," he said, mildly, "if this is supposed to be an
audience of children?  I, for one, have no wish to listen to the juvenile
stories of Doctor Johnson.  Furthermore, I have come here particularly to-
night to hear Boswell.  I want to compare him with Froude.  I therefore
protest against--"

"There is a roof to this house-boat," said Doctor Johnson.  "If Mr.
Carlyle will retire to the roof with Boswell I have no doubt he can be
accommodated.  As for Solomon's interruption, I can afford to pass that
over with the silent contempt it deserves, though I may add with
propriety that I consider his most famous proverbs the most absurd bits
of hack-work I ever encountered; and as for that story about dividing a
baby between two mothers by splitting it in two, it was grossly inhuman
unless the baby was twins.  When I was a boy--"

As the Doctor proceeded, Carlyle and Solomon, accompanied by the now
angry Boswell, left the room, and my account of the Story-tellers' Night
must perforce stop; because, though I have never heretofore confessed it,
all my information concerning the house-boat on the Styx has been derived
from the memoranda of Boswell.  It may be interesting to the reader to
learn, however, that, according to Boswell's account, the Story-tellers'
Night was never finished; but whether this means that it broke up
immediately afterwards in a riot, or that Doctor Johnson is still at work
detailing his reminiscences, I am not aware, and I cannot at the moment
of writing ascertain, for Boswell, when I have the pleasure of meeting
him, invariably avoids the subject.




CHAPTER XI: AS TO SAURIANS AND OTHERS


It was Noah who spoke.

"I'm glad," he said, "that when I embarked at the time of the heavy rains
that did so much damage in the old days, there weren't any dogs like that
fellow Cerberus about.  If I'd had to feed a lot of three-headed beasts
like him the Ark would have run short of provisions inside of ten days."

"That's very likely true," observed Mr. Barnum; "but I must confess, my
dear Noah, that you showed a lamentable lack of the showman's instinct
when you selected the animals you did.  A more commonplace lot of beasts
were never gathered together, and while Adam is held responsible for the
introduction of sin into the world, I attribute most of my offences to
none other than yourself."

The members of the club drew their chairs a little closer.  The
conversation had opened a trifle spicily, and, furthermore, they had
retained enough of their mortality to be interested in animal stories.
Adam, who had managed to settle his back dues and delinquent
house-charges, and once more acquired the privileges of the club, nodded
his head gratefully at Mr. Barnum.

"I'm glad to find some one," said he, "who places the responsibility for
trouble where it belongs.  I'm round-shouldered with the blame I've had
to bear.  I didn't invent sin any more than I invented the telephone, and
I think it's rather rough on a fellow who lived a quiet, retiring,
pastoral life, minding his own business and staying home nights, to be
held up to public reprobation for as long a time as I have."

"It'll be all right in time," said Raleigh; "just wait--be patient, and
your vindication will come.  Nobody thought much of the plays Bacon and I
wrote for Shakespeare until Shakespeare 'd been dead a century."

"Humph!" said Adam, gloomily.  "Wait!  What have I been doing all this
time?  I've waited all the time there's been so far, and until Mr. Barnum
spoke as he did I haven't observed the slightest inclination on the part
of anybody to rehabilitate my lost reputation.  Nor do I see exactly how
it's to come about even if I do wait."

"You might apply for an investigating committee to look into the
charges," suggested an American politician, just over.  "Get your friends
on it, and you'll be all right."

"Better let sleeping dogs lie," said Blackstone.

"I intend to," said Adam.  "The fact is, I hate to give any further
publicity to the matter.  Even if I did bring the case into court and sue
for libel, I've only got one witness to prove my innocence, and that's my
wife.  I'm not going to drag her into it.  She's got nervous prostration
over her position as it is, and this would make it worse.  Queen
Elizabeth and the rest of these snobs in society won't invite her to any
of their functions because they say she hadn't any grandfather; and even
if she were received by them, she'd be uncomfortable going about.  It
isn't pleasant for a woman to feel that every one knows she's the oldest
woman in the room."

"Well, take my word for it," said Raleigh, kindly.  "It'll all come out
all right.  You know the old saying, 'History repeats itself.'  Some day
you will be living back in Eden again, and if you are only careful to
make an exact record of all you do, and have a notary present, before
whom you can make an affidavit as to the facts, you will be able to
demonstrate your innocence."

"I was only condemned on hearsay evidence, anyhow," said Adam, ruefully.

"Nonsense; you were caught red-handed," said Noah; "my grandfather told
me so.  And now that I've got a chance to slip in a word edgewise, I'd
like mightily to have you explain your statement, Mr. Barnum, that I am
responsible for your errors.  That is a serious charge to bring against a
man of my reputation."

"I mean simply this: that to make a show interesting," said Mr. Barnum,
"a man has got to provide interesting materials, that's all.  I do not
mean to say a word that is in any way derogatory to your morality.  You
were a surprisingly good man for a sea-captain, and with the exception of
that one occasion when you--ah--you allowed yourself to be stranded on
the bar, if I may so put it, I know of nothing to be said against you as
a moral, temperate person."

"That was only an accident," said Noah, reddening.  "You can't expect a
man six hundred odd years of age--"

"Certainly not," said Raleigh, soothingly, "and nobody thinks less of you
for it.  Considering how you must have hated the sight of water, the
wonder of it is that it didn't become a fixed habit.  Let us hear what it
is that Mr. Barnum does criticise in you."

"His taste, that's all," said Mr. Barnum.  "I contend that, compared to
the animals he might have had, the ones he did have were as ant-hills to
Alps.  There were more magnificent zoos allowed to die out through Noah's
lack of judgment than one likes to think of.  Take the Proterosaurus, for
instance.  Where on earth do we find his equal to-day?"

"You ought to be mighty glad you can't find one like him," put in Adam.
"If you'd spent a week in the Garden of Eden with me, with lizards eight
feet long dropping out of the trees on to your lap while you were trying
to take a Sunday-afternoon nap, you'd be willing to dispense with things
of that sort for the balance of your natural life.  If you want to get an
idea of that experience let somebody drop a calf on you some afternoon."

"I am not saying anything about that," returned Barnum.  "It would be
unpleasant to have an elephant drop on one after the fashion of which you
speak, but I am glad the elephant was saved just the same.  I haven't
advocated the Proterosaurus as a Sunday-afternoon surprise, but as an
attraction for a show.  I still maintain that a lizard as big as a cow
would prove a lodestone, the drawing powers of which the pocket-money of
the small boy would be utterly unable to resist.  Then there was the
Iguanadon.  He'd have brought a fortune to the box-office--"

"Which you'd have immediately lost," retorted Noah, "paying rent.  When
you get a reptile of his size, that reaches thirty feet up into the air
when he stands on his hind-legs, the ordinary circus wagon of commerce
can't be made to hold him, and your menagerie-room has to have ceilings
so high that every penny he brought to the box-office would be spent
storing him."

"Mischievous, too," said Adam, "that Iguanadon.  You couldn't keep
anything out of his reach.  We used to forbid animals of his kind to
enter the garden, but that didn't bother him; he'd stand up on his hind-
legs and reach over and steal anything he'd happen to want."

"I could have used him for a fire-escape," said Mr. Barnum; "and as for
my inability to provide him with quarters, I'd have met that problem
after a short while.  I've always lamented the absence, too, of the
Megalosaurus--"

"Which simply shows how ignorant you are," retorted Noah.  "Why, my dear
fellow, it would have taken the whole of an ordinary zoo such as yours to
give the Megalosaurus a lunch.  Those fellows would eat a rhinoceros as
easily as you'd crack a peanut.  I did have a couple of Megalosaurians on
my boat for just twenty-four hours, and then I chucked them both
overboard.  If I'd kept them ten days longer they'd have eaten every
blessed beast I had with me, and your Zoo wouldn't have had anything else
but Megalosaurians."

"Papa is right about that, Mr. Barnum," said Shem.  "The whole Saurian
tribe was a fearful nuisance.  About four hundred years before the flood
I had a pet Creosaurus that I kept in our barn.  He was a cunning little
devil--full of tricks, and all that; but we never could keep a cow or a
horse on the place while he was about.  They'd mysteriously disappear,
and we never knew what became of 'em until one morning we surprised Fido
in--"

"Surprised who?" asked Doctor Johnson, scornfully.

"Fido," returned Shem.  "'That was my Creosaurus's name."

"Lord save us!  Fido!" cried Johnson.  "What a name for a Creosaurus!"

"Well, what of it?" asked Shem, angrily.  "You wouldn't have us call a
mastodon like that Fanny, would you, or Tatters?"

"Go on," said Johnson; "I've nothing to say."

"Shall I send for a physician?" put in Boswell, looking anxiously at his
chief, the situation was so extraordinary.

Solomon and Carlyle giggled; and the Doctor having politely requested
Boswell to go to a warmer section of the country, Shem resumed.

"I caught him in the act of swallowing five cows and Ham's favorite
trotter, sulky and all."

Baron Munchausen rose up and left the room.

"If they're going to lie I'm going to get out," he said, as he passed
through the room.

"What became of Fido?" asked Boswell.

"The sulky killed him," returned Shem, innocently.  "He couldn't digest
the wheels."

Noah looked approvingly at his son, and, turning to Barnum, observed,
quietly:

"What he says is true, and I will go further and say that it is my belief
that you would have found the show business impossible if I had taken
that sort of creature aboard.  You'd have got mightily discouraged after
your Antediluvians had chewed up a few dozen steam calliopes, and eaten
every other able-bodied exhibit you had managed to secure.  I'd have
tried to save a couple of Discosaurians if I hadn't supposed they were
able to take care of themselves.  A combination of sea-serpent and
dragon, with a neck twenty-two feet long, it seemed to me, ought to have
been able to ride out any storm or fall of rain; but there I was wrong,
and I am free to admit my error.  It never occurred to me that the sea-
serpents were in any danger, so I let them alone, with the result that I
never saw but one other, and he was only an illusion due to that unhappy
use of stimulants to which, with shocking bad taste, you have chosen to
refer."

"I didn't mean to call up unpleasant memories," said Barnum.  "I never
believed you got half-seas over, anyhow; but, to return to our muttons,
why didn't you hand down a few varieties of the Therium family to
posterity?  There were the Dinotherium and the Megatherium, either one of
which would have knocked spots out of any leopard that ever was made, and
along side of which even my woolly horse would have paled into
insignificance.  That's what I can't understand in your selections; with
Megatheriums to burn, why save leopards and panthers and other such every-
day creatures?"

"What kind of a boat do you suppose I had?" cried Noah.  "Do you imagine
for a moment that she was four miles on the water-line, with a mile and
three-quarters beam?  If I'd had a pair of Dinotheriums in the stern of
that Ark, she'd have tipped up fore and aft, until she'd have looked like
a telegraph-pole in the water, and if I'd put 'em amidships they'd have
had to be wedged in so tightly they couldn't move to keep the vessel
trim.  I didn't go to sea, my friend, for the purpose of being tipped
over in mid-ocean every time one of my cargo wanted to shift his weight
from one leg to the other."

"It was bad enough with the elephants, wasn't it, papa?" said Shem.

"Yes, indeed, my son," returned the patriarch.  "It was bad enough with
the elephants.  We had to shift our ballast half a dozen times a day to
keep the boat from travelling on her beam ends, the elephants moved about
so much; and when we came to the question of provender, it took up about
nine-tenths of our hold to store hay and peanuts enough to keep them
alive and good-tempered.  On the whole, I think it's rather late in the
day, considering the trouble I took to save anything but myself and my
family, to be criticised as I now am.  You ought to be much obliged to me
for saving any animals at all.  Most people in my position would have
built a yacht for themselves and family, and let everything else slide."

"That is quite true," observed Raleigh, with a pacificatory nod at Noah.
"You were eminently unselfish, and while, with Mr. Barnum, I exceedingly
regret that the Saurians and Therii and other tribes were left on the
pier when you sailed, I nevertheless think that you showed most excellent
judgment at the time."

"He was the only man who had any at all, for that matter," suggested
Shem, "and it required all his courage to show it.  Everybody was guying
him.  Sinners stood around the yard all day and every day, criticising
the model; one scoffer pretended he thought her a canal-boat, and asked
how deep the flood was likely to be on the tow-path, and whether we
intended to use mules in shallow water and giraffes in deep; another
asked what time allowance we expected to get in a fifteen-mile run, and
hinted that a year and two months per mile struck him as being the proper
thing--"

"It was far from pleasant," said Noah, tapping his fingers together
reflectively.  "I don't want to go through it again, and if, as Raleigh
suggests, history is likely to repeat herself, I'll sublet the contract
to Barnum here, and let him get the chaff."

"It was all right in the end, though, dad," said Shem.  "We had the great
laugh on 'hoi polloi' the second day out."

"We did, indeed," said Noah.  "When we told 'em we only carried first-
class passengers and had no room for emigrants, they began to see that
the Ark wasn't such an old tub, after all; and a good ninety per cent. of
them would have given ten dollars for a little of that time allowance
they'd been talking to us about for several centuries."

Noah lapsed into a musing silence, and Barnum rose to leave.

"I still wish you'd saved a Discosaurus," he said.  "A creature with a
neck twenty-two feet long would have been a gold mine to me.  He could
have been trained to stand in the ring, and by stretching out his neck
bite the little boys who sneak in under the tent and occupy seats on the
top row."

"Well, for your sake," said Noah, with a smile, "I'm very sorry; but for
my own, I'm quite satisfied with the general results."

And they all agreed that the patriarch had every reason to be pleased
with himself.




CHAPTER XII: THE HOUSE-BOAT DISAPPEARS


Queen Elizabeth, attended by Ophelia and Xanthippe, was walking along the
river-bank.  It was a beautiful autumn day, although, owing to certain
climatic peculiarities of Hades, it seemed more like midsummer.  The
mercury in the club thermometer was nervously clicking against the top of
the crystal tube, and poor Cerberus was having all he could do with his
three mouths snapping up the pestiferous little shades of by-gone gnats
that seemed to take an almost unholy pleasure in alighting upon his
various noses and ears.

Ophelia was doing most of the talking.

"I am sure I have never wished to ride one of them," she said,
positively.  "In the first place, I do not see where the pleasure of it
comes in, and, in the second, it seems to me as if skirts must be
dangerous.  If they should catch in one of the pedals, where would I be?"

"In the hospital shortly, methinks," said Queen Elizabeth.

"Well, I shouldn't wear skirts," snapped Xanthippe.  "If a man's wife
can't borrow some of her husband's clothing to reduce her peril to a
minimum, what is the use of having a husband?  When I take to the
bicycle, which, in spite of all Socrates can say, I fully intend to do, I
shall have a man's wheel, and I shall wear Socrates' old dress-clothes.
If Hades doesn't like it, Hades may suffer."

"I don't see how Socrates' clothes will help you," observed Ophelia.  "He
wore skirts himself, just like all the other old Greeks.  His toga would
be quite as apt to catch in the gear as your skirts."

Xanthippe looked puzzled for a moment.  It was evident that she had not
thought of the point which Ophelia had brought up--strong-minded ladies
of her kind are apt sometimes to overlook important links in such chains
of evidence as they feel called upon to use in binding themselves to
their rights.

"The women of your day were relieved of that dress problem, at any rate,"
laughed Queen Elizabeth.

"The women of my day," retorted Xanthippe, "in matters of dress were the
equals of their husbands--in my family particularly; now they have lost
their rights, and are made to confine themselves still to garments like
those of yore, while man has arrogated to himself the sole and exclusive
use of sane habiliments.  However, that is apart from the question.  I
was saying that I shall have a man's wheel, and shall wear Socrates' old
dress-clothes to ride it in, if Socrates has to go out and buy an old
dress-suit for the purpose."

The Queen arched her brows and looked inquiringly at Xanthippe for a
moment.

"A magnificent old maid was lost to the world when you married," she
said.  "Feeling as you do about men, my dear Xanthippe, I don't see why
you ever took a husband."

"Humph!" retorted Xanthippe.  "Of course you don't.  You didn't need a
husband.  You were born with something to govern.  I wasn't."

"How about your temper?" suggested Ophelia, meekly.

Xanthippe sniffed frigidly at this remark.

"I never should have gone crazy over a man if I'd remained unmarried
forty thousand years," she retorted, severely.  "I married Socrates
because I loved him and admired his sculpture; but when he gave up
sculpture and became a thinker he simply tried me beyond all endurance,
he was so thoughtless, with the result that, having ventured once or
twice to show my natural resentment, I have been handed down to posterity
as a shrew.  I've never complained, and I don't complain now; but when a
woman is married to a philosopher who is so taken up with his studies
that when he rises in the morning he doesn't look what he is doing, and
goes off to his business in his wife's clothes, I think she is entitled
to a certain amount of sympathy."

"And yet you wish to wear his," persisted Ophelia.

"Turn about is fair-play," said Xanthippe.  "I've suffered so much on his
account that on the principle of averages he deserves to have a little
drop of bitters in his nectar."

"You are simply the victim of man's deceit," said Elizabeth, wishing to
mollify the now angry Xanthippe, who was on the verge of tears.  "I
understood men, fortunately, and so never married.  I knew my father, and
even if I hadn't been a wise enough child to know him, I should not have
wed, because he married enough to last one family for several years."

"You must have had a hard time refusing all those lovely men, though,"
sighed Ophelia.  "Of course, Sir Walter wasn't as handsome as my dear
Hamlet, but he was very fetching."

"I cannot deny that," said Elizabeth, "and I didn't really have the heart
to say no when he asked me; but I did tell him that if he married me I
should not become Mrs. Raleigh, but that he should become King Elizabeth.
He fled to Virginia on the next steamer.  My diplomacy rid me of a very
unpleasant duty."

Chatting thus, the three famous spirits passed slowly along the path
until they came to the sheltered nook in which the house-boat lay at
anchor.

"There's a case in point," said Xanthippe, as the house-boat loomed up
before them.  "All that luxury is for men; we women are not permitted to
cross the gangplank.  Our husbands and brothers and friends go there; the
door closes on them, and they are as completely lost to us as though they
never existed.  We don't know what goes on in there.  Socrates tells me
that their amusements are of a most innocent nature, but how do I know
what he means by that?  Furthermore, it keeps him from home, while I have
to stay at home and be entertained by my sons, whom the Encyclopaedia
Britannica rightly calls dull and fatuous.  In other words, club life for
him, and dulness and fatuity for me."

"I think myself they're rather queer about letting women into that boat,"
said Queen Elizabeth.  "But it isn't Sir Walter's fault.  He told me he
tried to have them establish a Ladies' Day, and that they agreed to do
so, but have since resisted all his efforts to have a date set for the
function."

"It would be great fun to steal in there now, wouldn't it," giggled
Ophelia.  "There doesn't seem to be anybody about to prevent our doing
so."

"That's true," said Xanthippe.  "All the windows are closed, as if there
wasn't a soul there.  I've half a mind to take a peep in at the house."

"I am with you," said Elizabeth, her face lighting up with pleasure.  It
was a great novelty, and an unpleasant one to her, to find some place
where she could not go.  "Let's do it," she added.

So the three women tiptoed softly up the gang-plank, and, silently
boarding the house-boat, peeped in at the windows.  What they saw merely
whetted their curiosity.

"I must see more," cried Elizabeth, rushing around to the door, which
opened at her touch.  Xanthippe and Ophelia followed close on her heels,
and shortly they found themselves, open-mouthed in wondering admiration,
in the billiard-room of the floating palace, and Richard, the ghost of
the best billiard-room attendant in or out of Hades, stood before them.

"Excuse me," he said, very much upset by the sudden apparition of the
ladies.  "I'm very sorry, but ladies are not admitted here."

"We are equally sorry," retorted Elizabeth, assuming her most imperious
manner, "that your masters have seen fit to prohibit our being here; but,
now that we are here, we intend to make the most of the opportunity,
particularly as there seem to be no members about.  What has become of
them all?"

Richard smiled broadly.  "I don't know where they are," he replied; but
it was evident that he was not telling the exact truth.

"Oh, come, my boy," said the Queen, kindly, "you do know.  Sir Walter
told me you knew everything.  Where are they?"

"Well, if you must know, ma'am," returned Richard, captivated by the
Queen's manner, "they've all gone down the river to see a prize-fight
between Goliath and Samson."

"See there!" cried Xanthippe.  "That's what this club makes possible.
Socrates told me he was coming here to take luncheon with Carlyle, and
they've both of 'em gone off to a disgusting prize-fight!"

"Yes, ma'am, they have," said Richard; "and if Goliath wins, I don't
think Mr. Socrates will get home this evening."

"Betting, eh?" said Xanthippe, scornfully.

"Yes, ma'am," returned Richard.

"More club!" cried Xanthippe.

"Oh no, ma'am," said Richard.  "Betting is not allowed in the club;
they're very strict about that.  But the shore is only ten feet off,
ma'am, and the gentlemen always go ashore and make their bets."

During this little colloquy Elizabeth and Ophelia were wandering about,
admiring everything they saw.

"I do wish Lucretia Borgia and Calpurnia could see this.  I wonder if the
Caesars are on the telephone," Elizabeth said.  Investigation showed that
both the Borgias and the Caesars were on the wire, and in short order the
two ladies had been made acquainted with the state of affairs at the
house-boat; and as they were both quite as anxious to see the interior of
the much-talked-of club-house as the others, they were not long in
arriving.  Furthermore, they brought with them half a dozen more ladies,
among whom were Desdemona and Cleopatra, and then began the most
extraordinary session the house-boat ever knew.  A meeting was called,
with Elizabeth in the chair, and all the best ladies of the Stygian
realms were elected members.  Xanthippe, amid the greatest applause,
moved that every male member of the organization be expelled for conduct
unworthy of a gentleman in attending a prize-fight, and encouraging two
such horrible creatures as Goliath and Samson in their nefarious
pursuits.  Desdemona seconded the motion, and it was carried without a
dissenting voice, although Mrs. Caesar, with becoming dignity, merely
smiled approval, not caring to take part too actively in the proceedings.

The men having thus been disposed of in a summary fashion, Richard was
elected Janitor in Charon's place, and the club was entirely reorganized,
with Cleopatra as permanent President.  The meeting then adjourned, and
the invaders set about enjoying their newly acquired privileges.  The
smoking-room was thronged for a few moments, but owing to the
extraordinary strength of the tobacco which the faithful Richard
shovelled into the furnace, it developed no enduring popularity,
Xanthippe, with a suddenly acquired pallor, being the first to renounce
the pastime as revolting.

So fast and furious was the enjoyment of these thirsty souls, so long
deprived of their rights, that night came on without their observing it,
and with the night was brought the great peril into which they were
thrown, and from which at the moment of writing they had not been
extricated, and which, to my regret, has cut me off for the present from
any further information connected with the Associated Shades and their
beautiful lounging-place.  Had they not been so intent upon the inner
beauties of the House-boat on the Styx they might have observed
approaching, under the shadow of the westerly shore, a long, rakish craft
propelled by oars, which dipped softly and silently and with trained
precision in the now jet-black waters of the Styx.  Manning the oars were
a dozen evil-visaged ruffians, while in the stern of the approaching
vessel there sat a grim-faced, weather-beaten spirit, armed to the teeth,
his coat sleeves bearing the skull and cross-bones, the insignia of
piracy.

This boat, stealing up the river like a thief in the night, contained
Captain Kidd and his pirate crew, and their mission was a mission of
vengeance.  To put the matter briefly and plainly, Captain Kidd was
smarting under the indignity which the club had recently put upon him.  He
had been unanimously blackballed, even his proposer and seconder, who had
been browbeaten into nominating him for membership, voting against him.

"I may be a pirate," he cried, when he heard what the club had done, "but
I have feelings, and the Associated Shades will repent their action.  The
time will come when they'll find that I have their club-house, and they
have--its debts."

It was for this purpose that the great terror of the seas had come upon
this, the first favorable opportunity.  Kidd knew that the house-boat was
unguarded; his spies had told him that the members had every one gone to
the fight, and he resolved that the time had come to act.  He did not
know that the Fates had helped to make his vengeance all the more
terrible and withering by putting the most attractive and fashionable
ladies of the Stygian country likewise in his power; but so it was, and
they, poor souls, while this fiend, relentless and cruel, was slowly
approaching, sang on and danced on in blissful unconsciousness of their
peril.

In less than five minutes from the time when his sinister-craft rounded
the bend Kidd and his crew had boarded the house-boat, cut her loose from
her moorings, and in ten minutes she had sailed away into the great
unknown, and with her went some of the most precious gems in the social
diadem of Hades.

The rest of my story is soon told.  The whole country was aroused when
the crime was discovered, but up to the date of this narrative no word
has been received of the missing craft and her precious cargo.  Raleigh
and Caesar have had the seas scoured in search of her, Hamlet has offered
his kingdom for her return, but unavailingly; and the men of Hades were
cast into a gloom from which there seems to be no relief.

Socrates alone was unaffected.

"They'll come back some day, my dear Raleigh," he said, as the knight
buried his face, weeping, in his hands.  "So why repine?  I'll never lose
my Xanthippe--permanently, that is.  I know that, for I am a philosopher,
and I know there is no such thing as luck.  And we can start another
club."

"Very likely," sighed Raleigh, wiping his eyes.  "I don't mind the club
so much, but to think of those poor women--"

"Oh, they're all right," returned Socrates, with a laugh.  "Caesar's wife
is along, and you can't dispute the fact that she's a good chaperon.  Give
the ladies a chance.  They've been after our club for years; now let 'em
have it, and let us hope that they like it.  Order me up a hemlock sour,
and let's drink to their enjoyment of club life."

Which was done, and I, in spirit, drank with them, for I sincerely hope
that the "New Women" of Hades are having a good time.





CHAPTER I:  THE ASSOCIATED SHADES TAKE ACTION



The House-boat of the Associated Shades, formerly located upon the
River Styx, as the reader may possibly remember, had been torn from
its moorings and navigated out into unknown seas by that vengeful
pirate Captain Kidd, aided and abetted by some of the most ruffianly
inhabitants of Hades.  Like a thief in the night had they come, and
for no better reason than that the Captain had been unanimously voted
a shade too shady to associate with self-respecting spirits had they
made off with the happy floating club-house of their betters; and
worst of all, with them, by force of circumstances over which they
had no control, had sailed also the fair Queen Elizabeth, the
spirited Xanthippe, and every other strong-minded and beautiful woman
of Erebean society, whereby the men thereof were rendered desolate.

"I can't stand it!" cried Raleigh, desperately, as with his
accustomed grace he presided over a special meeting of the club,
called on the bank of the inky Stygian stream, at the point where the
missing boat had been moored.  "Think of it, gentlemen, Elizabeth of
England, Calpurnia of Rome, Ophelia of Denmark, and every precious
jewel in our social diadem gone, vanished completely; and with whom?
Kidd, of all men in the universe!  Kidd, the pirate, the ruffian--"

"Don't take on so, my dear Sir Walter," said Socrates, cheerfully.
"What's the use of going into hysterics?  You are not a woman, and
should eschew that luxury.  Xanthippe is with them, and I'll warrant
you that when that cherished spouse of mine has recovered from the
effects of the sea, say the third day out, Kidd and his crew will be
walking the plank, and voluntarily at that."

"But the House-boat itself," murmured Noah, sadly.  "That was my
delight.  It reminded me in some respects of the Ark."

"The law of compensation enters in there, my dear Commodore,"
retorted Socrates.  "For me, with Xanthippe abroad I do not need a
club to go to; I can stay at home and take my hemlock in peace and
straight.  Xanthippe always compelled me to dilute it at the rate of
one quart of water to the finger."

"Well, we didn't all marry Xanthippe," put in Caesar firmly,
"therefore we are not all satisfied with the situation.  I, for one,
quite agree with Sir Walter that something must be done, and quickly.
Are we to sit here and do nothing, allowing that fiend to kidnap our
wives with impunity?"

"Not at all," interposed Bonaparte.  "The time for action has
arrived.  All things considered, he is welcome to Marie Louise, but
the idea of Josephine going off on a cruise of that kind breaks my
heart."

"No question about it," observed Dr. Johnson.  "We've got to do
something if it is only for the sake of appearances.  The question
really is, what shall be done first?"

"I am in favor of taking a drink as the first step, and considering
the matter of further action afterwards," suggested Shakespeare, and
it was this suggestion that made the members unanimous upon the
necessity for immediate action, for when the assembled spirits called
for their various favorite beverages it was found that there were
none to be had, it being Sunday, and all the establishments wherein
liquid refreshments were licensed to be sold being closed--for at the
time of writing the local government of Hades was in the hands of the
reform party.

"What!" cried Socrates.  "Nothing but Styx water and vitriol,
Sundays?  Then the House-boat must be recovered whether Xanthippe
comes with it or not.  Sir Walter, I am for immediate action, after
all.  This ruffian should be captured at once and made an example
of."

"Excuse me, Socrates," put in Lindley Murray, "but, ah--pray speak in
Greek hereafter, will you, please?  When you attempt English you have
a beastly way of working up to climatic prepositions which are
offensive to the ear of a purist."

"This is no time to discuss style, Murray," interposed Sir Walter.
"Socrates may speak and spell like Chaucer if he pleases; he may even
part his infinitives in the middle, for all I care.  We have affairs
of greater moment in hand."

"We must ransack the earth," cried Socrates, "until we find that
boat.  I'm dry as a fish."

"There he goes again!" growled Murray.  "Dry as a fish!  What fish,
I'd like to know, is dry?"

"Red herrings," retorted Socrates; and there was a great laugh at the
expense of the purist, in which even Hamlet, who had grown more and
more melancholy and morbid since the abduction of Ophelia, joined.

"Then it is settled," said Raleigh; "something must be done.  And now
the point is, what?"

"Relief expeditions have a way of finding things," suggested Dr.
Livingstone.  "Or rather of being found by the things they go out to
relieve.  I propose that we send out a number of them.  I will take
Africa; Bonaparte can lead an expedition into Europe; General
Washington may have North America; and--"

"I beg pardon," put in Dr. Johnson,  "but have you any idea, Dr.
Livingstone, that Captain Kidd has put wheels on this House-boat of
ours, and is having it dragged across the Sahara by mules or camels?"

"No such absurd idea ever entered my head," retorted the Doctor.

"Do you, then, believe that he has put runners on it, and is engaged
in the pleasurable pastime of taking the ladies tobogganing down the
Alps?" persisted the philosopher.

"Not at all.  Why do you ask?" queried the African explorer,
irritably.

"Because I wish to know," said Johnson.  "That is always my motive in
asking questions.  You propose to go looking for a house-boat in
Central Africa; you suggest that Bonaparte lead an expedition in
search of it through Europe--all of which strikes me as nonsense.
This search is the work of sea-dogs, not of landlubbers.  You might
as well ask Confucius to look for it in the heart of China.  What
earthly use there is in ransacking the earth I fail to see.  What we
need is a navel expedition to scour the sea, unless it is pretty well
understood in advance that we believe Kidd has hauled the boat out of
the water, and is now using it for a roller-skating rink or a bicycle
academy in Ohio, or for some other purpose for which neither he nor
it was designed."

"Dr. Johnson's point is well taken," said a stranger who had been
sitting upon the string-piece of the pier, quietly, but with very
evident interest, listening to the discussion.  He was a tall and
excessively slender shade, "like a spirt of steam out of a teapot,"
as Johnson put it afterwards, so slight he seemed.  "I have not the
honor of being a member of this association," the stranger continued,
"but, like all well-ordered shades, I aspire to the distinction, and
I hold myself and my talents at the disposal of this club.  I fancy
it will not take us long to establish our initial point, which is
that the gross person who has so foully appropriated your property to
his own base uses does not contemplate removing it from its keel and
placing it somewhere inland.  All the evidence in hand points to a
radically different conclusion, which is my sole reason for doubting
the value of that conclusion.  Captain Kidd is a seafarer by
instinct, not a landsman.  The House-boat is not a house, but a boat;
therefore the place to look for it is not, as Dr. Johnson so well
says, in the Sahara Desert, or on the Alps, or in the State of Ohio,
but upon the high sea, or upon the waterfront of some one of the
world's great cities."

"And what, then, would be your plan?" asked Sir Walter, impressed by
the stranger's manner as well as by the very manifest reason in all
that he had said.

"The chartering of a suitable vessel, fully armed and equipped for
the purpose of pursuit.  Ascertain whither the House-boat has sailed,
for what port, and start at once.  Have you a model of the House-boat
within reach?" returned the stranger.

"I think not; we have the architect's plans, however," said the
chairman.

"We had, Mr. Chairman," said Demosthenes, who was secretary of the
House Committee, rising, "but they are gone with the House-boat
itself.  They were kept in the safe in the hold."

A look of annoyance came into the face of the stranger.

"That's too bad," he said.  "It was a most important part of my plan
that we should know about how fast the House-boat was."

"Humph!" ejaculated Socrates, with ill-concealed sarcasm.  "If you'll
take Xanthippe's word for it, the House-boat was the fastest yacht
afloat."

"I refer to the matter of speed in sailing," returned the stranger,
quietly.  "The question of its ethical speed has nothing to do with
it."

"The designer of the craft is here," said Sir Walter, fixing his eyes
upon Sir Christopher Wren.  "It is possible that he may be of
assistance in settling that point."

"What has all this got to do with the question, anyhow, Mr.
Chairman?" asked Solomon, rising impatiently and addressing Sir
Walter.  "We aren't preparing for a yacht-race, that I know of.
Nobody's after a cup, or a championship of any kind.  What we do want
is to get our wives back.  The Captain hasn't taken more than half of
mine along with him, but I am interested none the less.  The Queen of
Sheba is on board, and I am somewhat interested in her fate.  So I
ask you what earthly or unearthly use there is in discussing this
question of speed in the House-boat.  It strikes me as a woful waste
of time, and rather unprecedented too, that we should suspend all
rules and listen to the talk of an entire stranger."

"I do not venture to doubt the wisdom of Solomon," said Johnson,
dryly, "but I must say that the gentleman's remarks rather interest
me."

"Of course they do," ejaculated Solomon.  "He agreed with you.  That
ought to make him interesting to everybody.  Freaks usually are."

"That is not the reason at all," retorted Dr. Johnson.  "Cold water
agrees with me, but it doesn't interest me.  What I do think,
however, is that our unknown friend seems to have a grasp on the
situation by which we are confronted, and he's going at the matter in
hand in a very comprehensive fashion.  I move, therefore, that
Solomon be laid on the table, and that the privileges of the--ah--of
the wharf be extended indefinitely to our friend on the string-
piece."

The motion, having been seconded, was duly carried, and the stranger
resumed.

"I will explain for the benefit of his Majesty King Solomon, whose
wisdom I have always admired, and whose endurance as the husband of
three hundred wives has filled me with wonder," he said, "that before
starting in pursuit of the stolen vessel we must select a craft of
some sort for the purpose, and that in selecting the pursuer it is
quite essential that we should choose a vessel of greater speed than
the one we desire to overtake.  It would hardly be proper, I think,
if the House-boat can sail four knots an hour to attempt to overhaul
her with a launch, or other nautical craft, with a maximum speed of
two knots an hour."

"Hear! hear!" ejaculated Caesar.

"That is my reason, your Majesty, for inquiring as to the speed of
your late club-house," said the stranger, bowing courteously to
Solomon.  "Now, if Sir Christopher Wren can give me her measurements,
we can very soon determine at about what rate she is leaving us
behind under favorable circumstances."

"'Tisn't necessary for Sir Christopher to do anything of the sort,"
said Noah, rising and manifesting somewhat more heat than the
occasion seemed to require.  "As long as we are discussing the
question I will take the liberty of stating what I have never
mentioned before, that the designer of the House-boat merely
appropriated the lines of the Ark.  Shem, Ham, and Japhet will bear
testimony to the truth of that statement."

"There can be no quarrel on that score, Mr. Chairman," assented Sir
Christopher, with cutting frigidity.  "I am perfectly willing to
admit that practically the two vessels were built on the same lines,
but with modifications which would enable my boat to sail twenty
miles to windward and back in six days' less time than it would have
taken the Ark to cover the same distance, and it could have taken all
the wash of the excursion steamers into the bargain."

"Bosh!" ejaculated Noah, angrily.  "Strip your old tub down to a
flying balloon-jib and a marline-spike, and ballast the Ark with
elephants until every inch of her reeked with ivory and peanuts, and
she'd outfoot you on every leg, in a cyclone or a zephyr.  Give me
the Ark and a breeze, and your House-boat wouldn't be within hailing
distance of her five minutes after the start if she had 40,000 square
yards of canvas spread before a gale."

"This discussion is waxing very unprofitable," observed Confucius.
"If these gentlemen cannot be made to confine themselves to the
subject that is agitating this body, I move we call in the
authorities and have them confined in the bottomless pit."

"I did not precipitate the quarrel," said Noah.  "I was merely trying
to assist our friend on the string-piece.  I was going to say that as
the Ark was probably a hundred times faster than Sir Christopher
Wren's--tub, which he himself says can take care of all the wash of
the excursion boats, thereby becoming on his own admission a wash-
tub--"

"Order! order!" cried Sir Christopher.

"I was going to say that this wash-tub could be overhauled by a
launch or any other craft with a speed of thirty knots a mouth,"
continued Noah, ignoring the interruption.

"Took him forty days to get to Mount Ararat!" sneered Sir
Christopher.

"Well, your boat would have got there two weeks sooner, I'll admit,"
retorted Noah, "if she'd sprung a leak at the right time."

"Granting the truth of Noah's statement," said Sir Walter, motioning
to the angry architect to be quiet--"not that we take any side in the
issue between the two gentlemen, but merely for the sake of argument-
-I wish to ask the stranger who has been good enough to interest
himself in our trouble what he proposes to do--how can you establish
your course in case a boat were provided?"

"Also vot vill be dher gost, if any?" put in Shylock.

A murmur of disapprobation greeted this remark.

"The cost need not trouble you, sir," said Sir Walter, indignantly,
addressing the stranger; "you will have carte blanche."

"Den ve are ruint!" cried Shylock, displaying his palms, and showing
by that act a select assortment of diamond rings.

"Oh," laughed the stranger, "that is a simple matter.  Captain Kidd
has gone to London."

"To London!" cried several members at once.  "How do you know that?"

"By this," said the stranger, holding up the tiny stub end of a
cigar.

"Tut-tut!" ejaculated Solomon.  "What child's play is this!"

"No, your Majesty," observed the stranger, "it is not child's play;
it is fact.  That cigar end was thrown aside here on the wharf by
Captain Kidd just before he stepped on board the House-boat."

"How do you know that?" demanded Raleigh.  "And granting the truth of
the assertion, what does it prove?"

"I will tell you," said the stranger.  And he at once proceeded as
follows.



CHAPTER II:  THE STRANGER UNRAVELS A MYSTERY AND REVEALS HIMSELF



"I have made a hobby of the study of cigar ends," said the stranger,
as the Associated Shades settled back to hear his account of himself.
"From my earliest youth, when I used surreptitiously to remove the
unsmoked ends of my father's cigars and break them up, and, in
hiding, smoke them in an old clay pipe which I had presented to me by
an ancient sea-captain of my acquaintance, I have been interested in
tobacco in all forms, even including these self-same despised
unsmoked ends; for they convey to my mind messages, sentiments,
farces, comedies, and tragedies which to your minds would never
become manifest through their agency."

The company drew closer together and formed themselves in a more
compact mass about the speaker.  It was evident that they were
beginning to feel an unusual interest in this extraordinary person,
who had come among them unheralded and unknown.  Even Shylock stopped
calculating percentages for an instant to listen.

"Do you mean to tell us," demanded Shakespeare, "that the unsmoked
stub of a cigar will suggest the story of him who smoked it to your
mind?"

"I do," replied the stranger, with a confident smile.  "Take this
one, for instance, that I have picked up here upon the wharf; it
tells me the whole story of the intentions of Captain Kidd at the
moment when, in utter disregard of your rights, he stepped aboard
your House-boat, and, in his usual piratical fashion, made off with
it into unknown seas."

"But how do you know he smoked it?" asked Solomon, who deemed it the
part of wisdom to be suspicious of the stranger.

"There are two curious indentations in it which prove that.  The
marks of two teeth, with a hiatus between, which you will see if you
look closely," said the stranger, handing the small bit of tobacco to
Sir Walter, "make that point evident beyond peradventure.  The
Captain lost an eye-tooth in one of his later raids; it was knocked
out by a marine-spike which had been hurled at him by one of the crew
of the treasure-ship he and his followers had attacked.  The adjacent
teeth were broken, but not removed.  The cigar end bears the marks of
those two jagged molars, with the hiatus, which, as I have indicated,
is due to the destruction of the eye-tooth between them.  It is not
likely that there was another man in the pirate's crew with teeth
exactly like the commander's, therefore I say there can be no doubt
that the cigar end was that of the Captain himself."

"Very interesting indeed," observed Blackstone, removing his wig and
fanning himself with it; "but I must confess, Mr. Chairman, that in
any properly constituted law court this evidence would long since
have been ruled out as irrelevant and absurd.  The idea of two or
three hundred dignified spirits like ourselves, gathered together to
devise a means for the recovery of our property and the rescue of our
wives, yielding the floor to the delivering of a lecture by an entire
stranger on 'Cigar Ends He Has Met,' strikes me as ridiculous in the
extreme.  Of what earthly interest is it to us to know that this or
that cigar was smoked by Captain Kidd?"

"Merely that it will help us on, your honor, to discover the
whereabouts of the said Kidd," interposed the stranger.  "It is by
trifles, seeming trifles, that the greatest detective work is done.
My friends Le Coq, Hawkshaw, and Old Sleuth will bear me out in this,
I think, however much in other respects our methods may have
differed.  They left no stone unturned in the pursuit of a criminal;
no detail, however trifling, uncared for.  No more should we in the
present instance overlook the minutest bit of evidence, however
irrelevant and absurd at first blush it may appear to be.  The truth
of what I say was very effectually proven in the strange case of the
Brokedale tiara, in which I figured somewhat conspicuously, but which
have never made public, because it involves a secret affecting the
integrity of one of the noblest families in the British Empire.  I
really believe that mystery was solved easily and at once because I
happened to remember that the number of my watch was 86507B.  How
trivial and yet how important it was, to what then transpired, you
will realize when I tell you the incident."

The stranger's manner was so impressive that there was a unanimous
and simultaneous movement upon the part of all present to get up
closer, so as the more readily to hear what he said, as a result of
which poor old Boswell was pushed overboard, and fell, with a loud
splash into the Styx.  Fortunately, however, one of Charon's
pleasure-boats was close at hand, and in a short while the dripping,
sputtering spirit was drawn into it, wrung out, and sent home to dry.
The excitement attending this diversion having subsided, Solomon
asked:

"What was the incident of the lost tiara?"

"I am about to tell you," returned the stranger; "and it must be
understood that you are told in the strictest confidence, for, as I
say, the incident involves a state secret of great magnitude.  In
life--in the mortal life--gentlemen, I was a detective by profession,
and, if I do say it, who perhaps should not, I was one of the most
interesting for purely literary purposes that has ever been known.  I
did not find it necessary to go about saying 'Ha! ha!' as M. Le Coq
was accustomed to do to advertise his cleverness; neither did I
disguise myself as a drum-major and hide under a kitchen-table for
the purpose of solving a mystery involving the abduction of a parlor
stove, after the manner of the talented Hawkshaw.  By mental
concentration alone, without fireworks or orchestral accompaniment of
any sort whatsoever, did I go about my business, and for that very
reason many of my fellow-sleuths were forced to go out of real
detective work into that line of the business with which the stage
has familiarized the most of us--a line in which nothing but
stupidity, luck, and a yellow wig is required of him who pursues it."

"This man is an impostor," whispered Le Coq to Hawkshaw.

"I've known that all along by the mole on his left wrist," returned
Hawkshaw, contemptuously.

"I suspected it the minute I saw he was not disguised," returned Le
Coq, knowingly.  "I have observed that the greatest villains latterly
have discarded disguises, as being too easily penetrated, and
therefore of no avail, and merely a useless expense."

"Silence!" cried Confucius, impatiently.  "How can the gentleman
proceed, with all this conversation going on in the rear?"

Hawkshaw and Le Coq immediately subsided, and the stranger went on.

"It was in this way that I treated the strange case of the lost
tiara," resumed the stranger.  "Mental concentration upon seemingly
insignificant details alone enabled me to bring about the desired
results in that instance.  A brief outline of the case is as follows:
It was late one evening in the early spring of 1894.  The London
season was at its height.  Dances, fetes of all kinds, opera, and the
theatres were in full blast, when all of a sudden society was
paralyzed by a most audacious robbery.  A diamond tiara valued at
50,000 pounds sterling had been stolen from the Duchess of Brokedale,
and under circumstances which threw society itself and every
individual in it under suspicion--even his Royal Highness the Prince
himself, for he had danced frequently with the Duchess, and was known
to be a great admirer of her tiara.  It was at half-past eleven
o'clock at night that the news of the robbery first came to my ears.
I had been spending the evening alone in my library making notes for
a second volume of my memoirs, and, feeling somewhat depressed, I was
on the point of going out for my usual midnight walk on Hampstead
Heath, when one of my servants, hastily entering, informed me of the
robbery.  I changed my mind in respect to my midnight walk
immediately upon receipt of the news, for I knew that before one
o'clock some one would call upon me at my lodgings with reference to
this robbery.  It could not be otherwise.  Any mystery of such
magnitude could no more be taken to another bureau than elephants
could fly--"

"They used to," said Adam.  "I once had a whole aviary full of winged
elephants.  They flew from flower to flower, and thrusting their
probabilities deep into--"

"Their what?" queried Johnson, with a frown.

"Probabilities--isn't that the word?  Their trunks," said Adam.

"Probosces, I imagine you mean," suggested Johnson.

"Yes--that was it.  Their probosces," said Adam.  "They were great
honey-gatherers, those elephants--far better than the bees, because
they could make so much more of it in a given time."

Munchausen shook his head sadly.  "I'm afraid I'm outclassed by these
antediluvians," he said.

"Gentlemen! gentlemen!" cried Sir Walter.  "These interruptions are
inexcusable!"

"That's what I think," said the stranger, with some asperity.  "I'm
having about as hard a time getting this story out as I would if it
were a serial.  Of course, if you gentlemen do not wish to hear it, I
can stop; but it must be understood that when I do stop I stop
finally, once and for all, because the tale has not a sufficiency of
dramatic climaxes to warrant its prolongation over the usual magazine
period of twelve months."

"Go on! go on!" cried some.

"Shut up!" cried others--addressing the interrupting members, of
course.

"As I was saying," resumed the stranger, "I felt confident that
within an hour, in some way or other, that case would be placed in my
hands.  It would be mine either positively or negatively--that is to
say, either the person robbed would employ me to ferret out the
mystery and recover the diamonds, or the robber himself, actuated by
motives of self-preservation, would endeavor to direct my energies
into other channels until he should have the time to dispose of his
ill-gotten booty.  A mental discussion of the probabilities inclined
me to believe that the latter would be the case.  I reasoned in this
fashion:  The person robbed is of exalted rank.  She cannot move
rapidly because she is so.  Great bodies move slowly.  It is probable
that it will be a week before, according to the etiquette by which
she is hedged about, she can communicate with me.  In the first
place, she must inform one of her attendants that she has been
robbed.  He must communicate the news to the functionary in charge of
her residence, who will communicate with the Home Secretary, and from
him will issue the orders to the police, who, baffled at every step,
will finally address themselves to me.  'I'll give that side two
weeks,' I said.  On the other hand, the robber:  will he allow
himself to be lulled into a false sense of security by counting on
this delay, or will he not, noting my habit of occasionally entering
upon detective enterprises of this nature of my own volition, come to
me at once and set me to work ferreting out some crime that has never
been committed?  My feeling was that this would happen, and I pulled
out my watch to see if it were not nearly time for him to arrive.
The robbery had taken place at a state ball at the Buckingham Palace.
'H'm!' I mused.  'He has had an hour and forty minutes to get here.
It is now twelve-twenty.  He should be here by twelve-forty-five.  I
will wait.'  And hastily swallowing a cocaine tablet to nerve myself
up for the meeting, I sat down and began to read my Schopenhauer.
Hardly had I perused a page when there came a tap upon my door.  I
rose with a smile, for I thought I knew what was to happen, opened
the door, and there stood, much to my surprise, the husband of the
lady whose tiara was missing.  It was the Duke of Brokedale himself.
It is true he was disguised.  His beard was powdered until it looked
like snow, and he wore a wig and a pair of green goggles; but I
recognized him at once by his lack of manners, which is an
unmistakable sign of nobility.  As I opened the door, he began:

"'You are Mr.--'

"'I am,' I replied.  'Come in.  You have come to see me about your
stolen watch.  It is a gold hunting-case watch with a Swiss movement;
loses five minutes a day; stem-winder; and the back cover, which does
not bear any inscription, has upon it the indentations made by the
molars of your son Willie when that interesting youth was cutting his
teeth upon it.'"

"Wonderful!" cried Johnson.

"May I ask how you knew all that?" asked Solomon, deeply impressed.
"Such penetration strikes me as marvellous."

"I didn't know it," replied the stranger, with a smile.  "What I said
was intended to be jocular, and to put Brokedale at his ease.  The
Americans present, with their usual astuteness, would term it bluff.
It was.  I merely rattled on.  I simply did not wish to offend the
gentleman by letting him know that I had penetrated his disguise.
Imagine my surprise, however, when his eye brightened as I spoke, and
he entered my room with such alacrity that half the powder which he
thought disguised his beard was shaken off on to the floor.  Sitting
down in the chair I had just vacated, he quietly remarked:

"'You are a wonderful man, sir.  How did you know that I had lost my
watch?'

"For a moment I was nonplussed; more than that, I was completely
staggered.  I had expected him to say at once that he had not lost
his watch, but had come to see me about the tiara; and to have him
take my words seriously was entirely unexpected and overwhelmingly
surprising.  However, in view of his rank, I deemed it well to fall
in with his humour.  'Oh, as for that,' I replied, 'that is a part of
my business.  It is the detective's place to know everything; and
generally, if he reveals the machinery by means of which he reaches
his conclusions, he is a fool, since his method is his secret, and
his secret his stock-in-trade.  I do not mind telling you, however,
that I knew your watch was stolen by your anxious glance at my clock,
which showed that you wished to know the time.  Now most rich
Americans have watches for that purpose, and have no hesitation about
showing them.  If you'd had a watch, you'd have looked at it, not at
my clock.'

"My visitor laughed, and repeated what he had said about my being a
wonderful man.

"'And the dents which my son made cutting his teeth?' he added.

"'Invariably go with an American's watch.  Rubber or ivory rings
aren't good enough for American babies to chew on,' said I.  'They
must have gold watches or nothing.'

"'And finally, how did you know I was a rich American?' he asked.

"'Because no other can afford to stop at hotels like the Savoy in the
height of the season,' I replied, thinking that the jest would end
there, and that he would now reveal his identity and speak of the
tiara.  To my surprise, however, he did nothing of the sort.

"'You have an almost supernatural gift,' he said.  'My name is
Bunker.  I am stopping at the Savoy.  I AM an American.  I WAS rich
when I arrived here, but I'm not quite so bloated with wealth as I
was, now that I have paid my first week's bill.  I HAVE lost my
watch; such a watch, too, as you describe, even to the dents.  Your
only mistake was that the dents were made by my son John, and not
Willie; but even there I cannot but wonder at you, for John and
Willie are twins, and so much alike that it sometimes baffles even
their mother to tell them apart.  The watch has no very great value
intrinsically, but the associations are such that I want it back, and
I will pay 200 pounds for its recovery.  I have no clew as to who
took it.  It was numbered--'

"Here a happy thought struck me.  In all my description of the watch
I had merely described my own, a very cheap affair which I had won at
a raffle.  My visitor was deceiving me, though for what purpose I did
not on the instant divine.  No one would like to suspect him of
having purloined his wife's tiara.  Why should I not deceive him, and
at the same time get rid of my poor chronometer for a sum that
exceeded its value a hundredfold?"

"Good business!" cried Shylock.

The stranger smiled and bowed.

"Excellent," he said.  "I took the words right out of his mouth.  'It
was numbered 86507B!' I cried, giving, of course, the number of my
own watch.

"He gazed at me narrowly for a moment, and then he smiled.  'You grow
more marvellous at every step.  That was indeed the number.  Are you
a demon?'

"'No,' I replied.  'Only something of a mind-reader.'

"Well, to be brief, the bargain was struck.  I was to look for a
watch that I knew he hadn't lost, and was to receive 200 pounds if I
found it.  It seemed to him to be a very good bargain, as, indeed, it
was, from his point of view, feeling, as he did, that there never
having been any such watch, it could not be recovered, and little
suspecting that two could play at his little game of deception, and
that under any circumstances I could foist a ten-shilling watch upon
him for two hundred pounds.  This business concluded, he started to
go.

"'Won't you have a little Scotch?' I asked, as he started, feeling,
with all that prospective profit in view, I could well afford the
expense.  'It is a stormy night.'

"'Thanks, I will,' said he, returning and seating himself by my
table--still, to my surprise, keeping his hat on.

"'Let me take your hat,' I said, little thinking that my courtesy
would reveal the true state of affairs.  The mere mention of the word
hat brought about a terrible change in my visitor; his knees
trembled, his face grew ghastly, and he clutched the brim of his
beaver until it cracked.  He then nervously removed it, and I noticed
a dull red mark running about his forehead, just as there would be on
the forehead of a man whose hat fitted too tightly; and that mark,
gentlemen, had the undulating outline of nothing more nor less than a
tiara, and on the apex of the uttermost extremity was a deep
indentation about the size of a shilling, that could have been made
only by some adamantine substance!  The mystery was solved!  The
robber of the Duchess of Brokedale stood before me."

A suppressed murmur of excitement went through the assembled spirits,
and even Messrs. Hawkshaw and Le Coq were silent in the presence of
such genius.

"My plan of action was immediately formulated.  The man was
completely at my mercy.  He had stolen the tiara, and had it
concealed in the lining of his hat.  I rose and locked the door.  My
visitor sank with a groan into my chair.

"'Why did you do that?' he stammered, as I turned the key in the
lock.

"'To keep my Scotch whiskey from evaporating,' I said, dryly.  'Now,
my lord,' I added, 'it will pay your Grace to let me have your hat.
I know who you are.  You are the Duke of Brokedale.  The Duchess of
Brokedale has lost a valuable tiara of diamonds, and you have not
lost your watch.  Somebody has stolen the diamonds, and it may be
that somewhere there is a Bunker who has lost such a watch as I have
described.  The queer part of it all is,' I continued, handing him
the decanter, and taking a couple of loaded six-shooters out of my
escritoire--'the queer part of it all is that I have the watch and
you have the tiara.  We'll swap the swag.  Hand over the bauble,
please.'

"'But--' he began.

"'We won't have any butting, your Grace,' said I.  'I'll give you the
watch, and you needn't mind the 200 pounds; and you must give me the
tiara, or I'll accompany you forthwith to the police, and have a
search made of your hat.  It won't pay you to defy me.  Give it up.'

"He gave up the hat at once, and, as I suspected, there lay the
tiara, snugly stowed away behind the head-band.

"'You are a great fellow,' said I, as I held the tiara up to the
light and watched with pleasure the flashing brilliance of its gems.

"'I beg you'll not expose me,' he moaned.  'I was driven to it by
necessity.'

"'Not I,' I replied.  'As long as you play fair it will be all right.
I'm not going to keep this thing.  I'm not married, and so have no
use for such a trifle; but what I do intend is simply to wait until
your wife retains me to find it, and then I'll find it and get the
reward.  If you keep perfectly still, I'll have it found in such a
fashion that you'll never be suspected.  If, on the other hand, you
say a word about to-night's events, I'll hand you over to the
police.'

"'Humph!' he said.  'You couldn't prove a case against me.'

"'I can prove any case against anybody,' I retorted.  'If you don't
believe it, read my book,' I added, and I handed him a copy of my
memoirs.

"'I've read it,' he answered, 'and I ought to have known better than
to come here.  I thought you were only a literary success.'  And with
a deep-drawn sigh he took the watch and went out.  Ten days later I
was retained by the Duchess, and after a pretended search of ten days
more I found the tiara, restored it to the noble lady, and received
the 5000 pounds reward.  The Duke kept perfectly quiet about our
little encounter, and afterwards we became stanch friends; for he was
a good fellow, and was driven to his desperate deed only by the
demands of his creditors, and the following Christmas he sent me the
watch I had given him, with the best wishes of the season.

"So, you see, gentlemen, in a moment, by quick wit and a mental
concentration of no mean order, combined with strict observance of
the pettiest details, I ferreted out what bade fair to become a great
diamond mystery; and when I say that this cigar end proves certain
things to my mind, it does not become you to doubt the value of my
conclusions."

"Hear! hear!" cried Raleigh, growing tumultuous with enthusiasm.

"Your name? your name?" came from all parts of the wharf.

The stranger, putting his hand into the folds of his coat, drew forth
a bundle of business cards, which he tossed, as the prestidigitator
tosses playing-cards, out among the audience, and on each of them was
found printed the words:


SHERLOCK HOLMES,
DETECTIVE.
FERRETING DONE HERE.
Plots for Sale.


"I think he made a mistake in not taking the 200 pounds for the
watch.  Such carelessness destroys my confidence in him," said
Shylock, who was the first to recover from the surprise of the
revelation.



CHAPTER III:  THE SEARCH-PARTY IS ORGANIZED



"Well, Mr. Holmes," said Sir Walter Raleigh, after three rousing
cheers, led by Hamlet, had been given with a will by the assembled
spirits, "after this demonstration in your honor I think it is hardly
necessary for me to assure you of our hearty co-operation in anything
you may venture to suggest.  There is still manifest, however, some
desire on the part of the ever-wise King Solomon and my friend
Confucius to know how you deduce that Kidd has sailed for London,
from the cigar end which you hold in your hand."

"I can easily satisfy their curiosity," said Sherlock Holmes,
genially.  "I believe I have already proven that it is the end of
Kidd's cigar.  The marks of the teeth have shown that.  Now observe
how closely it is smoked--there is barely enough of it left for one
to insert between his teeth.  Now Captain Kidd would hardly have
risked the edges of his mustache and the comfort of his lips by
smoking a cigar down to the very light if he had had another; nor
would he under any circumstances have smoked it that far unless he
were passionately addicted to this particular brand of the weed.
Therefore I say to you, first, this was his cigar; second, it was the
last one he had; third, he is a confirmed smoker.  The result, he has
gone to the one place in the world where these Connecticut hand-
rolled Havana cigars--for I recognize this as one of them--have a
real popularity, and are therefore more certainly obtainable, and
that is at London.  You cannot get so vile a cigar as that outside of
a London hotel.  If I could have seen a quarter-inch more of it, I
should have been able definitely to locate the hotel itself.  The
wrappers unroll to a degree that varies perceptibly as between the
different hotels.  The Fortuna cigar can be smoked a quarter through
before its wrapper gives way; the Felix wrapper goes as soon as you
light the cigar; whereas the River, fronting on the Thames, is
surrounded by a moister atmosphere than the others, and, as a
consequence, the wrapper will hold really until most people are
willing to throw the whole thing away."

"It is really a wonderful art!" said Solomon.

"The making of a Connecticut Havana cigar?" laughed Holmes.  "Not at
all.  Give me a head of lettuce and a straw, and I'll make you a
box."

"I referred to your art--that of detection," said Solomon.  "Your
logic is perfect; step by step we have been led to the irresistible
conclusion that Kidd has made for London, and can be found at one of
these hotels."

"And only until next Tuesday, when he will take a house in the
neighborhood of Scotland Yard," put in Holmes, quickly, observing a
sneer on Hawkshaw's lips, and hastening to overwhelm him by further
evidence of his ingenuity.  "When he gets his bill he will open his
piratical eyes so wide that he will be seized with jealousy to think
of how much more refined his profession has become since he left it,
and out of mere pique he will leave the hotel, and, to show himself
still cleverer than his modern prototypes, he will leave his account
unpaid, with the result that the affair will be put in the hands of
the police, under which circumstances a house in the immediate
vicinity of the famous police headquarters will be the safest hiding-
place he can find, as was instanced by the remarkable case of the
famous Penstock bond robbery.  A certain churchwarden named Hinkley,
having been appointed cashier thereof, robbed the Penstock Imperial
Bank of 1,000,000 pounds in bonds, and, fleeing to London, actually
joined the detective force at Scotland Yard, and was detailed to find
himself, which of course he never did, nor would he ever have been
found had he not crossed my path."

Hawkshaw gazed mournfully off into space, and Le Coq muttered profane
words under his breath.

"We're not in the same class with this fellow, Hawkshaw," said Le
Coq.  "You could tap your forehead knowingly eight hours a day
through all eternity with a sledge-hammer without loosening an idea
like that."

"Nevertheless I'll confound him yet," growled the jealous detective.
"I shall myself go to London, and, disguised as Captain Kidd, will
lead this visionary on until he comes there to arrest me, and when
these club members discover that it is Hawkshaw and not Kidd he has
run to earth, we'll have a great laugh on Sherlock Holmes."

"I am anxious to hear how you solved the bond-robbery mystery," said
Socrates, wrapping his toga closely about him and settling back
against one of the spiles of the wharf.

"So are we all," said Sir Walter.  "But meantime the House-boat is
getting farther away."

"Not unless she's sailing backwards," sneered Noah, who was still
nursing his resentment against Sir Christopher Wren for his
reflections upon the speed of the Ark

"What's the hurry?" asked Socrates.  "I believe in making haste
slowly; and on the admission of our two eminent naval architects, Sir
Christopher and Noah, neither of their vessels can travel more than a
mile a week, and if we charter the Flying Dutchman to go in pursuit
of her we can catch her before she gets out of the Styx into the
Atlantic."

"Jonah might lend us his whale, if the beast is in commission,"
suggested Munchausen, dryly.  "I for one would rather take a state-
room in Jonah's whale than go aboard the Flying Dutchman again.  I
made one trip on the Dutchman, and she's worse than a dory for
comfort; further--I don't see what good it would do us to charter a
boat that can't land oftener than once in seven years, and spends
most of her time trying to double the Cape of Good Hope."

"My whale is in commission," said Jonah, with dignity.  "But Baron
Munchausen need not consider the question of taking a state-room
aboard of her.  She doesn't carry second-class passengers.  And if I
took any stock in the idea of a trip on the Flying Dutchman amounting
to a seven years' exile, I would cheerfully pay the Baron's expenses
for a round trip."

"We are losing time, gentlemen," suggested Sherlock Holmes.  "This is
a moment, I think, when you should lay aside personal differences and
personal preferences for immediate action.  I have examined the wake
of the House-boat, and I judge from the condition of what, for want
of a better term, I may call the suds, when she left us the House-
boat was making ten knots a day.  Almost any craft we can find
suitably manned ought to be able to do better than that; and if you
could summon Charon and ascertain what boats he has at hand, it would
be for the good of all concerned."

"That's a good plan," said Johnson.  "Boswell, see if you can find
Charon."

"I am here already, sir," returned the ferryman, rising.  "Most of my
boats have gone into winter quarters, your Honor.  The Mayflower went
into dry dock last week to be calked up; the Pinta and the Santa
Maria are slow and cranky; the Monitor and the Merrimac I haven't
really had time to patch up; and the Valkyrie is two months overdue.
I cannot make up my mind whether she is lost or kept back by
excursion steamers.  Hence I really don't know what I can lend you.
Any of these boat I have named you could have had for nothing; but my
others are actively employed, and I couldn't let them go without a
serious interference with my business."

The old man blinked sorrowfully across the waters at the opposite
shore.  It was quite evident that he realized what a dreadful expense
the club was about to be put to, and while of course there would be
profit in it for him, he was sincerely sorry for them.

"I repeat," he added, "those boats you could have had for nothing,
but the others I'd have to charge you for, though of course I'll give
you a discount."

And he blinked again, as he meditated upon whether that discount
should be an eighth or one-quarter of one per cent.

"The Flying Dutchman," he pursued, "ain't no good for your purposes.
She's too fast.  She's built to fly by, not to stop.  You'd catch up
with the House-boat in a minute with her, but you'd go right on and
disappear like a visionary; and as for the Ark, she'd never do--with
all respect to Mr. Noah.  She's just about as suitable as any other
waterlogged cattle-steamer'd be, and no more--first-rate for
elephants and kangaroos, but no good for cruiser-work, and so slow
she wouldn't make a ripple high enough to drown a gnat going at the
top of her speed.  Furthermore, she's got a great big hole in her
bottom, where she was stove in by running afoul of--Mount Arrus-root,
I believe it was called when Captain Noah went cruising with that
menagerie of his."

"That's an unmitigated falsehood!" cried Noah, angrily.  "This man
talks like a professional amateur yachtsman.  He has no regard for
facts, but simply goes ahead and makes statements with an utter
disregard of the truth.  The Ark was not stove in.  We beached her
very successfully.  I say this in defence of my seamanship, which was
top-notch for my day."

"Couldn't sail six weeks without fouling a mountain-peak!" sneered
Wren, perceiving a chance to get even.

"The hole's there, just the same," said Charon.  "Maybe she was a
centreboard, sad that's where you kept the board."

"The hole is there because it was worn there by one of the
elephants," retorted Noah.  "You get a beast like the elephant
shuffling one of his fore-feet up and down, up and down, a plank for
twenty-four hours a day for forty days in one of your boats, and see
where your boat would be."

"Thanks," said Charon, calmly.  "But the elephants don't patronize my
line.  All the elephants I've ever seen in Hades waded over, except
Jumbo, and he reached his trunk across, fastened on to a tree limb
with it, and swung himself over.  However, the Ark isn't at all what
you want, unless you are going to man her with a lot of centaurs.  If
that's your intention, I'd charter her; the accommodations are just
the thing for a crew of that kind."

"Well, what do you suggest?" asked Raleigh, somewhat impatiently.
"You've told us what we can't do.  Now tell us what we can do."

"I'd stay right here," said Charon, "and let the ladies rescue
themselves.  That's what I'd do.  I've had the honor of bringing 'em
over here, and I think I know 'em pretty well.  I've watched 'em
close, and it's my private opinion that before many days you'll see
your club-house sailing back here, with Queen Elizabeth at the
hellum, and the other ladies on the for'ard deck knittin' and
crochetin', and tearin' each other to pieces in a conversational way,
as happy as if there never had been any Captain Kidd and his pirate
crew."

"That suggestion is impossible," said Blackstone, rising.  "Whether
the relief expedition amounts to anything or not, it's good to be set
going.  The ladies would never forgive us if we sat here inactive,
even if they were capable of rescuing themselves.  It is an accepted
principle of law that this climate hath no fury like a woman left to
herself, and we've got enough professional furies hereabouts without
our aiding in augmenting the ranks.  We must have a boat."

"It'll cost you a thousand dollars a week," said Charon.

"I'll subscribe fifty," cried Hamlet.

"I'll consult my secretary," said Solomon, "and find out how many of
my wives have been abducted, and I'll pay ten dollars apiece for
their recovery."

"That's liberal," said Hawkshaw.  "There are sixty-three of 'em on
board, together with eighty of his fiancees.  What's the quotation on
fiancees, King Solomon?"

"Nothing," said Solomon.  "They're not mine yet, and it's their
father's business to get 'em back.  Not mine."

Other subscriptions came pouring in, and it was not long before
everybody save Shylock had put his name down for something.  This
some one of the more quick-witted of the spirits soon observed, and,
with reckless disregard of the feelings of the Merchant of Venice,
began to call, "Shylock!  Shylock!  How much?"

The Merchant tried to leave the pier, but his path was blocked.

"Subscribe, subscribe!" was the cry.  "How much?"

"Order, gentlemen, order!" said Sir Walter, rising and holding a
bottle aloft.  "A black person by the name of Friday, a valet of our
friend Mr. Crusoe, has just handed me this bottle, which he picked up
ten minutes ago on the bank of the river a few miles distant.  It
contains a bit of paper, and may perhaps give us a clew based upon
something more substantial than even the wonderful theories of our
new brother Holmes."

A deathly silence followed the chairman's words, as Sir Walter drew a
corkscrew from his pocket and opened the bottle.  He extracted the
paper, and, as he had surmised, it proved to be a message from the
missing vessel.  His face brightening with a smile of relief, Sir
Walter read, aloud:

"Have just emerged into the Atlantic Club in hands of Kidd and forty
ruffians.  One hundred and eighty-three ladies on board.  Headed for
the Azores.  Send aid at once.  All well except Xanthippe, who is
seasick in the billiard-room.  (Signed) Portia."

"Aha!" cried Hawkshaw.  "That shows how valuable the Holmes theory
is."

"Precisely," said Holmes.  "No woman knows anything about seafaring,
but Portia is right.  The ship is headed for the Azores, which is the
first tack needed in a windward sail for London under the present
conditions."

The reply was greeted with cheers, and when they subsided the cry for
Shylock's subscription began again, but he declined.

"I had intended to put up a thousand ducats," he said, defiantly,
"but with that woman Portia on board I won't give a red obolus!" and
with that he wrapped his cloak about him and stalked off into the
gathering shadows of the wood.

And so the funds were raised without the aid of Shylock, and the
shapely twin-screw steamer the Gehenna was chartered of Charon, and
put under the command of Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who, after he had
thanked the company for their confidence, walked abstractedly away,
observing in strictest confidence to himself that he had done well to
prepare that bottle beforehand and bribe Crusoe's man to find it.

"For now," he said, with a chuckle, "I can get back to earth again
free of cost on my own hook, whether my eminent inventor wants me
there or not.  I never approved of his killing me off as he did at
the very height of my popularity."



CHAPTER IV:  ON BOARD THE HOUSE-BOAT



Meanwhile the ladies were not having such a bad time, after all.
Once having gained possession of the House-boat, they were loath to
think of ever having to give it up again, and it is an open question
in my mind if they would not have made off with it themselves had
Captain Kidd and his men not done it for them.

"I'll never forgive these men for their selfishness in monopolizing
all this," said Elizabeth, with a vicious stroke of a billiard-cue,
which missed the cue-ball and tore a right angle in the cloth.  "It
is not right."

"No," said Portia.  "It is all wrong; and when we get back home I'm
going to give my beloved Bassanio a piece of my mind; and if he
doesn't give in to me, I'LL reverse my decision in the famous case of
Shylock versus Antonio."

"Then I sincerely hope he doesn't give in," retorted Cleopatra, "for
I swear by all my auburn locks that that was the very worst bit of
injustice ever perpetrated.  Mr. Shakespeare confided to me one
night, at one of Mrs. Caesar's card-parties, that he regarded that as
the biggest joke he ever wrote, and Judge Blackstone observed to
Antony that the decision wouldn't have held in any court of equity
outside of Venice.  If you owe a man a thousand ducats, and it costs
you three thousand to get them, that's your affair, not his.  If it
cost Antonio every drop of his bluest blood to pay the pound of
flesh, it was Antonio's affair, not Shylock's.  However, the world
applauds you as a great jurist, when you have nothing more than a
woman's keen instinct for sentimental technicalities."

"It would have made a horrid play, though, if it had gone on,"
shuddered Elizabeth.

"That may be, but, carried out realistically, it would have done away
with a raft of bad actors," said Cleopatra.  "I'm half sorry it
didn't go on, and I'm sure it wouldn't have been any worse than
compelling Brutus to fall on his sword until he resembles a chicken
liver en brochette, as is done in that Julius Caesar play."

"Well, I'm very glad I did it," snapped Portia.

"I should think you would be," said Cleopatra.  "If you hadn't done
it, you'd never have been known.  What was that?"

The boat had given a slight lurch.

"Didn't you hear a shuffling noise up on deck, Portia?" asked the
Egyptian Queen.

"I thought I did, and it seemed as if the vessel had moved a bit,"
returned Portia, nervously; for, like most women in an advanced state
of development, she had become a martyr to her nerves.

"It was merely the wash from one of Charon's new ferry-boats, I
fancy," said Elizabeth, calmly.  "It's disgusting, the way that old
fellow allows these modern innovations to be brought in here!  As if
the old paddle-boats he used to carry shades in weren't good enough
for the immigrants of this age!  Really this Styx River is losing a
great deal of its charm.  Sir Walter and I were upset, while out
rowing one day last summer, by the waves kicked up by one of Charon's
excursion steamers going up the river with a party of picnickers from
the city--the Greater Gehenna Chowder Club, I believe it was--on
board of her.  One might just as well live in the midst of the
turmoil of a great city as try to get uninterrupted quiet here in the
suburbs in these days.  Charon isn't content to get rich slowly; he
must make money by the barrelful, if he has to sacrifice all the
comfort of everybody living on this river.  Anybody'd think he was an
American, the way he goes on; and everybody else here is the same
way.  The Erebeans are getting to be a race of shopkeepers."

"I think myself," sighed Cleopatra, "that Hades is being spoiled by
the introduction of American ideas--it is getting by far too
democratic for my tastes; and if it isn't stopped, it's my belief
that the best people will stop coming here.  Take Madame Recamier's
salon as it is now and compare it with what it used to be!  In the
early days, after her arrival here, everybody went because it was the
swell thing, and you'd be sure of meeting the intellectually elect.
On the one hand you'd find Sophocles; on the other, Cicero; across
the room would be Horace chatting gayly with some such person as
myself.  Great warriors, from Alexander to Bonaparte, were there, and
glad of the opportunity to be there, too; statesmen like
Macchiavelli; artists like Cellini or Tintoretto.  You couldn't move
without stepping on the toes of genius.  But now all is different.
The money-getting instinct has been aroused within them all, with the
result that when I invited Mozart to meet a few friends at dinner at
my place last autumn, he sent me a card stating his terms for
dinners.  Let me see, I think I have it with me; I've kept it by me
for fear of losing it, it is such a complete revelation of the actual
condition of affairs in this locality.  Ah! this is it," she added,
taking a small bit of pasteboard from her card-case.  "Read that."

The card was passed about, and all the ladies were much astonished--
and naturally so, for it ran this wise:


NOTICE TO HOSTESSES.

Owing to the very great, constantly growing, and at times vexatious
demands upon his time socially,

HERR WOLFGANG AMADEUS MOZART

takes this method of announcing to his friends that on and after
January 1, 1897, his terms for functions will be as follows:

Dinners with conversation on the         Marks
    Theory of Music                       500
Dinners with conversation on the
    Theory of Music, illustrated          750
Dinners without any conversation          300
 Receptions, public, with music           1000
   "    "   private,                      750
 Encores (single)                          100
 Three encores for                         150
 Autographs                                 10

Positively no Invitations for Five-o'Clock Teas or Morning Musicales
considered.


"Well, I declare!" tittered Elizabeth, as she read.  "Isn't that
extraordinary?  He's got the three-name craze, too!"

"It's perfectly ridiculous," said Cleopatra.  "But it's fairer than
Artemus Ward's plan.  Mozart gives notice of his intentions to charge
you; but with Ward it's different.  He comes, and afterwards sends a
bill for his fun.  Why, only last week I got a 'quarterly statement'
from him showing a charge against me of thirty-eight dollars for
humorous remarks made to my guests at a little chafing-dish party I
gave in honor of Balzac, and, worst of all, he had marked it 'Please
remit.'  Even Antony, when he wrote a sonnet to my eyebrow, wouldn't
let me have it until he had heard whether or not Boswell wanted it
for publication in the Gossip.  With Rubens giving chalk-talks for
pay, Phidias doing 'Five-minute Masterpieces in Putty' for suburban
lyceums, and all the illustrious in other lines turning their genius
to account through the entertainment bureaus, it's impossible to have
a salon now."

"You are indeed right," said Madame Recamier, sadly.  "Those were
palmy days when genius was satisfied with chicken salad and lemonade.
I shall never forget those nights when the wit and wisdom of all time
were--ah--were on tap at my house, if I may so speak, at a cost to me
of lights and supper.  Now the only people who will come for nothing
are those we used to think of paying to stay away.  Boswell is always
ready, but you can't run a salon on Boswell."

"Well," said Portia, "I sincerely hope that you won't give up the
functions altogether, because I have always found them most
delightful.  It is still possible to have lights and supper."

"I have a plan for next winter," said Madame Recamier, "but I suppose
I shall be accused of going into the commercial side of it if I adopt
it.  The plan is, briefly, to incorporate my salon.  That's an idea
worthy of an American, I admit; but if I don't do it I'll have to
give it up entirely, which, as you intimate, would be too bad.  An
incorporated salon, however, would be a grand thing, if only because
it would perpetuate the salon.  'The Recamier Salon (Limited)' would
be a most excellent title, and, suitably capitalized would enable us
to pay our lions sufficiently.  Private enterprise is powerless under
modern conditions.  It's as much as I can afford to pay for a dinner,
without running up an expensive account for guests; and unless we get
up a salon-trust, as it were, the whole affair must go to the wall."

"How would you make it pay?" asked Portia.  "I can't see where your
dividends would come from."

"That is simple enough," said Madame Recamier.  "We could put up a
large reception-hall with a portion of our capital, and advertise a
series of nights--say one a week throughout the season.  These would
be Warriors' Night, Story-tellers' Night, Poets' Night, Chafing-dish
Night under the charge of Brillat-Savarin, and so on.  It would be
understood that on these particular evenings the most interesting
people in certain lines would be present, and would mix with
outsiders, who should be admitted only on payment of a certain sum of
money.  The commonplace inhabitants of this country could thus meet
the truly great; and if I know them well, as I think I do, they'll
pay readily for the privilege.  The obscure love to rub up against
the famous here as well as they do on earth."

"You'd run a sort of Social Zoo?" suggested Elizabeth.

"Precisely; and provide entertainment for private residences too.  An
advertisement in Boswell's paper, which everybody buys--"

"And which nobody reads," said Portia.

"They read the advertisements," retorted Madame Recamier.  "As I was
saying, an advertisement could be placed in Boswell's paper as
follows:  'Are you giving a Function?  Do you want Talent?  Get your
Genius at the Recamier Salon (Limited).'  It would be simply
magnificent as a business enterprise.  The common herd would be
tickled to death if they could get great people at their homes, even
if they had to pay roundly for them."

"It would look well in the society notes, wouldn't it, if Mr. John
Boggs gave a reception, and at the close of the account it said, 'The
supper was furnished by Calizetti, and the genius by the Recamier
Salon (Limited)'?" suggested Elizabeth, scornfully.

"I must admit," replied the French lady, "that you call up an
unpleasant possibility, but I don't really see what else we can do if
we want to preserve the salon idea.  Somebody has told these talented
people that they have a commercial value, and they are availing
themselves of the demand."

"It is a sad age!" sighed Elizabeth.

"Well, all I've got to say is just this," put in Xanthippe:  "You
people who get up functions have brought this condition of affairs on
yourselves.  You were not satisfied to go ahead and indulge your
passion for lions in a moderate fashion.  Take the case of
Demosthenes last winter, for instance.  His wife told me that he
dined at home three times during the winter.  The rest of the time he
was out, here, there, and everywhere, making after-dinner speeches.
The saving on his dinner bills didn't pay his pebble account, much
less remunerate him for his time, and the fearful expense of nervous
energy to which he was subjected.  It was as much as she could do,
she said, to keep him from shaving one side of his head, so that he
couldn't go out, the way he used to do in Athens when he was afraid
he would be invited out and couldn't scare up a decent excuse for
refusing."

"Did he do that?" cried Elizabeth, with a roar of laughter.

"So the cyclopaedias say.  It's a good plan, too," said Xanthippe.
"Though Socrates never had to do it.  When I got the notion Socrates
was going out too much, I used to hide his dress clothes.  Then there
was the case of Rubens.  He gave a Carbon Talk at the Sforza's
Thursday Night Club, merely to oblige Madame Sforza, and three weeks
later discovered that she had sold his pictures to pay for her gown!
You people simply run it into the ground.  You kill the goose that
when taken at the flood leads on to fortune.  It advertises you, does
the lion no good, and he is expected to be satisfied with
confectionery, material and theoretical.  If they are getting tired
of candy and compliments, it's because you have forced too much of it
upon them."

"They like it, just the same," retorted Recamier.  "A genius likes
nothing better than the sound of his own voice, when he feels that it
is falling on aristocratic ears.  The social laurel rests pleasantly
on many a noble brow."

"True," said Xanthippe.  "But when a man gets a pile of Christmas
wreaths a mile high on his head, he begins to wonder what they will
bring on the market.  An occasional wreath is very nice, but by the
ton they are apt to weigh on his mind.  Up to a certain point
notoriety is like a woman, and a man is apt to love it; but when it
becomes exacting, demanding instead of permitting itself to be
courted, it loses its charm."

"That is Socratic in its wisdom," smiled Portia.

"But Xanthippic in its origin," returned Xanthippe.  "No man ever
gave me my ideas."

As Xanthippe spoke, Lucretia Borgia burst into the room.

"Hurry and save yourselves!" she cried.  "The boat has broken loose
from her moorings, and is floating down the stream.  If we don't
hurry up and do something, we'll drift out to sea!"

"What!" cried Cleopatra, dropping her cue in terror, and rushing for
the stairs.  "I was certain I felt a slight motion.  You said it was
the wash from one of Charon's barges, Elizabeth."

"I thought it was," said Elizabeth, following closely after.

"Well, it wasn't," moaned Lucretia Borgia.  "Calpurnia just looked
out of the window and discovered that we were in mid-stream."

The ladies crowded anxiously about the stair and attempted to ascend,
Cleopatra in the van; but as the Egyptian Queen reached the doorway
to the upper deck, the door opened, and the hard features of Captain
Kidd were thrust roughly through, and his strident voice rang out
through the gathering gloom.  "Pipe my eye for a sardine if we
haven't captured a female seminary!" he cried.

And one by one the ladies, in terror, shrank back into the billiard-
room, while Kidd, overcome by surprise, slammed the door to, and
retreated into the darkness of the forward deck to consult with his
followers as to "what next."



CHAPTER V:  A CONFERENCE ON DECK



"Here's a kettle of fish!" said Kidd, pulling his chin whisker in
perplexity as he and his fellow-pirates gathered about the captain to
discuss the situation.  "I'm blessed if in all my experience I ever
sailed athwart anything like it afore!  Pirating with a lot of low-
down ruffians like you gentlemen is bad enough, but on a craft loaded
to the water's edge with advanced women--I've half a mind to turn
back."

"If you do, you swim--we'll not turn back with you," retorted
Abeuchapeta, whom, in honor of his prowess, Kidd had appointed
executive officer of the House-boat.  "I have no desire to be
mutinous, Captain Kidd, but I have not embarked upon this enterprise
for a pleasure sail down the Styx.  I am out for business.  If you
had thirty thousand women on board, still should I not turn back."

"But what shall we do with 'em?" pleaded Kidd.  "Where can we go
without attracting attention?  Who's going to feed 'em?  Who's going
to dress 'em?  Who's going to keep 'em in bonnets?  You don't know
anything about these creatures, my dear Abeuchapeta; and, by-the-way,
can't we arbitrate that name of yours?  It would be fearful to
remember in the excitement of a fight."

"Call him Ab," suggested Sir Henry Morgan, with an ill-concealed
sneer, for he was deeply jealous of Abeuchapeta's preferral.

"If you do I'll call you Morgue, and change your appearance to fit,"
retorted Abeuchapeta, angrily.

"By the beards of all my sainted Buccaneers," began Morgan, springing
angrily to his feet, "I'll have your life!"

"Gentlemen!  Gentlemen--my noble ruffians!" expostulated Kidd.
"Come, come; this will never do!  I must have no quarrelling among my
aides.  This is no time for divisions in our councils.  An entirely
unexpected element has entered into our affairs, and it behooveth us
to act in concert.  It is no light matter--"

"Excuse me, captain," said Abeuchapeta, "but that is where you and I
do not agree.  We've got our ship and we've got our crew, and in
addition we find that the Fates have thrown in a hundred or more
women to act as ballast.  Now I, for one, do not fear a woman.  We
can set them to work.  There is plenty for them to do keeping things
tidy; and if we get into a very hard fight, and come out of the melee
somewhat the worse for wear, it will be a blessing to have 'em along
to mend our togas, sew buttons on our uniforms, and darn our
hosiery."

Morgan laughed sarcastically.  "When did you flourish, if ever,
colonel?" he asked.

"Do you refer to me?" queried Abeuchapeta, with a frown.

"You have guessed correctly," replied Morgan, icily.  "I have quite
forgotten your date; were you a success in the year one, or when?"

"Admiral Abeuchapeta, Sir Henry," interposed Kidd, fearing a further
outbreak of hostilities--"Admiral Abeuchapeta was the terror of the
seas in the seventh century, and what he undertook to do he did, and
his piratical enterprises were carried on on a scale of magnificence
which is without parallel off the comic-opera stage.  He never went
forth without at least seventy galleys and a hundred other vessels."

Abeuchapeta drew himself up proudly.  "Six-ninety-eight was my great
year," he said.

"That's what I thought," said Morgan.  "That is to say, you got your
ideas of women twelve hundred years ago, and the ladies have changed
somewhat since that time.  I have great respect for you, sir, as a
ruffian.  I have no doubt that as a ruffian you are a complete
success, but when it comes to 'feminology' you are sailing in unknown
waters.  The study of women, my dear Abeuchadnezzar--"

"Peta," retorted Abeuchapeta, irritably.

"I stand corrected.  The study of women, my dear Peter," said Morgan,
with a wink at Conrad, which fortunately the seventh-century pirate
did not see, else there would have been an open break--"the study of
women is more difficult than that of astronomy; there may be two
stars alike, but all women are unique.  Because she was this, that,
or the other thing in your day does not prove that she is any one of
those things in our day--in fact, it proves the contrary.  Why, I
venture even to say that no individual woman is alike."

"That's rather a hazy thought," said Kidd, scratching his head in a
puzzled sort of way.

"I mean that she's different from herself at different times," said
Morgan.  "What is it the poet called her?--'an infinite variety
show,' or something of that sort; a perpetual vaudeville--a
continuous performance, as it were, from twelve to twelve."

"Morgan is right, admiral!" put in Conrad the corsair, acting
temporarily as bo'sun.  "The times are sadly changed, and woman is no
longer what she was.  She is hardly what she is, much less what she
was.  The Roman Gynaeceum would be an impossibility to-day.  You
might as well expect Delilah to open a barber-shop on board this boat
as ask any of these advanced females below-stairs to sew buttons on a
pirate's uniform after a fray, or to keep the fringe on his epaulets
curled.  They're no longer sewing-machines--they are Keeley motors
for mystery and perpetual motion.  Women have views now they are no
longer content to be looked at merely; they must see for themselves;
and the more they see, the more they wish to domesticate man and
emancipate woman.  It's my private opinion that if we are to get
along with them at all the best thing to do is to let 'em alone.  I
have always found I was better off in the abstract, and if this
question is going to be settled in a purely democratic fashion by
submitting it to a vote, I'll vote for any measure which involves
leaving them strictly to themselves.  They're nothing but a lot of
ghosts anyhow, like ourselves, and we can pretend we don't see them."

"If that could be, it would be excellent," said Morgan; "but it is
impossible.  For a pirate of the Byronic order, my dear Conrad, you
are strangely unversed in the ways of the sex which cheers but not
inebriates.  We can no more ignore their presence upon this boat than
we can expect whales to spout kerosene.  In the first place, it would
be excessively impolite of us to cut them--to decline to speak to
them if they should address us.  We may be pirates, ruffians,
cutthroats, but I hope we shall never forget that we are gentlemen."

"The whole situation is rather contrary to etiquette, don't you
think?" suggested Conrad.  "There's nobody to introduce us, and I
can't really see how we can do otherwise than ignore them.  I
certainly am not going to stand on deck and make eyes at them, to try
and pick up an acquaintance with them, even if I am of a Byronic
strain."

"You forget," said Kidd, "two essential features of the situation.
These women are at present--or shortly will be, when they realize
their situation--in distress, and a true gentleman may always fly to
the rescue of a distressed female; and, the second point, we shall
soon be on the seas, and I understand that on the fashionable
transatlantic lines it is now considered de rigueur to speak to
anybody you choose to.  The introduction business isn't going to
stand in my way."

"Well, may I ask," put in Abeuchapeta, "just what it is that is
worrying you?  You said something about feeding them, and dressing
them, and keeping them in bonnets.  I fancy there's fish enough in
the sea to feed 'em; and as for their gowns and hats, they can make
'em themselves.  Every woman is a milliner at heart."

"Exactly, and we'll have to pay the milliners.  That is what bothers
me.  I was going to lead this expedition to London, Paris, and New
York, admiral.  That is where the money is, and to get it you've got
to go ashore, to headquarters.  You cannot nowadays find it on the
high seas.  Modern civilization," said Kidd, "has ruined the pirate's
business.  The latest news from the other world has really opened my
eyes to certain facts that I never dreamed of.  The conditions of the
day of which I speak are interestingly shown in the experience of our
friend Hawkins here.  Captain Hawkins, would you have any objection
to stating to these gentlemen the condition of affairs which led you
to give up piracy on the high seas?"

"Not the slightest, Captain Kidd," returned Captain Hawkins, who was
a recent arrival in Hades.  "It is a sad little story, and it gives
me a pain for to think on it, but none the less I'll tell it, since
you ask me.  When I were a mere boy, fellow-pirates, I had but one
ambition, due to my readin', which was confined to stories of a
Sunday-school nater--to become somethin' different from the little
Willies an' the clever Tommies what I read about therein.  They was
all good, an' they went to their reward too soon in life for me, who
even in them days regarded death as a stuffy an' unpleasant
diversion.  Learnin' at an early period that virtue was its only
reward, an' a-wish-in' others, I says to myself:  'Jim,' says I, 'if
you wishes to become a magnet in this village, be sinful.  If so be
as you are a good boy, an' kind to your sister an' all other animals,
you'll end up as a prosperous father with fifteen hundred a year
sure, with never no hope for no public preferment beyond bein' made
the super-intendent of the Sunday-school; but if so be as how you're
bad, you may become famous, an' go to Congress, an' have your picture
in the Sunday noospapers.'  So I looks around for books tellin' how
to get 'Famous in Fifty Ways,' an' after due reflection I settles in
my mind that to be a pirate's just the thing for me, seein' as how
it's both profitable an' healthy.  Pass-in' over details, let me tell
you that I became a pirate.  I ran away to sea, an' by dint of
perseverance, as the Sunday-school book useter say, in my badness I
soon became the centre of a evil lot; an' when I says to 'em, 'Boys,
I wants to be a pirate chief,' they hollers back, loud like, 'Jim,
we're with you,' an' they was.  For years I was the terror of the
Venezuelan Gulf, the Spanish Main, an' the Pacific seas, but there
was precious little money into it.  The best pay I got was from a
Sunday noospaper which paid me well to sign an article on 'Modern
Piracy' which I didn't write.  Finally business got so bad the crew
began to murmur, an' I was at my wits' ends to please 'em; when one
mornin', havin' passed a restless night, I picks up a noospaper and
sees in it that 'Next Saturday's steamer is a weritable treasure-
ship, takin' out twelve million dollars, and the jewels of a certain
prima donna valued at five hundred thousand.'  'Here's my chance,'
says I, an' I goes to sea and lies in wait for the steamer.  I
captures her easy, my crew bein' hungry, an' fightin according like.
We steals the box a-hold-in' the jewels an' the bag containin' the
millions, hustles back to our own ship, an' makes for our rondyvoo,
me with two bullets in my leg, four o' my crew killed, and one engin'
of my ship disabled by a shot--but happy.  Twelve an' a half millions
at one break is enough to make anybody happy."

"I should say so," said Abeuchapeta, with an ecstatic shake of his
head.  "I didn't get that in all my career."

"Nor I," sighed Kidd.  "But go on, Hawkins."

"Well, as I says," continued Captain Hawkins, "we goes to the
rondyvoo to look over our booty.  'Captain 'Awkins,' says my valet--
for I was a swell pirate, gents, an' never travelled nowhere without
a man to keep my clothes brushed and the proper wrinkles in my
trousers--'this 'ere twelve millions,' says he, 'is werry light,'
says he, carryin' the bag ashore.  'I don't care how light it is, so
long as it's twelve millions, Henderson,' says I; but my heart sinks
inside o' me at his words, an' the minute we lands I sits down to
investigate right there on the beach.  I opens the bag, an' it's the
one I was after--but the twelve millions!"

"Weren't there?" cried Conrad.

"Yes, they was there," sighed Hawkins, "but every bloomin' million
was represented by a certified check, an' payable in London!"

"By Jingo!" cried Morgan.  "What fearful luck!  But you had the prima
donna's jewels."

"Yes," said Hawkins, with a moan.  "But they was like all other prima
donna's jewels--for advertisin' purposes only, an' made o' gum-
arabic!"

"Horrible!" said Abeuchapeta.  "And the crew, what did they say?"

"They was a crew of a few words," sighed Hawkins.  "Werry few words,
an' not a civil word in the lot--mostly adjectives of a profane kind.
When I told 'em what had happened, they got mad at Fortune for a-
jiltin' of 'em, an'--well, I came here.  I was 'sas'inated that werry
night!"

"They killed you?" cried Morgan.

"A dozen times," nodded Hawkins.  "They always was a lavish lot.  I
met death in all its most horrid forms.  First they stabbed me, then
they shot me, then they clubbed me, and so on, endin' up with a
lynchin'--but I didn't mind much after the first, which hurt a bit.
But now that I'm here I'm glad it happened.  This life is sort of
less responsible than that other.  You can't hurt a ghost by shooting
him, because there ain't nothing to hurt, an' I must say I like bein'
a mere vision what everybody can see through."

"All of which interesting tale proves what?" queried Abeuchapeta.

"That piracy on the sea is not profitable in these days of the check
banking system," said Kidd.  "If you can get a chance at real gold
it's all right, but it's of no earthly use to steal checks that
people can stop payment on.  Therefore it was my plan to visit the
cities and do a little freebooting there, where solid material wealth
is to be found."

"Well?  Can't we do it now?" asked Abeuchapeta.

"Not with these women tagging after us," returned Kidd.  "If we went
to London and lifted the whole Bank of England, these women would
have it spent on Regent Street inside of twenty-four hours."

"Then leave them on board," said Abeuchapeta.

"And have them steal the ship!" retorted Kidd.  "No.  There are but
two things to do.  Take 'em back, or land them in Paris.  Tell them
to spend a week on shore while we are provisioning.  Tell 'em to shop
to their hearts' content, and while they are doing it we can sneak
off and leave them stranded."

"Splendid!" cried Morgan.

"But will they consent?" asked Abeuchapeta.

"Consent!  To shop?  In Paris?  For a week?" cried Morgan.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Hawkins.  "Will they consent!  Will a duck swim?"

And so it was decided, which was the first incident in the career of
the House-boat upon which the astute Mr. Sherlock Holmes had failed
to count.



CHAPTER VI:  A CONFERENCE BELOW-STAIRS



When, with a resounding slam, the door to the upper deck of the
House-boat was shut in the faces of queens Elizabeth and Cleopatra by
the unmannerly Kidd, these ladies turned and gazed at those who
thronged the stairs behind them in blank amazement, and the heart of
Xanthippe, had one chosen to gaze through that diaphanous person's
ribs, could have been seen to beat angrily.

Queen Elizabeth was so excited at this wholly novel attitude towards
her regal self that, having turned, she sat down plump upon the floor
in the most unroyal fashion.

"Well!" she ejaculated.  "If this does not surpass everything!  The
idea of it!  Oh for one hour of my olden power, one hour of the axe,
one hour of the block!"

"Get up," retorted Cleopatra, "and let us all return to the billiard-
room and discuss this matter calmly.  It is quite evident that
something has happened of which we wotted little when we came aboard
this craft."

"That is a good idea," said Calpurnia, retreating below.  "I can see
through the window that we are in motion.  The vessel has left her
moorings, and is making considerable headway down the stream, and the
distinctly masculine voices we have heard are indications to my mind
that the ship is manned, and that this is the result of design rather
than of accident.  Let us below."

Elizabeth rose up and readjusted her ruff, which in the excitement of
the moment had been forced to assume a position about her forehead
which gave one the impression that its royal wearer had suddenly
donned a sombrero.

"Very well," she said.  "Let us below; but oh, for the axe!"

"Bring the lady an axe," cried Xanthippe, sarcastically.  "She wants
to cut somebody."

The sally was not greeted with applause.  The situation was regarded
as being too serious to admit of humor, and in silence they filed
back into the billiard-room, and, arranging themselves in groups,
stood about anxiously discussing the situation.

"It's getting rougher every minute," sobbed Ophelia.  "Look at those
pool-balls!"  These were in very truth chasing each other about the
table in an extraordinary fashion.  "And I wish I'd never followed
you horrid new creatures on board!" the poor girl added, in an agony
of despair.

"I believe we've crossed the bar already!" said Cleopatra, gazing out
of the window at a nasty choppy sea that was adding somewhat to the
disquietude of the fair gathering.  "If this is merely a joke on the
part of the Associated Shades, it is a mighty poor one, and I think
it is time it should cease."

"Oh, for an axe!" moaned Elizabeth, again.

"Excuse me, your Majesty," put in Xanthippe.  "You said that before,
and I must say it is getting tiresome.  You couldn't do anything with
an axe.  Suppose you had one.  What earthly good would it do you, who
were accustomed to doing all your killing by proxy?  I don't believe,
if you had the unmannerly person who slammed the door in your face
lying prostrate upon the billiard-table here, you could hit him a
square blow in the neck if you had a hundred axes.  Delilah might as
well cry for her scissors, for all the good it would do us in our
predicament.  If Cleopatra had her asp with her it might be more to
the purpose.  One deadly little snake like that let loose on the
upper deck would doubtless drive these boors into the sea, and even
then our condition would not be bettered, for there isn't any of us
that can sail a boat.  There isn't an old salt among us."

"Too bad Mrs. Lot isn't along," giggled Marguerite de Valois, whose
Gallic spirits were by no means overshadowed by the unhappy
predicament in which she found herself.

"I'm here," piped up Mrs. Lot.  "But I'm not that kind of a salt."

"I am present," said Mrs. Noah.  "Though why I ever came I don't
know, for I vowed the minute I set my foot on Ararat that dry land
was good enough for me, and that I'd never step aboard another boat
as long as I lived.  If, however, now that I am here, I can give you
the benefit of my nautical experience, you are all perfectly welcome
to it."

"I'm sure we're very much obliged for the offer," said Portia, "but
in the emergency which has arisen we cannot say how much obliged we
are until we know what your experience amounted to.  Before relying
upon you we ought to know how far that reliance can go--not that I
lack confidence in you, my dear madam, but that in an hour of peril
one must take care, to rely upon the oak, not upon the reed."

"The point is properly taken," said Elizabeth, "and I wish to say
here that I am easier in my mind when I realize that we have with us
so level-headed a person as the lady who has just spoken.  She has
spoken truly and to the point.  If I were to become queen again, I
should make her my attorney-general.  We must not go ahead
impulsively, but look at all things in a calm, judicial manner."

"Which is pretty hard work with a sea like this on," remarked
Ophelia, faintly, for she was getting a trifle sallow, as indeed she
might, for the House-boat was beginning to roll tremendously with no
alleviation save an occasional pitch, which was an alleviation only
in the sense that it gave variety to their discomfort.  "I don't
believe a chief-justice could look at things calmly and in a judicial
manner if he felt as I do."

"Poor dear!" said the matronly Mrs. Noah, sympathetically.  "I know
exactly how you feel.  I have been there myself.  The fourth day out
I and my whole family were in the same condition, except that Noah,
my husband, was so very far gone that I could not afford to yield.  I
nursed him for six days before he got his sea-legs on, and then
succumbed myself."

"But," gasped Ophelia, "that doesn't help me -

"It did my husband," said Mrs. Noah.

"When he heard that the boys were seasick too, he actually laughed
and began to get better right away.  There is really only one cure
for the mal de mer, and that is the fun of knowing that somebody else
is suffering too.  If some of you ladies would kindly yield to the
seductions of the sea, I think we could get this poor girl on her
feet in an instant."

Unfortunately for poor Ophelia, there was no immediate response to
this appeal, and the unhappy young woman was forced to suffer in
solitude.

"We have no time for untimely diversions of this sort," snapped
Xanthippe, with a scornful glance at the suffering Ophelia, who,
having retired to a comfortable lounge at an end of the room, was
evidently improving.  "I have no sympathy with this habit some of my
sex seem to have acquired of succumbing to an immediate sensation of
this nature."

"I hope to be pardoned for interrupting," said Mrs. Noah, with a
great deal of firmness, "but I wish Mrs. Socrates to understand that
it is rather early in the voyage for her to lay down any such broad
principle as that, and for her own sake to-morrow, I think it would
be well if she withdrew the sentiment.  There are certain things
about a sea-voyage that are more or less beyond the control of man or
woman, and any one who chides that poor suffering child on yonder
sofa ought to be more confident than Mrs. Socrates can possibly be
that within an hour she will not be as badly off.  People who live in
glass houses should not throw dice."

"I shall never yield to anything so undignified as seasickness, let
me tell you that," retorted Xanthippe.  "Furthermore, the proverb is
not as the lady has quoted it.  'People who live in glass houses
should not throw stones' is the proper version."

"I was not quoting," returned Mrs. Noah, calmly.  "When I said that
people who live in glass houses should not throw dice, I meant
precisely what I said.  People who live in glass houses should not
take chances.  In assuming with such vainglorious positiveness that
she will not be seasick, the lady who has just spoken is giving
tremendous odds, as the boys used to say on the Ark when we gathered
about the table at night and began to make small wagers on the day's
run."

"I think we had better suspend this discussion," suggested Cleopatra.
"It is of no immediate interest to any one but Ophelia, and I fancy
she does not care to dwell upon it at any great length.  It is more
important that we should decide upon our future course of action.  In
the first place, the question is who these people up on deck are.  If
they are the members of the club, we are all right.  They will give
us our scare, and land us safely again at the pier.  In that event it
is our womanly duty to manifest no concern, and to seem to be aware
of nothing unusual in the proceeding.  It would never do to let them
think that their joke has been a good one.  If, on the other hand, as
I fear, we are the victims of some horde of ruffians, who have
pounced upon us unawares, and are going into the business of
abduction on a wholesale basis, we must meet treachery with
treachery, strategy with strategy.  I, for one, am perfectly willing
to make every man on board walk the plank; having confidence in the
seawomanship of Mrs. Noah and her ability to steer us into port."

"I am quite in accord with these views," put in Madame Recamier, "and
I move you, Mrs. President, that we organize a series of sub-
committees--one on treachery, with Lucretia Borgia and Delilah as
members; one on strategy, consisting of Portia and Queen Elizabeth;
one on navigation, headed by Mrs. Noah; with a final sub-committee on
reconnoitre, with Cassandra to look forward, and Mrs. Lot to look
aft--all of these subordinated to a central committee of safety
headed by Cleopatra and Calpurnia.  The rest of us can then commit
ourselves and our interests unreservedly to these ladies, and proceed
to enjoy ourselves without thought of the morrow."

"I second the motion," said Ophelia, "with the amendment that Madame
Recamier be appointed chair-lady of another sub-committee, on
entertainment."

The amendment was accepted, and the motion put.  It was carried with
an enthusiastic aye, and the organization was complete.

The various committees retired to the several corners of the room to
discuss their individual lines of action, when a shadow was observed
to obscure the moonlight which had been streaming in through the
window.  The faces of Calpurnia and Cleopatra blanched for an
instant, as, immediately following upon this apparition, a large
bundle was hurled through the open port into the middle of the room,
and the shadow vanished.

"Is it a bomb?" cried several of the ladies at once.

"Nonsense!" said Madame Recamier, jumping lightly forward.  "A man
doesn't mind blowing a woman up, but he'll never blow himself up.
We're safe enough in that respect.  The thing looks to me like a
bundle of illustrated papers."

"That's what it is," said Cleopatra who had been investigating.
"It's rather a discourteous bit of courtesy, tossing them in through
the window that way, I think, but I presume they mean well.  Dear
me," she added, as, having untied the bundle, she held one of the
open papers up before her, "how interesting!  All the latest Paris
fashions.  Humph!  Look at those sleeves, Elizabeth.  What an
impregnable fortress you would have been with those sleeves added to
your ruffs!"

"I should think they'd be very becoming," put in Cassandra, standing
on her tip-toes and looking over Cleopatra's shoulder.  "That Watteau
isn't bad, either, is it, now?"

"No," remarked Calpurnia.  "I wonder how a Watteau back like that
would go on my blue alpaca?"

"Very nicely," said Elizabeth.  "How many gores has it?"

"Five," observed Calpurnia.  "One more than Caesar's toga.  We had to
have our costumes distinct in some way."

"A remarkable hat, that," nodded Mrs. Lot, her eye catching sight of
a Virot creation at the top of the page.

"Reminds me of Eve's description of an autumn scene in the garden,"
smiled Mrs. Noah.  "Gorgeous in its foliage, beautiful thing; though
I shouldn't have dared wear one in the Ark, with all those hungry
animals browsing about the upper and lower decks."

"I wonder," remarked Cleopatra, as she cocked her head to one side to
take in the full effect of an attractive summer gown--"I wonder how
that waist would make up in blue crepon, with a yoke of lace and a
stylishly contrasting stock of satin ribbon?"

"It would depend upon how you finished the sleeves," remarked Madame
Recamier.  "If you had a few puffs of rich brocaded satin set in with
deeply folded pleats it wouldn't be bad."

"I think it would be very effective," observed Mrs. Noah, "but a
trifle too light for general wear.  I should want some kind of a wrap
with it."

"It does need that," assented Elizabeth.  "A wrap made of
passementerie and jet, with a mousseline de soie ruche about the neck
held by a chou, would make it fascinating."

"The committee on treachery is ready to report," said Delilah, rising
from her corner, where she and Lucretia Borgia had been having so
animated a discussion that they had failed to observe the others
crowding about Cleopatra and the papers.

"A little sombre," said Cleopatra.  "The corsage is effective, but I
don't like those basque terminations.  I've never approved of those
full godets--"

"The committee on treachery," remarked Delilah again, raising her
voice, "has a suggestion to make."

"I can't get over those sleeves, though," laughed Helen of Troy.
"What is the use of them?"

"They might be used to get Greeks into Troy," suggested Madame
Recamier.

"The committee on treachery," roared Delilah, thoroughly angered by
the absorption of the chairman and others, "has a suggestion to make.
This is the third and last call."

"Oh, I beg pardon," cried Cleopatra, rapping for order.  "I had
forgotten all about our committees.  Excuse me, Delilah.  I--ah--was
absorbed in other matters.  Will you kindly lay your pattern--I
should say your plan--before us?"

"It is briefly this," said Delilah.  "It has been suggested that we
invite the crew of this vessel to a chafing-dish party, under the
supervision of Lucretia Borgia, and that she--"

The balance of the plan was not outlined, for at this point the
speaker was interrupted by a loud knocking at the door, its instant
opening, and the appearance in the doorway of that ill-visaged
ruffian Captain Kidd.

"Ladies," he began, "I have come here to explain to you the situation
in which you find yourselves.  Have I your permission to speak?"

The ladies started back, but the chairman was equal to the occasion.

"Go on," said Cleopatra, with queenly dignity, turning to the
interloper; and the pirate proceeded to take the second step in the
nefarious plan upon which he and his brother ruffians had agreed, of
which the tossing in through the window of the bundle of fashion
papers was the first.



CHAPTER VII:  THE "GEHENNA" IS CHARTERED



It was about twenty-four hours after the events narrated in the
preceding chapters that Mr. Sherlock Holmes assumed command of the
Gehenna, which was nothing more nor less than the shadow of the ill-
starred ocean steamship City of Chicago, which tried some years ago
to reach Liverpool by taking the overland route through Ireland,
fortunately without detriment to her passengers and crew, who had the
pleasure of the experience of shipwreck without any of the
discomforts of drowning.  As will be remembered, the obstructionist
nature of the Irish soil prevented the City of Chicago from
proceeding farther inland than was necessary to keep her well
balanced amidships upon a convenient and not too stony bed; and that
after a brief sojourn on the rocks she was finally disposed of to the
Styx Navigation Company, under which title Charon had had himself
incorporated, is a matter of nautical history.  The change of name to
the Gehenna was the act of Charon himself, and was prompted, no
doubt, by a desire to soften the jealous prejudices of the residents
of the Stygian capital against the flourishing and ever-growing
metropolis of Illinois.

The Associated Shades had had some trouble in getting this craft.
Charon, through his constant association with life on both sides of
the dark river, had gained a knowledge, more or less intimate, of
modern business methods, and while as janitor of the club he was
subject to the will of the House-boat Committee, and sympathized
deeply with the members of the association in their trouble, as
president of the Styx Navigation Company he was bound up in certain
newly attained commercial ideas which were embarrassing to those
members of the association to whose hands the chartering of a vessel
had been committed.

"See here, Charon," Sir Walter Raleigh had said, after Charon had
expressed himself as deeply sympathetic, but unable to shave the
terms upon which the vessel could be had, "you are an infernal old
hypocrite.  You go about wringing your hands over our misfortunes
until they've got as dry and flabby as a pair of kid gloves, and yet
when we ask you for a ship of suitable size and speed to go out after
those pirates, you become a sort of twin brother to Shylock, without
his excuse.  His instincts are accidents of birth.  Yours are
cultivated, and you know it."

"You are very much mistaken, Sir Walter," Charon had answered to
this.  "You don't understand my position.  It is a very hard one.  As
janitor of your club I am really prostrated over the events of the
past twenty-four hours.  My occupation is gone, and my despair over
your loss is correspondingly greater, for I have time on my hands to
brood over it.  I was hysterical as a woman yesterday afternoon--so
hysterical that I came near upsetting one of the Furies who engaged
me to row her down to Madame Medusa's villa last evening; and right
at the sluice of the vitriol reservoir at that."

"Then why the deuce don't you do something to help us?" pleaded
Hamlet.

"How can I do any more than I have done?  I've offered you the
Gehenna," retorted Charon.

"But on what terms?" expostulated Raleigh.  "If we had all the wealth
of the Indies we'd have difficulty in paying you the sums you
demand."

"But I am only president of the company," explained Charon.  "I'd
like, as president, to show you some courtesy, and I'm perfectly
willing to do so; but when it comes down to giving you a vessel like
that, I'm bound by my official oath to consider the interest of the
stockholders.  It isn't as it used to be when I had boats to hire in
my own behalf alone.  In those days I had nobody's interest but my
own to look after.  Now the ships all belong to the Styx Navigation
Company.  Can't you see the difference?"

"You own all the stock, don't you?" insisted Raleigh.

"I don't know," Charon answered, blandly.  "I haven't seen the
transfer-books lately.''

"But you know that you did own every share of it, and that you
haven't sold any, don't you?" put in Hamlet.

Charon was puzzled for a moment, but shortly his face cleared, and
Sir Walter's heart sank, for it was evident that the old fellow could
not be cornered.

"Well, it's this way, Sir Walter, and your Highness," he said, "I--I
can't say whether any of that stock has been transferred or not.  The
fact is, I've been speculating a little on margin, and I've put up
that stock as security, and, for all I know, I may have been sold out
by my brokers.  I've been so upset by this unfortunate occurrence
that I haven't seen the market reports for two days.  Really you'll
have to be content with my offer or go without the Gehenna.  There's
too much suspicion attached to high corporate officials lately for me
to yield a jot in the position I have taken.  It would never do to
get you all ready to start, and then have an injunction clapped on
you by some unforeseen stockholder who was not satisfied with the
terms offered you; nor can I ever let it be said of me that to retain
my position as janitor of your organization I sacrificed a trust
committed to my charge.  I'll gladly lend you my private launch,
though I don't think it will aid you much, because the naphtha-tank
has exploded, and the screw slipped off and went to the bottom two
weeks ago.  Still, it is at your service, and I've no doubt that
either Phidias or Benvenuto Cellini will carve out a paddle for you
if you ask him to."

"Bah!" retorted Raleigh.  "You might as well offer us a pair of
skates."

"I would, if I thought the river'd freeze," retorted Charon, blandly.

Raleigh and Hamlet turned away impatiently and left Charon to his own
devices, which for the time being consisted largely of winking his
other eye quietly and outwardly making a great show of grief.

"He's too canny for us, I am afraid," said Sir Walter.  "We'll have
to pay him his money."

"Let us first consult Sherlock Holmes," suggested Hamlet, and this
they proceeded at once to do.

"There is but one thing to be done," observed the astute detective
after he had heard Sir Walter's statement of the case.  "It is an old
saying that one should fight fire with fire.  We must meet modern
business methods with modern commercial ideas.  Charter his vessel at
his own price."

"But we'd never be able to pay," said Hamlet.

"Ha-ha!" laughed Holmes.  "It is evident that you know nothing of the
laws of trade nowadays.  Don't pay!"

"But how can we?" asked Raleigh.

"The method is simple.  You haven't anything to pay with," returned
Holmes.  "Let him sue.  Suppose he gets a verdict.  You haven't
anything he can attach--if you have, make it over to your wives or
your fiancees"

"Is that honest?" asked Hamlet, shaking his head doubtfully.

"It's business," said Holmes.

"But suppose he wants an advance payment?" queried Hamlet.

"Give him a check drawn to his own order.  He'll have to endorse it
when he deposits it, and that will make him responsible," laughed
Holmes.

"What a simple thing when you understand it!" commented Raleigh.

"Very," said Holmes.  "Business is getting by slow degrees to be an
exact science.  It reminds me of the Brighton mystery, in which I
played a modest part some ten years ago, when I first took up
ferreting as a profession.  I was sitting one night in my room at one
of the Brighton hotels, which shall be nameless.  I never give the
name of any of the hotels at which I stop, because it might give
offence to the proprietors of other hotels, with the result that my
books would be excluded from sale therein.  Suffice it to say that I
was spending an early summer Sunday at Brighton with my friend
Watson.  We had dined well, and were enjoying our evening smoke
together upon a small balcony overlooking the water, when there came
a timid knock on the door of my room.

"'Watson,' said I, 'here comes some one for advice.  Do you wish to
wager a small bottle upon it?'

"'Yes,' he answered, with a smile.  'I am thirsty and I'd like a
small bottle; and while I do not expect to win, I'll take the bet.  I
should like to know, though, how you know.'

"'It is quite simple,' said I.  'The timidity of the knock shows that
my visitor is one of two classes of persons--an autograph-hunter or a
client, one of the two.  You see I give you a chance to win.  It may
be an autograph-hunter, but I think it is a client.  If it were a
creditor, he would knock boldly, even ostentatiously; if it were the
maid, she would not knock at all; if it were the hall-boy, he would
not come until I had rung five times for him.  None of these things
has occurred; the knock is the half-hearted knock which betokens
either that the person who knocked is in trouble, or is uncertain as
to his reception.  I am willing, however, considering the heat and my
desire to quench my thirst, to wager that it is a client.'

"'Done,' said Watson; and I immediately remarked, 'Come in.'

"The door opened, and a man of about thirty-five years of age, in a
bathing-suit, entered the room, and I saw at a glance what had
happened.

"'Your name is Burgess,' I said.  'You came here from London this
morning, expecting to return to-night.  You brought no luggage with
you.  After luncheon you went bathing.  You had machine No. 35, and
when you came out of the water you found that No. 35 had disappeared,
with your clothes and the silver watch your uncle gave you on the day
you succeeded to his business.'

"Of course, gentlemen," observed the detective, with a smile at Sir
Walter and Hamlet--"of course the man fairly gasped, and I continued:
'You have been lying face downward in the sand ever since, waiting
for nightfall, so that you could come to me for assistance, not
considering it good form to make an afternoon call upon a stranger at
his hotel, clad in a bathing-suit.  Am I correct?'

"'Sir,' he replied, with a look of wonder, 'you have narrated my
story exactly as it happened, and I find I have made no mistake in
coming to you.  Would you mind telling me what is your course of
reasoning?'

"'It is plain as day,' said I.  'I am the person with the red beard
with whom you came down third class from London this morning, and you
told me your name was Burgess and that you were a butcher.  When you
looked to see the time, I remarked upon the oddness of your watch,
which led to your telling me that it was the gift of your uncle.'

"'True,' said Burgess, 'but I did not tell you I had no luggage.'

"'No,' said I, 'but that you hadn't is plain; for if you had brought
any other clothing besides that you had on with you, you would have
put it on to come here.  That you have been robbed I deduce also from
your costume.'

"'But the number of the machine?' asked Watson.

"'Is on the tag on the key hanging about his neck,' said I.

"'One more question,' queried Burgess.  'How do you know I have been
lying face downward on the beach ever since?'

"'By the sand in your eyebrows,' I replied; and Watson ordered up the
small bottle."

"I fail to see what it was in our conversation, however," observed
Hamlet, somewhat impatient over the delay caused by the narration of
this tale, "that suggested this train of thought to you."

"The sequel will show," returned Holmes.

"Oh, Lord!" put in Raleigh.  "Can't we put off the sequel until a
later issue?  Remember, Mr. Holmes, that we are constantly losing
time."

"The sequel is brief, and I can narrate it on our way to the office
of the Navigation Company," observed the detective.  "When the bottle
came I invited Mr. Burgess to join us, which he did, and as the hour
was late when we came to separate, I offered him the use of my parlor
overnight.  This he accepted, and we retired.

"The next morning when I arose to dress, the mystery was cleared."

"You had dreamed its solution?" asked Raleigh.

"No," replied Holmes.  "Burgess had disappeared with all my clothing,
my false-beard, my suit-case, and my watch.  The only thing he had
left me was the bathing-suit and a few empty small bottles."

"And why, may I ask," put in Hamlet, as they drew near to Charon's
office--"why does that case remind you of business as it is conducted
to-day?"

"In this, that it is a good thing to stay out of unless you know it
all," explained Holmes.  "I omitted in the case of Burgess to observe
one thing about him.  Had I observed that his nose was rectilinear,
incurved, and with a lifted base, and that his auricular temporal
angle was between 96 and 97 degrees, I should have known at once that
he was an impostor Vide Ottolenghui on 'Ears and Noses I Have Met,'
pp. 631-640."

"Do you mean to say that you can tell a criminal by his ears?"
demanded Hamlet.

"If he has any--yes; but I did not know that at the time of the
Brighton mystery.  Therefore I should have stayed out of the case.
But here we are.  Good-morning, Charon."

By this time the trio had entered the private office of the president
of the Styx Navigation Company, and in a few moments the vessel was
chartered at a fabulous price.

On the return to the wharf, Sir Walter somewhat nervously asked
Holmes if he thought the plan they had settled upon would work.

"Charon is a very shrewd old fellow," said he.  "He may outwit us
yet."

"The chances are just two and one-eighth degrees in your favor,"
observed Holmes, quietly, with a glance at Raleigh's ears.  "The
temporal angle of your ears is 93.125 degrees, whereas Charon's stand
out at 91, by my otometer.  To that extent your criminal instincts
are superior to his.  If criminology is an exact science, reasoning
by your respective ears, you ought to beat him out by a perceptible
though possibly narrow margin."

With which assurance Raleigh went ahead with his preparations, and
within twelve hours the Gehenna was under way, carrying a full
complement of crew and officers, with every state-room on board
occupied by some spirit of the more illustrious kind.

Even Shylock was on board, though no one knew it, for in the dead of
night he had stolen quietly up the gang-plank and had hidden himself
in an empty water-cask in the forecastle.

"'Tisn't Venice," he said, as he sat down and breathed heavily
through the bung of the barrel, "but it's musty and damp enough, and,
considering the cost, I can't complain.  You can't get something for
nothing, even in Hades."



CHAPTER VIII:  ON BOARD THE "GEHENNA"



When the Gehenna had passed down the Styx and out through the
beautiful Cimmerian Harbor into the broad waters of the ocean, and
everything was comparatively safe for a while at least, Sherlock
Holmes came down from the bridge, where he had taken his place as the
commander of the expedition at the moment of departure.  His brow was
furrowed with anxiety, and through his massive forehead his brain
could be seen to be throbbing violently, and the corrugations of his
gray matter were not pleasant to witness as he tried vainly to
squeeze an idea out of them.

"What is the matter?" asked Demosthenes, anxiously.  "We are not in
any danger, are we?"

"No," replied Holmes.  "But I am somewhat puzzled at the bubbles on
the surface of the ocean, and the ripples which we passed over an
hour or two ago, barely perceptible through the most powerful
microscope, indicate to my mind that for some reason at present
unknown to me the House-boat has changed her course.  Take that
bubble floating by.  It is the last expiring bit of aerial agitation
of the House-boat's wake.  Observe whence it comes.  Not from the
Azores quarter, but as if instead of steering a straight course
thither the House-boat had taken a sharp turn to the north-east, and
was making for Havre; or, in other words, Paris instead of London
seems to have become their destination."

Demosthenes looked at Holmes with blank amazement, and, to keep from
stammering out the exclamation of wonder that rose to his lips, he
opened his bonbonniere and swallowed a pebble.

"You don't happen to have a cocaine tablet in your box, do you?"
queried Holmes.

"No," returned the Greek.  "Cocaine makes me flighty and nervous, but
these pebbles sort of ballast me and hold me down.  How on earth do
you know that that bubble comes from the wake of the House-boat?"

"By my chemical knowledge, merely," replied Holmes.  "A merely
worldly vessel leaves a phosphorescent bubble in its wake.  That one
we have just discovered is not so, but sulphurescent, if I may coin a
word which it seems to me the English language is very much in need
of.  It proves, then, that the bubble is a portion of the wake of a
Stygian craft, and the only Stygian craft that has cleared the
Cimmerian Harbor for years is the House-boat--Q. E. D."

"We can go back until we find the ripple again, and follow that, I
presume," sneered Le Coq, who did not take much stock in the theories
of his great rival, largely because he was a detective by intuition
rather than by study of the science.

"You can if you want to, but it is better not to," rejoined Holmes,
simply, as though not observing the sneer, "because the ripple
represents the outer lines of the angle of disturbance in the water;
and as any one of the sides to an angle is greater than the
perpendicular from the hypothenuse to the apex, you'd merely be going
the long way.  This is especially important when you consider the
formation of the bow of the House-boat, which is rounded like the
stern of most vessels, and comes near to making a pair of ripples at
an angle of ninety degrees."

"Then," observed Sir Walter, with a sigh of disappointment, "we must
change our course and sail for Paris?"

"I am afraid so," said Holmes; "but of course it's by no means
certain as yet.  I think if Columbus would go up into the mizzentop
and look about him, he might discover something either in
confirmation or refutation of the theory."

"He couldn't discover anything," put in Pinzon.  "He never did."

"Well, I like that!" retorted Columbus.  "I'd like to know who
discovered America."

"So should I," observed Leif Ericson, with a wink at Vespucci.

"Tut!" retorted Columbus.  "I did it, and the world knows it, whether
you claim it or not."

"Yes, just as Noah discovered Ararat," replied Pinzon.  "You sat upon
the deck until we ran plumb into an island, after floating about for
three months, and then you couldn't tell it from a continent, even
when you had it right before your eyes.  Noah might just as well have
told his family that he discovered a roof garden as for you to go
back to Spain telling 'em all that San Salvador was the United
States."

"Well, I don't care," said Columbus, with a short laugh.  "I'm the
one they celebrate, so what's the odds?  I'd rather stay down here in
the smoking-room enjoying a small game, anyhow, than climb up that
mast and strain my eyes for ten or a dozen hours looking for evidence
to prove or disprove the correctness of another man's theory.  I
wouldn't know evidence when I saw it, anyhow.  Send Judge
Blackstone."

"I draw the line at the mizzentop," observed Blackstone.  "The
dignity of the bench must and shall be preserved, and I'll never
consent to climb up that rigging, getting pitch and paint on my
ermine, no matter who asks me to go."

"Whomsoever I tell to go, shall go," put in Holmes, firmly.  "I am
commander of this ship.  It will pay you to remember that, Judge
Blackstone."

"And I am the Court of Appeals," retorted Blackstone, hotly.  "Bear
that in mind, captain, when you try to send me up.  I'll issue a writ
of habeas corpus on my own body, and commit you for contempt."

"There's no use of sending the Judge, anyhow," said Raleigh, fearing
by the glitter that came into the eye of the commander that trouble
might ensue unless pacificatory measures were resorted to.  "He's
accustomed to weighing everything carefully, and cannot be rushed
into a decision.  If he saw any evidence, he'd have to sit on it a
week before reaching a conclusion.  What we need here more than
anything else is an expert seaman, a lookout, and I nominate Shem.
He has sailed under his father, and I have it on good authority that
he is a nautical expert."

Holmes hesitated for an instant.  He was considering the necessity of
disciplining the recalcitrant Blackstone, but he finally yielded.

"Very well," he said.  "Shem be it.  Bo'sun, pipe Shem on deck, and
tell him that general order number one requires him to report at the
mizzentop right away, and that immediately he sees anything he shall
come below and make it known to me.  As for the rest of us, having a
very considerable appetite, I do now decree that it is dinner-time.
Shall we go below?"

"I don't think I care for any, thank you," said Raleigh.  "Fact is--
ah--I dined last week, and am not hungry."

Noah laughed.  "Oh, come below and watch us eat, then," he said.
"It'll do you good."

But there was no reply.  Raleigh had plunged head first into his
state-room, which fortunately happened to be on the upper deck.  The
rest of the spirits repaired below to the saloon, where they were
soon engaged in an animated discussion of such viands as the larder
provided.

"This," said Dr. Johnson, from the head of the table, "is what I call
comfort.  I don't know that I am so anxious to recover the House-
boat, after all."

"Nor I," said Socrates, "with a ship like this to go off cruising on,
and with such a larder.  Look at the thickness of that puree, Doctor-
-"

"Excuse me," said Boswell, faintly, "but I--I've left my note--bub--
book upstairs, Doctor, and I'd like to go up and get it."

"Certainly," said Dr. Johnson.  "I judge from your color, which is
highly suggestive of a modern magazine poster, that it might be well
too if you stayed on deck for a little while and made a few entries
in your commonplace book."

"Thank you," said Boswell, gratefully.  "Shall you say anything
clever during dinner, sir?  If so, I might be putting it down while
I'm up--"

"Get out!" roared the Doctor.  "Get up as high as you can--get up
with Shem on the mizzentop--"

"Very good, sir," replied Boswell, and he was off.

"You ought to be more lenient with him, Doctor," said Bonaparte; "he
means well."

"I know it," observed Johnson; "but he's so very previous.  Last
winter, at Chaucer's dinner to Burns, I made a speech, which Boswell
printed a week before it was delivered, with the words 'laughter' and
'uproarious applause' interspersed through it.  It placed me in a
false position."

"How did he know what you were going to say?" queried Demosthenes.

"Don't know," replied Johnson.  "Kind of mind-reader, I fancy," he
added, blushing a trifle.  "But, Captain Holmes, what do you deduce
from your observation of the wake of the House-boat?  If she's going
to Paris, why the change?"

"I have two theories," replied the detective.

"Which is always safe," said Le Coq.

"Always; it doubles your chances of success," acquiesced Holmes.
"Anyhow, it gives you a choice, which makes it more interesting.  The
change of her course from Londonward to Parisward proves to me either
that Kidd is not satisfied with the extent of the revenge he has
already taken, and wishes to ruin you gentlemen financially by
turning your wives, daughters, and sisters loose on the Parisian
shops, or that the pirates have themselves been overthrown by the
ladies, who have decided to prolong their cruise and get some fun out
of their misfortune."

"And where else than to Paris would any one in search of pleasure
go?" asked Bonaparte.

"I had more fun a few miles outside of Brussels," said Wellington,
with a sly wink at Washington.

"Oh, let up on that!" retorted Bonaparte.  "It wasn't you beat me at
Waterloo.  You couldn't have beaten me at a plain ordinary game of
old-maid with a stacked pack of cards, much less in the game of war,
if you hadn't had the elements with you."

"Tut!" snapped Wellington.  "It was clear science laid you out,
Boney."

"Taisey-voo!" shouted the irate Corsican.  "Clear science be hanged!
Wet science was what did it.  If it hadn't been for the rain, my
little Duke, I should have been in London within a week, my
grenadiers would have been camping in your Rue Peekadeely, and the
Old Guard all over everywhere else."

"You must have had a gay army, then,"  laughed Caesar.  "What are
French soldiers made of, that they can't stand the wet--unshrunk
linen or flannel?"

"Bah!" observed Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders and walking a few
paces away.  "You do not understand the French.  The Frenchman is not
a pell-mell soldier like you Romans; he is the poet of arms; he does
not go in for glory at the expense of his dignity; style, form, is
dearer to him than honor, and he has no use for fighting in the wet
and coming out of the fight conspicuous as a victor with the curl out
of his feathers and his epaulets rusted with the damp.  There is no
glory in water.  But if we had had umbrellas and mackintoshes, as
every Englishman who comes to the Continent always has, and a bath-
tub for everybody, then would your Waterloo have been different
again, and the great democracy of Europe with a Bonaparte for emperor
would have been founded for what the Americans call the keeps; and as
for your little Great Britain, ha! she would have become the
Blackwell's Island of the Greater France."

"You're almost as funny as Punch isn't," drawled Wellington, with an
angry gesture at Bonaparte.  "You weren't within telephoning distance
of victory all day.  We simply played with you, my boy.  It was a
regular game of golf for us.  We let you keep up pretty close and win
a few holes, but on the home drive we had you beaten in one stroke.
Go to, my dear Bonaparte, and stop talking about the flood."

"It's a lucky thing for us that Noah wasn't a Frenchman, eh?" said
Frederick the Great.  "How that rain would have fazed him if he had
been!  The human race would have been wiped out."

"Oh, pshaw!" ejaculated Noah, deprecating the unseemliness of the
quarrel, and putting his arm affectionately about Bonaparte's
shoulder.  "When you come down to that, I was French--as French as
one could be in those days--and these Gallic subjects of my friend
here were, every one of 'em, my lineal descendants, and their hatred
of rain was inherited directly from me, their ancestor."

"Are not we English as much your descendants?" queried Wellington,
arching his eyebrows.

"You are," said Noah, "but you take after Mrs. Noah more than after
me.  Water never fazes a woman, and your delight in tubs is an
essentially feminine trait.  The first thing Mrs. Noah carried aboard
was a laundry outfit, and then she went back for rugs and coats and
all sorts of hand-baggage.  Gad, it makes me laugh to this day when I
think of it!  She looked for all the world like an Englishman
travelling on the Continent as she walked up the gang-plank behind
the elephants, each elephant with a Gladstone bag in his trunk and a
hat-box tied to his tail."  Here the venerable old weather-prophet
winked at Munchausen, and the little quarrel which had been imminent
passed off in a general laugh.

"Where's Boswell?  He ought to get that anecdote," said Johnson.

"I've locked him up in the library," said Holmes.  "He's in charge of
the log, and as I have a pretty good general idea as to what is about
to happen, I have mapped out a skeleton of the plot and set him to
work writing it up."  Here the detective gave a sudden start, placed
his hand to his ear, listened intently for an instant, and, taking
out his watch and glancing at it, added, quietly, "In three minutes
Shem will be in here to announce a discovery, and one of great
importance, I judge, from the squeak."

The assemblage gazed earnestly at Holmes for a moment.

"The squeak?" queried Raleigh.

"Precisely," said Holmes.  "The squeak is what I said, and as I
always say what I mean, it follows logically that I meant what I
said."

"I heard no squeak," observed Dr. Johnson; "and, furthermore, I fail
to see how a squeak, if I had heard it, would have portended a
discovery of importance."

"It would not--to you," said Holmes; "but with me it is different.
My hearing is unusually acute.  I can hear the dropping of a pin
through a stone wall ten feet thick; any sound within a mile of my
eardrum vibrates thereon with an intensity which would surprise you,
and it is by the use of cocaine that I have acquired this wonderfully
acute sense.  A property which dulls the senses of most people
renders mine doubly apprehensive; therefore, gentlemen, while to you
there was no auricular disturbance, to me there was.  I heard Shem
sliding down the mast a minute since.  The fact that he slid down the
mast instead of climbing down the rigging showed that he was in great
haste, therefore he must have something to communicate of great
importance."

"Why isn't he here already, then?  It wouldn't take him two minutes
to get from the deck here," asked the ever-auspicious Le Coq.

"It is simple," returned Holmes, calmly.  "If you will go yourself
and slide down that mast you will see.  Shem has stopped for a little
witch-hazel to soothe his burns.  It is no cool matter sliding down a
mast two hundred feet in height."

As Sherlock Holmes spoke the door burst open and Shem rushed in.

"A signal of distress, captain!" he cried.

"From what quarter--to larboard?" asked Holmes.

"No," returned Shem, breathless.

"Then it must be dead ahead," said Holmes.

"Why not to starboard?" asked Le Coq, dryly.

"Because," answered Holmes, confidently, "it never happens so.  If
you had ever read a truly exciting sea-tale, my dear Le Coq, you
would have known that interesting things, and particularly signals of
distress, are never seen except to larboard or dead ahead."

A murmur of applause greeted this retort, and Le Coq subsided.

"The nature of the signal?" demanded Holmes.

"A black flag, skull and cross-bones down, at half-mast!" cried Shem,
"and on a rock-bound coast!"

"They're marooned, by heavens!" shouted Holmes, springing to his feet
and rushing to the deck, where he was joined immediately by Sir
Walter, Dr. Johnson, Bonaparte, and the others.

"Isn't he a daisy?" whispered Demosthenes to Diogenes as they climbed
the stairs.

"He is more than that; he's a blooming orchid," said Diogenes, with
intense enthusiasm.  "I think I'll get my X-ray lantern and see if
he's honest."



CHAPTER IX:  CAPTAIN KIDD MEETS WITH AN OBSTACLE



"Excuse me, your Majesty," remarked Helen of Troy as Cleopatra
accorded permission to Captain Kidd to speak, "I have not been
introduced to this gentleman nor has he been presented to me, and I
really cannot consent to any proceeding so irregular as this.  I do
not speak to gentlemen I have not met, nor do I permit them to
address me."

"Hear, hear!" cried Xanthippe.  "I quite agree with the principle of
my young friend from Troy.  It may be that when we claimed for
ourselves all the rights of men that the right to speak and be spoken
to by other men without an introduction will included in the list,
but I for one have no desire to avail myself of the privilege,
especially when it's a horrid-looking man like this."

Kidd bowed politely, and smiled so terribly that several of the
ladies fainted.

"I will withdraw," he said, turning to Cleopatra; and it must be said
that his suggestion was prompted by his heartfelt wish, for now that
he found himself thus conspicuously brought before so many women,
with falsehood on his lips, his courage began to ooze.

"Not yet, please," answered the chairlady.  "I imagine we can get
about this difficulty without much trouble."

"I think it a perfectly proper objection too," observed Delilah,
rising.  "If we ever needed etiquette we need it now.  But I have a
plan which will obviate any further difficulty.  If there is no one
among us who is sufficiently well acquainted with the gentleman to
present him formally to us, I will for the time being take upon
myself the office of ship's barber and cut his hair.  I understand
that it is quite the proper thing for barbers to talk, while cutting
their hair, to persons to whom they have not been introduced.  And,
besides, he really needs a hair-cut badly.  Thus I shall establish an
acquaintance with the captain, after which I can with propriety
introduce him to the rest of you."

"Perhaps the gentleman himself might object to that," put in Queen
Elizabeth.  "If I remember rightly, your last customer was very much
dissatisfied with the trim you gave him."

"It will be unnecessary to do what Delilah proposes," said Mrs. Noah,
with a kindly smile, as she rose up from the corner in which she had
been sitting, an interested listener.  "I can introduce the gentleman
to you all with perfect propriety.  He's a member of my family.  His
grandfather was the great-grandson a thousand and eight times removed
of my son Shem's great-grandnephew on his father's side.  His
relationship to me is therefore obvious, though from what I know of
his reputation I think he takes more after my husband's ancestors
than my own.  Willie, dear, these ladies are friends of mine.
Ladies, this young man is one of my most famous descendants.  He has
been a man of many adventures, and he has been hanged once, which,
far from making him undesirable as an acquaintance, has served merely
to render him harmless, and therefore a safe person to know.  Now, my
son, go ahead and speak your piece."

The good old spirit sat down, and the scruples of the objectors
having thus been satisfied, Captain Kidd began.

"Now that I know you all," he remarked, as pleasantly as he could
under the circumstances, "I feel that I can speak more freely, and
certainly with a great deal less embarrassment than if I were
addressing a gathering of entire strangers.  I am not much of a hand
at speaking, and have always felt somewhat nonplussed at finding
myself in a position of this nature.  In my whole career I never
experienced but one irresistible impulse to make a public address of
any length, and that was upon that unhappy occasion to which the
greatest and grandest of my great-grandmothers has alluded, and that
only as the chain by which I was suspended in mid-air tightened about
my vocal chords.  At that moment I could have talked impromptu for a
year, so fast and numerously did thoughts of the uttermost import
surge upward into my brain; but circumstances over which I had no
control prevented the utterance of those thoughts, and that speech is
therefore lost to the world."

"He has the gift of continuity," observed Madame Recamier.

"Ought to be in the United States Senate," smiled Elizabeth.

"I wish I could make up my mind as to whether he is outrageously
handsome or desperately ugly," remarked Helen of Troy.  "He
fascinates me, but whether it is the fascination of liking or of
horror I can't tell, and it's quite important."

"Ladies," resumed the captain, his uneasiness increasing as he came
to the point, "I am but the agent of your respective husbands,
fiances, and other masculine guardians.  The gentlemen who were
previously the tenants of this club-house have delegated to me the
important, and I may add highly agreeable, task of showing you the
world.  They have noted of late years the growth of that feeling of
unrest which is becoming every day more and more conspicuous in
feminine circles in all parts of the universe--on the earth, where
women are clamoring to vote, and to be allowed to go out late at
night without an escort, in Hades, where, as you are no doubt aware,
the management of the government has fallen almost wholly into the
hands of the Furies; and even in the halls of Jupiter himself, where,
I am credibly informed, Juno has been taking private lessons in the
art of hurling thunderbolts--information which the extraordinary
quality of recent electrical storms on the earth would seem to
confirm.  Thunderbolts of late years have been cast hither and yon in
a most erratic fashion, striking where they were least expected, as
those of you who keep in touch with the outer world must be fully
aware.  Now, actuated by their usual broad and liberal motives, the
men of Hades wish to meet the views of you ladies to just that extent
that your views are based upon a wise selection, in turn based upon
experience, and they have come to me and in so many words have said,
'Mr. Kidd, we wish the women of Hades to see the world.  We want them
to be satisfied.  We do not like this constantly increasing spirit of
unrest.  We, who have seen all the life that we care to see, do not
ourselves feel equal to the task of showing them about.  We will pay
you liberally if you will take our House-boat, which they have always
been anxious to enter, and personally conduct our beloved ones to
Paris, London, and elsewhere.  Let them see as much of life as they
can stand.  Accord them every privilege.  Spare no expense; only
bring them back again to us safe and sound.'  These were their words,
ladies.  I asked them why they didn't come along themselves, saying
that even if they were tired of it all, they should make some
personal sacrifice to your comfort; and they answered, reasonably and
well, that they would be only too glad to do so, but that they feared
they might unconsciously seem to exert a repressing influence upon
you.  'We want them to feel absolutely free, Captain Kidd,' said
they, 'and if we are along they may not feel so.'  The answer was
convincing, ladies, and I accepted the commission."

"But we knew nothing of all this," interposed Elizabeth.  "The
subject was not broached to us by our husbands, brothers, fiances, or
fathers.  My brother, Sir Walter Raleigh--"

Cleopatra chuckled.  "Brother!  Brother's good," she said.

"Well, that's what he is," retorted Elizabeth, quickly.  "I promised
to be a sister to him, and I'm going to keep my word.  That's the
kind of a queen I am.  I was about to remark," Elizabeth added,
turning to the captain, "that my brother, Sir Walter Raleigh, never
even hinted at any such plan, and usually he asked my advice in
matters of so great importance."

"That is easily accounted for, madame," retorted Kidd.  "Sir Walter
intended this as a little surprise for you, that is all.  The
arrangements were all placed in his hands, and it was he who bound us
all to secrecy.  None of the ladies were to be informed of it."

"It does not sound altogether plausible," interposed Portia.  "If you
ladies do not object, I should like to cross-examine this--ah--
gentleman."

Kidd paled visibly.  He was not prepared for any such trial; however,
he put as good a face on the matter as he could, and announced his
willingness to answer any questions that he might be asked.

"Shall we put him under oath?" asked Cleopatra.

"As you please, ladies," said the pirate.  "A pirate's word is as
good as his bond; but I'll take an oath if you choose--a half-dozen
of 'em, if need be."

"I fancy we can get along without that," said Portia.  "Now, Captain
Kidd, who first proposed this plan?"

"Socrates," said Kidd, unblushingly with a sly glance at Xanthippe.

"What?" cried Xanthippe.  "My husband propose anything that would
contribute to my pleasure or intellectual advancement?  Bah!  Your
story is transparently false at the outset."

"Nevertheless," said Kidd, "the scheme was proposed by Socrates.  He
said a trip of that kind for Xanthippe would be very restful and
health-giving."

"For me?" cried Xanthippe, sceptically.

"No, madame, for him," retorted Kidd.

"Ah--ho-ho!  That's the way of it, eh?" said Xanthippe, flushing to
the roots of her hair.  "Very likely.  You--ah--you will excuse my
doubting your word, Captain Kidd, a moment since.  I withdraw my
remark, and in order to make fullest reparation, I beg to assure
these ladies that I am now perfectly convinced that you are telling
the truth.  That last observation is just like my husband, and when I
get back home again, if I ever do, well--ha, ha!--we'll have a merry
time, that's all."

"And what was--ah--Bassanio's connection with this affair?" added
Portia, hesitatingly.

"He was not informed of it," said Kidd, archly.  "I am not acquainted
with Bassanio, my lady, but I overheard Sir Walter enjoining upon the
others the absolute necessity of keeping the whole affair from
Bassanio, because he was afraid he would not consent to it.
'Bassanio has a most beautiful wife, gentlemen,' said Sir Walter,
'and he wouldn't think of parting with her under any circumstances;
therefore let us keep our intentions a secret from him.'  I did not
hear whom the gentleman married, madame; but the others, Prince
Hamlet, the Duke of Buckingham, and Louis the Fourteenth, all agreed
that Mrs. Bassanio was too beautiful a person to be separated from,
and that it was better, therefore, to keep Bassanio in the dark as to
their little enterprise until it was too late for him to interfere."

A pink glow of pleasure suffused the lovely countenance of the cross-
examiner, and it did not require a very sharp eye to see that the
wily Kidd had completely won her over to his side.  On the other
hand, Elizabeth's brow became as corrugated as her ruff, and the
spirit of the pirate shivered to the core as he turned and gazed upon
that glowering face.

"Sir Walter agreed to that, did he?" snapped Elizabeth.  "And yet he
was willing to part with--ah--his sister."

"Well, your Majesty," began Kidd, hesitatingly, "you see it was this
way:  Sir Walter--er--did say that, but--ah--he--ah--but he added
that he of course merely judged--er--this man Bassanio's feelings by
his own in parting from his sister--"

"Did he say sister?" cried Elizabeth.

"Well--no--not in those words," shuffled Kidd, perceiving quickly
wherein his error lay, "but--ah--I jumped at the conclusion, seeing
his intense enthusiasm for the lady's beauty and--er--intellectual
qualities, that he referred to you, and it is from yourself that I
have gained my knowledge as to the fraternal, not to say sororal,
relationship that exists between you."

"That man's a diplomat from Diplomaville!" muttered Sir Henry Morgan,
who, with Abeuchapeta and Conrad, was listening at the port without.

"He is that," said Abeuchapeta, "but he can't last much longer.  He's
perspiring like a pitcher of ice-water on a hot day, and a spirit of
his size and volatile nature can't stand much of that without
evaporating.  If you will observe him closely you will see that his
left arm already has vanished into thin air."

"By Jove!" whispered Conrad, "that's a fact!  If they don't let up on
him he'll vanish.  He's getting excessively tenuous about the top of
his head."

All of which was only too true.  Subjected to a scrutiny which he had
little expected, the deceitful ambassador of the thieving band was
rapidly dissipating, and, as those without had so fearsomely noted,
was in imminent danger of complete sublimation, which, in the case of
one possessed of so little elementary purity, meant nothing short of
annihilation.  Fortunately for Kidd, however, his wonderful tact had
stemmed the tide of suspicion.  Elizabeth was satisfied with his
explanation, and in the minds of at least three of the most
influential ladies on board, Portia, Xanthippe, and Elizabeth, he had
become a creature worthy of credence, which meant that he had nothing
more to fear.

"I am prepared, your Majesty," said Elizabeth, addressing Cleopatra,
"to accept from this time on the gentleman's word.  The little that
he has already told us is hall-marked with truth.  I should like to
ask, however, one more question, and that is how our gentleman
friends expected to embark us upon this voyage without letting us
into the secret?"

"Oh, as for that," replied Kidd, with a deep-drawn sigh of relief,
for he too had noticed the gradual evaporation of his arm and the
incipient etherization of his cranium--"as for that, it was simple
enough.  There was to have been a day set apart for ladies' day at
the club, and when you were all on board we were quietly to weigh
anchor and start.  The fact that you had anticipated the day, of your
own volition, was telephoned by my scouts to me at my headquarters,
and that news was by me transmitted by messenger to Sir Walter at
Charon's Glen Island, where the long-talked-of fight between Samson
and Goliath was taking place.  Raleigh immediately replied, 'Good!
Start at once.  Paris first.  Unlimited credit.  Love to Elizabeth.'
Wherefore, ladies," he added, rising from his chair and walking to
the door--"wherefore you are here and in my care.  Make yourselves
comfortable, and with the aid of the fashion papers which you have
already received prepare yourselves for the joys that await you.
With the aid of Madame Recamier and Baedeker's Paris, which you will
find in the library, it will be your own fault if when you arrive
there you resemble a great many less fortunate women who don't know
what they want."

With these words Kidd disappeared through the door, and fainted in
the arms of Sir Henry Morgan.  The strain upon him had been too
great.

"A charming fellow," said Portia, as the pirate disappeared.

"Most attractive," said Elizabeth.

"Handsome, too, don't you think?" asked Helen of Troy.

"And truthful beyond peradventure," observed Xanthippe, as she
reflected upon the words the captain had attributed to Socrates.  "I
didn't believe him at first, but when he told me what my sweet-
tempered philosopher had said, I was convinced."

"He's a sweet child," interposed Mrs. Noah, fondly.  "One of my
favorite grandchildren."

"Which makes it embarrassing for me to say," cried Cassandra,
starting up angrily, "that he is a base caitiff!"

Had a bomb been dropped in the middle of the room, it could not have
created a greater sensation than the words of Cassandra.

"What?" cried several voices at once.  "A caitiff?"

"A caitiff with a capital K," retorted Cassandra.  "I know that,
because while he was telling his story I was listening to it with one
ear and looking forward into the middle of next week with the other--
I mean the other eye--and I saw--"

"Yes, you saw?" cried Cleopatra.

"I saw that he was deceiving us.  Mark my words, ladies, he is a base
caitiff," replied Cassandra--"a base caitiff."

"What did you see?" cried Elizabeth, excitedly.

"This," said Cassandra, and she began a narration of future events
which I must defer to the next chapter.  Meanwhile his associates
were endeavoring to restore the evaporated portions of the prostrated
Kidd's spirit anatomy by the use of a steam-atomizer, but with
indifferent success.  Kidd's training had not fitted him for an
intellectual combat with superior women, and he suffered accordingly.



CHAPTER X:  A WARNING ACCEPTED



"It is with no desire to interrupt my friend Cassandra
unnecessarily," said Mrs. Noah, as the prophetess was about to
narrate her story, "that I rise to beg her to remember that, as an
ancestress of Captain Kidd, I hope she will spare a grandmother's
feelings, if anything in the story she is about to tell is improper
to be placed before the young.  I have been so shocked by the stories
of perfidy and baseness generally that have been published of late
years, that I would interpose a protest while there is yet time if
there is a line in Cassandra's story which ought to be withheld from
the public; a protest based upon my affection for posterity, and in
the interests of morality everywhere."

"You may rest easy upon that score, my dear Mrs. Noah," said the
prophetess.  "What I have to say would commend itself, I am sure,
even to the ears of a British matron; and while it is as complete a
demonstration of man's perfidy as ever was, it is none the less as
harmless a little tale as the Dottie Dimple books or any other more
recent study of New England character."

"Thank you for the load your words have lifted from my mind," said
Mrs. Noah, settling back in her chair, a satisfied expression upon
her gentle countenance.  "I hope you will understand why I spoke, and
withal why modern literature generally has been so distressful to me.
When you reflect that the world is satisfied that most of man's
criminal instincts are the result of heredity, and that Mr. Noah and
I are unable to shift the responsibility for posterity to other
shoulders than our own, you will understand my position.  We were
about the most domestic old couple that ever lived, and when we see
the long and varied assortment of crimes that are cropping out
everywhere in our descendants it is painful to us to realize what a
pair of unconsciously wicked old fogies we must have been."

"We all understand that," said Cleopatra, kindly; "and we are all
prepared to acquit you of any responsibility for the advanced
condition of wickedness to-day.  Man has progressed since your time,
my dear grandma, and the modern improvements in the science of crime
are no more attributable to you than the invention of the telephone
or the oyster cocktail is attributable to your husband."

"Thank you kindly," murmured the old lady, and she resumed her
knitting upon a phantom tam-o'-shanter, which she was making as a
Christmas surprise for her husband.

"When Captain Kidd began his story," said Cassandra, "he made one
very bad mistake, and yet one which was prompted by that courtesy
which all men instinctively adopt when addressing women.  When he
entered the room he removed his hat, and therein lay his fatal error,
if he wished to convince me of the truth of his story, for with his
hat removed I could see the workings of his mind.  While you ladies
were watching his lips or his eyes, some of you taking in the
gorgeous details of his dress, all of you hanging upon his every
word, I kept my eye fixed firmly upon his imagination, and I saw,
what you did not, THAT HE WAS DRAWING WHOLLY UPON THAT!"

"How extraordinary!" cried Elizabeth.

"Yes--and fortunate," said Cassandra.  "Had I not done so, a week
hence we should, every one of us, have been lost in the surging
wickedness of the city of Paris."

"But, Cassandra," said Trilby, who was anxious to return once more to
the beautiful city by the Seine, "he told us we were going to Paris."

"Of course he did," said Madame Recamier, "and in so many words.
Certainly he was not drawing upon his imagination there."

"And one might be lost in a very much worse place," put in Marguerite
de Valois, "if, indeed, it were possible to lose us in Paris at all.
I fancy that I know enough about Paris to find my way about."

"Humph!" ejaculated Cassandra.  "What a foolish little thing you are!
You don't imagine that the Paris of to-day is the Paris of your time,
or even the Paris of that sweet child Trilby's time, do you?  If you
do you are very much mistaken.  I almost wish I had not warned you of
your danger and had let you go, just to see those eyes of yours open
with amazement at the change.  You'd find your Louvre a very
different sort of a place from what it used to be, my dear lady.
Those pleasing little windows through which your relations were wont
in olden times to indulge in target practice at people who didn't go
to their church are now kept closed; the galleries which used to
swarm with people, many of whom ought to have been hanged, now swarm
with pictures, many of which ought not to have been hung; the romance
which clung about its walls is as much a part of the dead past as
yourselves, and were you to materialize suddenly therein you would
find yourselves jostled and hustled and trodden upon by the curious
from other lands, with Argus eyes taking in five hundred pictures a
minute, and traversing those halls at a rate of speed at which
Mercury himself would stand aghast."

"But my beloved Tuileries?" cried Marie Antoinette.

"Has been swallowed up by a play-ground for the people, my dear,"
said Cassandra, gently.  "Paris is no place for us, and it is the
intention of these men, in whose hands we are, to take us there and
then desert us.  Can you imagine anything worse than ourselves, the
phantoms of a glorious romantic past, basely deserted in the streets
of a wholly strange, superficial, material city of to-day?  What do
you think, Elizabeth, would be your fate if, faint and famished, you
begged for sustenance at an English door to-day, and when asked your
name and profession were to reply, 'Elizabeth, Queen of England'?"

"Insane asylum," said Elizabeth, shortly.

"Precisely.  So in Paris with the rest of us," said Cassandra.

"How do you know all this?" asked Trilby, still unconvinced.

"I know it just as you knew how to become a prima donna," said
Cassandra.  "I am, however, my own Svengali, which is rather
preferable to the patent detachable hypnotizer you had.  I hypnotize
myself, and direct my mind into the future.  I was a professional
forecaster in the days of ancient Troy, and if my revelations had
been heeded the Priam family would, I doubt not, still be doing
business at the old stand, and Mr. AEneas would not have grown round-
shouldered giving his poor father a picky-back ride on the opening
night of the horse-show, so graphically depicted by Virgil."

"I never heard about that," said Trilby.  "It sounds like a very
funny story, though."

"Well, it wasn't so humorous for some as it was for others," said
Cassandra, with a sly glance at Helen.  "The fact is, until you
mentioned it yourself, it never occurred to me that there was much
fun in any portion of the Trojan incident, excepting perhaps the
delirium tremens of old Laocoon, who got no more than he deserved for
stealing my thunder.  I had warned Troy against the Greeks, and they
all laughed at me, and said my eye to the future was strabismatic;
that the Greeks couldn't get into Troy at all, even if they wanted
to.  And then the Greeks made a great wooden horse as a gift for the
Trojans, and when I turned my X-ray gaze upon it I saw that it
contained about six brigades of infantry, three artillery regiments,
and sharp-shooters by the score.  It was a sort of military Noah's
Ark; but I knew that the prejudice against me was so strong that
nobody would believe what I told them.  So I said nothing.  My
prophecies never came true, they said, failing to observe that my
warning as to what would be was in itself the cause of their non-
fulfilment.  But desiring to save Troy, I sent for Laocoon and told
him all about it, and he went out and announced it as his own private
prophecy; and then, having tried to drown his conscience in strong
waters, he fell a victim to the usual serpentine hallucination, and
everybody said he wasn't sober, and therefore unworthy of belief.
The horse was accepted, hauled into the city, and that night orders
came from hindquarters to the regiments concealed inside to march.
They marched, and next morning Troy had been removed from the map;
ninety per cent of the Trojans died suddenly, and AEneas, grabbing up
his family in one hand and his gods in the other, went yachting for
several seasons, ultimately settling down in Italy.  All of this
could have been avoided if the Trojans would have taken the hint from
my prophecies.  They preferred, however, not to do it, with the
result that to-day no one but Helen and myself knows even where Troy
was, and we'll never tell."

"It is all true," said Helen, proudly.  "I was the woman who was at
the bottom of it all, and I can testify that Cassandra always told
the truth, which is why she was always so unpopular.  When anything
that was unpleasant happened, after it was all over she would turn
and say, sweetly, 'I told you so.'  She was the original 'I told you
so' nuisance, and of course she had the newspapyruses down on her,
because she never left them any sensation to spring upon the public.
If she had only told a fib once in a while, the public would have had
more confidence in her."

"Thank you for your endorsement," said Cassandra, with a nod at
Helen.  "With such testimony I cannot see how you can refrain from
taking my advice in this matter; and I tell you, ladies, that this
man Kidd has made his story up out of whole cloth; the men of Hades
had no more to do with our being here than we had; they were as much
surprised as we are to find us gone.  Kidd himself was not aware of
our presence, and his object in taking us to Paris is to leave us
stranded there, disembodied spirits, vagrant souls with no familiar
haunts to haunt, no place to rest, and nothing before us save
perpetual exile in a world that would have no sympathy for us in our
misfortune, and no belief in our continued existence."

"But what, then, shall we do?" cried Ophelia, wringing her hands in
despair.

"It is a terrible problem," said Cleopatra, anxiously; "and yet it
does seem as if our woman's instinct ought to show us some way out of
our trouble."

"The Committee on Treachery," said Delilah, "has already suggested a
chafing-dish party, with Lucretia Borgia in charge of the lobster
Newberg."

"That is true," said Lucretia; "but I find, in going through my
reticule, that my maid, for some reason unknown to me, has failed to
renew my supply of poisons.  I shall discharge her on my return home,
for she knows that I never go anywhere without them; but that does
not help matters at this juncture.  The sad fact remains that I could
prepare a thousand delicacies for these pirates without fatal
results."

"You mean immediately fatal, do you not?" suggested Xanthippe.  "I
could myself prepare a cake which would in time reduce our captors to
a state of absolute dependence, but of course the effect is not
immediate."

"We might give a musicale, and let Trilby sing 'Ben Bolt' to them,"
suggested Marguerite de Valois, with a giggle.

"Don't be flippant, please," said Portia.  "We haven't time to waste
on flippant suggestions.  Perhaps a court-martial of these pirates,
supplemented by a yard-arm, wouldn't be a bad thing.  I'll prosecute
the case."

"You forget that you are dealing with immortal spirits," observed
Cleopatra.  "If these creatures were mortals, hanging them would be
all right, and comparatively easy, considering that we outnumber them
ten to one, and have many resources for getting them, more or less,
in our power, but they are not.  They have gone through the refining
process of dissolution once, and there's an end to that.  Our only
resource is in the line of deception, and if we cannot deceive them,
then we have ceased to be women."

"That is truly said," observed Elizabeth.  "And inasmuch as we have
already provided ourselves with a suitable committee for the
preparation of our plans of a deceptive nature, I move, as the
easiest possible solution of the difficulty for the rest of us, that
the Committee on Treachery be requested to go at once into executive
session, with orders not to come out of it until they have suggested
a plausible plan of campaign against our abductors.  We must be rid
of them.  Let the Committee on Treachery say how."

"Second the motion," said Mrs. Noah.  "You are a very clear-headed
young woman, Lizzie, and your grandmother is proud of you."

The Committee on Treachery were about to protest, but the chair
refused to entertain any debate upon the question, which was put and
carried with a storm of approval.

Five minutes later a note was handed through the port, addressed to
Cleopatra, which read as follows:


"Dear Madame,--Six bells has just struck, and the officers and crew
are hungry.  Will you and your fair companions co-operate with us in
our enterprise by having a hearty dinner ready within two hours?  A
speck has appeared on the horizon which betokens a coming storm, else
we would prepare our supper ourselves.  As it is, we feel that your
safety depends on our remaining on deck.  If there is any beer on the
ice, we prefer it to tea.  Two cases will suffice.

"Yours respectfully,

"HENRY MORGAN, Bart.; First Mate."


"Hurrah!" cried Cleopatra, as she read this communication.  "I have
an idea.  Tell the Committee on Treachery to appear before the full
meeting at once."

The committee was summoned, and Cleopatra announced her plan of
operation, and it was unanimously adopted; but what it was we shall
have to wait for another chapter to learn.



CHAPTER XI:  MAROONED



When Captain Holmes arrived upon deck he seized his glass, and,
gazing intently through it for a moment, perceived that the faithful
Shem had not deceived him.  Flying at half-mast from a rude, roughly
hewn pole set upon a rocky height was the black flag, emblem of
piracy, and, as Artemus Ward put it, "with the second joints
reversed."  It was in very truth a signal of distress.

"I make it a point never to be surprised," observed Holmes, as he
peered through the glass, "but this beats me.  I didn't know there
was an island of this nature in these latitudes.  Blackstone, go
below and pipe Captain Cook on deck.  Perhaps he knows what island
that is."

"You'll have to excuse me, Captain Holmes," replied the Judge.  "I
didn't ship on this voyage as a cabin-boy or a messenger-boy.
Therefore I--"

"Bonaparte, put the Judge in irons," interrupted Holmes, sternly.  "I
expect to be obeyed, Judge Blackstone, whether you shipped as a Lord
Chief-Justice or a state-room steward.  When I issue an order it must
be obeyed.  Step lively there, Bonaparte.  Get his honor ironed and
summon your marines.  We may have work to do before night.  Hamlet,
pipe Captain Cook on deck."

"Aye, aye, sir," replied Hamlet, with alacrity, as he made off.

"That's the way to obey orders," said Holmes, with a scornful glance
at Blackstone.

"I was only jesting, Captain," said the latter, paling somewhat.

"That's all right," said Holmes, taking up his glass again.  "So was
I when I ordered you in irons, and in order that you may appreciate
the full force of the joke I repeat it.  Bonaparte, do your duty."

In an instant the order was obeyed, and the unhappy Judge shortly
found himself manacled and alone in the forecastle.  Meanwhile
Captain Cook, in response to the commander's order, repaired to the
deck and scanned the distant coast.

"I can't place it," he said.  "It can't be Monte Cristo, can it?"

"No, it can't," said the Count, who stood hard by.  "My island was in
the Mediterranean, and even if it dragged anchor it couldn't have got
out through the Strait of Gibraltar."

"Perhaps it's Robinson Crusoe's island," suggested Doctor Johnson.

"Not it," observed De Foe.  "If it is, the rest of you will please
keep off.  It's mine, and I may want to use it again.  I've been
having a number of interviews with Crusoe latterly, and he's given me
a lot of new points, which I intend incorporating in a sequel for the
Cimmerian Magazine."

"Well, in the name of Atlas, what island is it, then?" roared Holmes,
angrily.  "What is the matter with all you learned lubbers that I
have brought along on this trip?  Do you suppose I've brought you to
whistle up favorable winds?  Not by the beard of the Prophet!  I
brought you to give me information, and now when I ask for the name
of a simple little island like that in plain sight there's not one of
you able so much as to guess at it reasonably.  The next man I ask
for information goes into irons with Judge Blackstone if he doesn't
answer me instantly with the information I want.  Munchausen, what
island is that?"

"Ahem! that?" replied Munchausen, trembling, as he reflected upon the
Captain's threat.  "What?  Nobody knows what island that is?  Why,
you surprise me -

"See here, Baron," retorted Holmes, menacingly, "I ask you a plain
question, and I want a plain answer, with no evasions to gain time.
Now it's irons or an answer.  What island is that?"

"It's an island that doesn't appear on any chart, Captain,"
Munchausen responded instantly, pulling himself together for a mighty
effort, "and it has never been given a name; but as you insist upon
having one, we'll call it Holmes Island, in your honor.  It is not
stationary.  It is a floating island of lava formation, and is a
menace to every craft that goes to sea.  I spent a year of my life
upon it once, and it is more barren than the desert of Sahara,
because you cannot raise even sand upon it, and it is devoid of water
of any sort, salt or fresh."

"What did you live on during that year?" asked Holmes, eying him
narrowly.

"Canned food from wrecks," replied the Baron, feeling much easier now
that he had got a fair start--"canned food from wrecks, commander.
There is a magnetic property in the upper stratum of this piece of
derelict real estate, sir, which attracts to it every bit of canned
substance that is lost overboard in all parts of the world.  A ship
is wrecked, say, in the Pacific Ocean, and ultimately all the loose
metal upon her will succumb to the irresistible attraction of this
magnetic upper stratum, and will find its way to its shores.  So in
any other part of the earth.  Everything metallic turns up here
sooner or later; and when you consider that thousands of vessels go
down every year, vessels which are provisioned with tinned foods
only, you will begin to comprehend how many millions of pounds of
preserved salmon, sardines, pate de foie gras, peaches, and so on,
can be found strewn along its coast."

"Munchausen," said Holmes, smiling, "by the blush upon your cheek,
coupled with an occasional uneasy glance of the eye, I know that for
once you are standing upon the, to you, unfamiliar ground of truth,
and I admire you for it.  There is nothing to be ashamed of in
telling the truth occasionally.  You are a man after my own heart.
Come below and have a cocktail.  Captain Cook, take command of the
Gehenna during my absence; head her straight for Holmes Island, and
when you discover anything new let me know.  Bonaparte, in honor of
Munchausen's remarkable genius, I proclaim general amnesty to our
prisoners, and you may release Blackstone from his dilemma; and if
you have any tin soldiers among your marines, see that they are
lashed to the rigging.  I don't want this electric island of the
Baron's to get a grip upon my military force at this juncture."

With this Holmes, followed by Munchausen, went below, and the two
worthies were soon deep in the mysteries of a phantom cocktail, while
Doctor Johnson and De Foe gazed mournfully out over the ocean at the
floating island.

"De Foe," said Johnson "that ought to be a lesson to you.  This
realism that you tie up to is all right when you are alone with your
conscience; but when there are great things afoot, an imagination and
a broad view as to the limitations of truth aren't at all bad.  You
or I might now be drinking that cocktail with Holmes if we'd only
risen to the opportunity the way Munchausen did."

"That is true," said De Foe, sadly.  "But I didn't suppose he wanted
that kind of information.  I could have spun a better yarn than that
of Munchausen's with my eyes shut.  I supposed he wanted truth, and I
gave it."

"I'd like to know what has become of the House-boat," said Raleigh,
anxiously gazing through the glass at the island.  "I can see old
Henry Morgan sitting down there on the rocks with his elbows on his
knees and his chin in his hands, and Kidd and Abeuchapeta are
standing back of him, yelling like mad, but there isn't a boat in
sight."

"Who is that man, off to the right, dancing a fandango?" asked
Johnson.

"It looks like Conrad, but I can't tell.  He appears to have gone
crazy.  He's got that wild look on his face which betokens insanity.
We'll have to be careful in our parleyings with these people," said
Raleigh.

"Anything new?" asked Holmes, returning to the deck, smacking his
lips in enjoyment of the cocktail.

"No--except that we are almost within hailing distance," said Cook.

"Then give orders to cast anchor," observed Holmes.  "Bonaparte, take
a crew of picked men ashore and bring those pirates aboard.  Take the
three musketeers with you, and don't let Kidd or Morgan give you any
back talk.  If they try any funny business, exorcise them."

"Aye, aye, sir," replied Bonaparte, and in a moment a boat had been
lowered and a sturdy crew of sailors were pulling for the shore.  As
they came within ten feet of it the pirates made a mad dash down the
rough, rocky hillside and clamored to be saved.

"What's happened to you?" cried Bonaparte, ordering the sailors to
back water lest the pirates should too hastily board the boat and
swamp her.

"We are marooned," replied Kidd, "and on an island of a volcanic
nature.  There isn't a square inch of it that isn't heated up to 125
degrees, and seventeen of us have already evaporated.  Conrad has
lost his reason; Abeuchapeta has become so tenuous that a child can
see through him.  As for myself, I am growing iridescent with
anxiety, and unless I get off this infernal furnace I'll disappear
like a soap-bubble.  For Heaven's sake, then, General, take us off,
on your own terms.  We'll accept anything."

As if in confirmation of Kidd's words, six of the pirate crew
collapsed and disappeared into thin air, and a glance at Abeuchapeta
was proof enough of his condition.  He had become as clear as
crystal, and had it not been for his rugged outlines he would hardly
have been visible even to his fellow-spirits.  As for Kidd, he had
taken on the aspect of a rainbow, and it was patent that his fears
for himself were all too well founded.

Bonaparte embarked the leaders of the band first, returning
subsequently for the others, and repaired with them at once to the
Gehenna, where they were ushered into the presence of Sherlock
Holmes.  The first question he asked was as to the whereabouts of the
House-boat.

"That we do not know," replied Kidd, mournfully, gazing downward at
the wreck of his former self.  "We came ashore, sir, early yesterday
morning, in search of food.  It appears that when--acting in a wholly
inexcusable fashion, and influenced, I confess it, by motives of
revenge--I made off with your club-house, I neglected to ascertain if
it were well stocked with provisions, a fatal error; for when we
endeavored to get supper we discovered that the larder contained but
half a bottle of farcie olives, two salted almonds, and a soda
cracker--not a luxurious feast for sixty-nine pirates and a hundred
and eighty-three women to sit down to."

"That's all nonsense," said Demosthenes.  "The House Committee had
provided enough supper for six hundred people, in anticipation of the
appetite of the members on their return from the fight."

"Of course they did," said Confucius; "and it was a good one, too--
salads, salmon glace, lobsters--every blessed thing a man can't get
at home we had; and what is more, they'd been delivered on board.  I
saw to that before I went up the river."

"Then," moaned Kidd, "it is as I suspected.  We were the victims of
base treachery on the part of those women."

"Treachery?  Well, I like that.  Call it reciprocity," said Hamlet,
dryly.

"We were informed by the ladies that there was nothing for supper
save the items I have already referred to," said Kidd.  "I see it all
now.  We had tried to make them comfortable, and I put myself to some
considerable personal inconvenience to make them easy in their minds,
but they were ungrateful."

"Whatever induced you to take 'em along with you?" asked Socrates.

"We didn't want them," said Kidd.

"We didn't know they were on board until it was too late to turn
back.  They'd broken in, and were having the club all to themselves
in your absence."

"It served you good and right," said Socrates, with a laugh.  "Next
time you try to take things that don't belong to you, maybe you'll be
a trifle more careful as to whose property you confiscate."

"But the House-boat--you haven't told us how you lost her," put in
Raleigh, impatiently.

"Well, it was this way," said Kidd.  "When, in response to our polite
request for supper, the ladies said there was nothing to eat on
board, something had to be done, for we were all as hungry as bears,
and we decided to go ashore at the first port and provision.
Unfortunately the crew got restive, and when this floating frying-pan
loomed into view, to keep them good-natured we decided to land and
see if we could beg, borrow, or steal some supplies.  We had to.
Observations taken with the sextant showed that there was no port
within five hundred miles; the island looked as if it might be
inhabited at least by goats, and ashore we went, every man of us,
leaving the House-boat safely anchored in the harbor.  At first we
didn't mind the heat, and we hunted and hunted and hunted; but after
three or four hours I began to notice that three of my sailors were
shrivelling up, and Conrad began to act as if he were daft.  Hawkins
burst right before my eyes.  Then Abeuchapeta got prismatic around
the eyes and began to fade, and I noticed a slight iridescence about
myself; and as for Morgan, he had the misfortune to lie down to take
a nap in the sun, and when he waked up, his whole right side had
evaporated.  Then we saw what the trouble was.  We'd struck this lava
island, and were gradually succumbing to its intense heat.  We rushed
madly back to the harbor to embark; and our ship, gentlemen, and your
House-boat, was slowly but surely disappearing over the horizon, and
flying from the flag-staff at the fore were signals of farewell, with
an unfeeling P.S. below to this effect:  'DON'T WAIT UP FOR US.  WE
MAY NOT BE BACK UNTIL LATE.'"

There was a pause, during which Socrates laughed quietly to himself,
while Abeuchapeta and the one-sided Morgan wept silently.

"That, gentlemen of the Associated Shades, is all I know of the
whereabouts of the House-boat," continued Captain Kidd.  "I have no
doubt that the ladies practised a deception, to our discomfiture, and
I must say that I think it was exceedingly clever--granting that it
was desirable to be rid of us, which I don't, for we meant well by
them, and they would have enjoyed themselves."

"But," cried Hamlet, "may they not now be in peril?  They cannot
navigate that ship."

"They got her out of the harbor all right," said Kidd.  "And I judged
from the figure at the helm that Mrs. Noah had taken charge.  What
kind of a seaman she is I don't know."

"Almighty bad," ejaculated Shem, turning pale.  "It was she who ran
us ashore on Ararat."

"Well, wasn't that what you wanted?" queried Munchausen.

"What we wanted!" cried Shem.  "Well, I guess not.  You don't want
your yacht stranded on a mountain-top, do you?  She was a dead loss
there, whereas if mother hadn't been in such a hurry to get ashore,
we could have waited a month and landed on the seaboard."

"You might have turned her into a summer hotel," suggested
Munchausen.

"Well, we must up anchor and away," said Holmes.  "Our pursuit has
merely begun, apparently.  We must overtake this vessel, and the
question to be answered is--where?"

"That's easy," said Artemus Ward.  "From what Shem says, I think we'd
better look for her in the Himalayas."

"And, meanwhile, what shall be done with Kidd?" asked Holmes.

"He ought to be expelled from the club," said Johnson.

"We can't expel him, because he's not a member," replied Raleigh.

"Then elect him," suggested Ward.

"What on earth for?" growled Johnson.

"So that we can expel him," said Ward.  And while Boswell's hero was
trying to get the value of this notion through his head, the others
repaired to the deck, and the Gehenna was soon under way once more.
Meanwhile Captain Kidd and his fellows were put in irons and stowed
away in the forecastle, alongside of the water-cask in which Shylock
lay in hiding.



CHAPTER XII:  THE ESCAPE AND THE END



If there was anxiety on board of the Gehenna as to the condition and
whereabouts of the House-boat, there was by no means less uneasiness
upon that vessel itself.  Cleopatra's scheme for ridding herself and
her abducted sisters of the pirates had worked to a charm, but,
having worked thus, a new and hitherto undreamed-of problem, full of
perplexities bearing upon their immediate safety, now confronted
them.  The sole representative of a seafaring family on board was
Mrs. Noah, and it did not require much time to see that her knowledge
as to navigation was of an extremely primitive order, limited indeed
to the science of floating.

When the last pirate had disappeared behind the rocks of Holmes
Island, and all was in readiness for action, the good old lady, who
had hitherto been as calm and unruffled as a child, began to get red
in the face and to bustle about in a manner which betrayed
considerable perturbation of spirit.

"Now, Mrs. Noah," said Cleopatra, as, peeping out from the billiard-
room window, she saw Morgan disappearing in the distance, "the coast
is clear, and I resign my position of chairman to you.  We place the
vessel in your hands, and ourselves subject to your orders.  You are
in command.  What do you wish us to do?"

"Very well," replied Mrs. Noah, putting down her knitting and
starting for the deck.  "I'm not certain, but I think the first thing
to do is to get her moving.  Do you know, I've never discovered
whether this boat was a steamboat or a sailing-vessel?  Does anybody
know?"

"I think it has a naphtha tank and a propeller," said Elizabeth,
"although I don't know.  It seems to me my brother Raleigh told me
they'd had a naphtha engine put in last winter after the freshet,
when the House-boat was carried ten miles down the river, and had to
be towed back at enormous expense.  They put it in so that if she
were carried away again she could get back of her own power."

"That's unfortunate," said Mrs. Noah, "because I don't know anything
about these new fangled notions.  If there's any one here who knows
anything about naphtha engines, I wish they'd speak."

"I'm of the opinion," said Portia, "that I can study out the theory
of it in a short while."

"Very well, then," said Mrs. Noah, "you can do it.  I'll appoint you
engineer, and give you all your orders now, right away, in advance.
Set her going and keep her going, and don't stop without a written
order signed by me.  We might as well be very careful, and have
everything done properly, and it might happen that in the excitement
of our trip you would misunderstand my spoken orders and make a fatal
error.  Therefore, pay no attention to unwritten orders.  That will
do for you for the present.  Xanthippe, you may take Ophelia and
Madame Recamier, and ten other ladies, and, every morning before
breakfast, swab the larboard deck.  Cassandra, Tuesdays you will
devote to polishing the brasses in the dining-room, and the balance
of your time I wish you to expend in dusting the bric-a-brac.  Dido,
you always were strong at building fires.  I'll make you chief
stoker.  You will also assist Lucretia Borgia in the kitchen.
Inasmuch as the latter's maid has neglected to supply her with the
usual line of poisons, I think we can safely entrust to Lucretia's
hands the responsibilities of the culinary department."

"I'm perfectly willing to do anything I can," said Lucretia, "but I
must confess that I don't approve of your methods of commanding a
ship.  A ship's captain isn't a domestic martinet, as you are setting
out to be.  We didn't appoint you housekeeper."

"Now, my child," said Mrs. Noah, firmly, "I do not wish any words.
If I hear any more impudence from you, I'll put you ashore without a
reference; and the rest of you I would warn in all kindness that I
will not tolerate insubordination.  You may, all of you, have one
night of the week and alternate Sundays off, but your work must be
done.  The regimen I am adopting is precisely that in vogue on the
Ark, only I didn't have the help I have now, and things got into very
bad shape.  We were out forty days, and, while the food was poor and
the service execrable, we never lost a life."

The boat gave a slight tremor.

"Hurrah!" cried Elizabeth, clapping her hands with glee, "we are
off!"

"I will repair to the deck and get our bearings," said Mrs. Noah,
putting her shawl over her shoulders.  "Meantime, Cleopatra, I
appoint you first mate.  See that things are tidied up a bit here
before I return.  Have the windows washed, and to-morrow I want all
the rugs and carpets taken up and shaken."

Portia meanwhile had discovered the naphtha engine, and, after
experimenting several times with the various levers and stop-cocks,
had finally managed to move one of them in such a way as to set the
engine going, and the wheel began to revolve.

"Are we going all right?" she cried, from below.

"I am afraid not," said the gallant commander.  "The wheel is roiling
up the water at a great rate, but we don't seem to be going ahead
very fast--in fact, we're simply moving round and round as though we
were on a pivot."

"I'm afraid we're aground amidships," said Xanthippe, gazing over the
side of the House-boat anxiously.  "She certainly acts that way--like
a merry-go-round."

"Well, there's something wrong," said Mrs. Noah; "and we've got to
hurry and find out what it is, or those men will be back and we shall
be as badly off as ever."

"Maybe this has something to do with it," observed Mrs. Lot, pointing
to the anchor rope.  "It looks to me as if those horrid men had tied
us fast."

"That's just what it is," snapped Mrs. Noah.  "They guessed our plan,
and have fastened us to a pole or something, but I imagine we can
untie it."

Portia, who had come on deck, gave a short little laugh.

"Why, of course we don't move," she said--"we are anchored!"

"What's that?" queried Mrs. Noah.  "We never had an experience like
that on the Ark."

Portia explained the science of the anchor.

"What nonsense!" ejaculated Mrs. Noah.  "How can we get away from
it?"

"We've got to pull it up," said Portia.  "Order all hands on deck and
have it pulled up."

"It can't be done, and, if it could, I wouldn't have it!" said Mrs.
Noah, indignantly.  "The idea!  Lifting heavy pieces of iron, my dear
Portia, is not a woman's work.  Send for Delilah, and let her cut the
rope with her scissors."

"It would take her a week to cut a hawser like that," said Elizabeth,
who had been investigating.  "It would be more to the purpose, I
think, to chop it in two with an axe."

"Very well," replied Mrs. Noah, satisfied.  "I don't care how it is
done as long as it is done quickly.  It would never do for us to be
recaptured now."

The suggestion of Elizabeth was carried out, and the queen herself
cut the hawser with six well-directed strokes of the axe.

"You ARE an expert with it, aren't you?" smiled Cleopatra.

"I am, indeed," replied Elizabeth, grimly.  "I had it suspended over
my head for so long a time before I got to the throne that I couldn't
help familiarizing myself with some of its possibilities."

"Ah!" cried Mrs. Noah, as the vessel began to move.  "I begin to feel
easier.  It looks now as if we were really off."

"It seems to me, though," said Cleopatra, gazing forward, "that we
are going backward."

"Oh, well, what if we are!" said Mrs. Noah.  "We did that on the Ark
half the time.  It doesn't make any difference which way we are going
as long as we go, does it?"

"Why, of course it does!" cried Elizabeth.  "What can you be thinking
of?  People who walk backward are in great danger of running into
other people.  Why not the same with ships?  It seems to me, it's a
very dangerous piece of business, sailing backward."

"Oh, nonsense," snapped Mrs. Noah.  "You are as timid as a zebra.
During the Flood, we sailed days and days and days, going backward.
It didn't make a particle of difference how we went--it was as safe
one way as another, and we got just as far away in the end.  Our main
object now is to get away from the pirates, and that's what we are
doing.  Don't get emotional, Lizzie, and remember, too, that I am in
charge.  If I think the boat ought to go sideways, sideways she shall
go.  If you don't like it, it is still not too late to put you
ashore."

The threat calmed Elizabeth somewhat, and she was satisfied, and all
went well with them, even if Portia had started the propeller
revolving reverse fashion; so that the House-boat was, as Elizabeth
had said, backing her way through the ocean.

The day passed, and by slow degrees the island and the marooned
pirates faded from view, and the night came on, and with it a dense
fog.

"We're going to have a nasty night, I am afraid," said Xanthippe,
looking anxiously out of the port.

"No doubt," said Mrs. Noah, pleasantly.  "I'm sorry for those who
have to be out in it."

"That's what I was thinking about," observed Xanthippe.  "It's going
to be very hard on us keeping watch."

"Watch for what?" demanded Mrs. Noah, looking over the tops of her
glasses at Xanthippe.

"Why, surely you are going to have lookouts stationed on deck?" said
Elizabeth.

"Not at all," said Mrs. Noah.  "Perfectly absurd.  We never did it on
the Ark, and it isn't necessary now.  I want you all to go to bed at
ten o'clock.  I don't think the night air is good for you.  Besides,
it isn't proper for a woman to be out after dark, whether she's new
or not."

"But, my dear Mrs. Noah," expostulated Cleopatra, "what will become
of the ship?"

"I guess she'll float through the night whether we are on deck or
not," said the commander.  "The Ark did, why not this?  Now, girls,
these new-fangled yachting notions are all nonsense.  It's night, and
there's a fog as thick as a stone-wall all about us.  If there were a
hundred of you upon deck with ten eyes apiece, you couldn't see
anything.  You might much better be in bed.  As your captain,
chaperon, and grandmother, I command you to stay below."

"But--who is to steer?" queried Xanthippe.

"What's the use of steering until we can see where to steer to?"
demanded Mrs. Noah.  "I certainly don't intend to bother with that
tiller until some reason for doing it arises.  We haven't any place
to steer to yet; we don't know where we are going.  Now, my dear
children, be reasonable, and don't worry me.  I've had a very hard
day of it, and I feel my responsibilities keenly.  Just let me
manage, and we'll come out all right.  I've had more experience than
any of you, and if--"

A terrible crash interrupted the old lady's remarks.  The House-boat
shivered and shook, careened way to one side, and as quickly righted
and stood still.  A mad rush up the gangway followed, and in a moment
a hundred and eighty-three pale-faced, trembling women stood upon the
deck, gazing with horror at a great helpless hulk ten feet to the
rear, fastened by broken ropes and odd pieces of rigging to the
stern-posts of the House-boat, sinking slowly but surely into the
sea.

It was the Gehenna!

The House-boat had run her down and her last hour had come, but,
thanks to the stanchness of her build and wonderful beam, the
floating club-house had withstood the shock of the impact and now
rode the waters as gracefully as ever.

Portia was the first to realize the extent of the catastrophe, and in
a short while chairs and life-preservers and tables--everything that
could float--had been tossed into the sea to the struggling immortals
therein.  On board the Gehenna, those who had not cast themselves
into the waters, under the cool direction of Holmes and Bonaparte,
calmly lowered the boats, and in a short while were not only able to
felicitate themselves upon their safety, but had likewise the good
fortune to rescue their more impetuous brethren who had preferred to
swim for it.  Ultimately, all were brought aboard the House-boat in
safety, and the men in Hades were once more reunited to their wives,
daughters, sisters, and fiancees, and Elizabeth had the satisfaction
of once more saving the life of Raleigh by throwing him her ruff as
she had done a year or so previously, when she and her brother had
been upset in the swift current of the river Styx.

Order and happiness being restored, Holmes took command of the House-
boat and soon navigated her safely back into her old-time berth.  The
Gehenna went to the bottom and was never seen again, and when the
roll was called it was found that all who had set out upon her had
returned in safety save Shylock, Kidd, Sir Henry Morgan, and
Abeuchapeta; but even they were not lost, for, five weeks later,
these four worthies were found early one morning drifting slowly up
the river Styx, gazing anxiously out from the top of a water-cask and
yelling lustily for help.

And here endeth the chronicle of the pursuit of the good old House-
boat.  Back to her moorings, the even tenor of her ways was once more
resumed, but with one slight difference.

The ladies became eligible for membership, and, availing themselves
of the privilege, began to think less and less of the advantages of
being men and to rejoice that, after all, they were women; and even
Xanthippe and Socrates, after that night of peril, reconciled their
differences, and no longer quarrel as to which is the more entitled
to wear the toga of authority.  It has become for them a divided
skirt.

As for Kidd and his fellows, they have never recovered from the
effects of their fearful, though short, exile upon Holmes Island, and
are but shadows of their former shades; whereas Mr. Sherlock Holmes
has so endeared himself to his new-found friends that he is quite as
popular with them as he is with us, who have yet to cross the dark
river and be subjected to the scrutiny of the Committee on Membership
at the House-boat on the Styx.

Even Hawkshaw has been able to detect his genius.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Pursuit of the House-Boat, by John Bangs
﻿

MR. MUNCHAUSEN

AN ACCOUNT OF HIS RECENT ADVENTURES




I

I ENCOUNTER THE OLD GENTLEMAN


There are moments of supreme embarrassment in the lives of persons
given to veracity,--indeed it has been my own unusual experience in
life that the truth well stuck to is twice as hard a proposition as a
lie so obvious that no one is deceived by it at the outset. I cannot
quite agree with my friend, Caddy Barlow, who says that in a tight
place it is better to lie at once and be done with it than to tell the
truth which will need forty more truths to explain it, but I must
confess that in my forty years of absolute and conscientious devotion
to truth I have found myself in holes far deeper than any my most
mendacious of friends ever got into. I do not propose, however, to
desert at this late hour the Goddess I have always worshipped because
she leads me over a rough and rocky road, and whatever may be the
hardships involved in my wooing I intend to the very end to remain the
ever faithful slave of Mademoiselle Veracité. All of which I state
here in prefatory mood, and in order, in so far as it is possible for
me to do so, to disarm the incredulous and sniffy reader who may be
inclined to doubt the truth of my story of how the manuscript of the
following pages came into my possession. I am quite aware that to some
the tale will appear absolutely and intolerably impossible. I know
that if any other than I told it to me I should not believe it. Yet
despite these drawbacks the story is in all particulars, essential and
otherwise, absolutely truthful.

The facts are briefly these:

It was not, to begin with, a dark and dismal evening. The snow was not
falling silently, clothing a sad and gloomy world in a mantle of
white, and over the darkling moor a heavy mist was not rising, as is
so frequently the case. There was no soul-stirring moaning of bitter
winds through the leafless boughs; so far as I was aware nothing
soughed within twenty miles of my bailiwick; and my dog, lying before
a blazing log fire in my library, did not give forth an occasional
growl of apprehension, denoting the presence or approach of an uncanny
visitor from other and mysterious realms: and for two good reasons.
The first reason is that it was midsummer when the thing happened, so
that a blazing log fire in my library would have been an extravagance
as well as an anachronism. The second is that I have no dog. In fact
there was nothing unusual, or uncanny in the whole experience. It
happened to be a bright and somewhat too sunny July day, which is not
an unusual happening along the banks of the Hudson. You could see the
heat, and if anything had soughed it could only have been the mercury
in my thermometer. This I must say clicked nervously against the top
of the glass tube and manifested an extraordinary desire to climb
higher than the length of the tube permitted. Incidentally I may add,
even if it be not believed, that the heat was so intense that the
mercury actually did raise the whole thermometer a foot and a half
above the mantel-shelf, and for two mortal hours, from midday until
two by the Monastery Clock, held it suspended there in mid-air with no
visible means of support. Not a breath of air was stirring, and the
only sounds heard were the expanding creaks of the beams of my house,
which upon that particular day increased eight feet in width and
assumed a height which made it appear to be a three instead of a two
story dwelling. There was little work doing in the house. The children
played about in their bathing suits, and the only other active factor
in my life of the moment was our hired man who was kept busy in the
cellar pouring water on the furnace coal to keep it from spontaneously
combusting.

We had just had luncheon, burning our throats with the iced tea and
with considerable discomfort swallowing the simmering cold roast
filet, which we had to eat hastily before the heat of the day
transformed it into smoked beef. My youngest boy Willie perspired so
copiously that we seriously thought of sending for a plumber to solder
up his pores, and as for myself who have spent three summers of my
life in the desert of Sahara in order to rid myself of nervous chills
to which I was once unhappily subject, for the first time in my life I
was impelled to admit that it was intolerably warm. And then the
telephone bell rang.

"Great Scott!" I cried, "Who in thunder do you suppose wants to play
golf on a day like this?"--for nowadays our telephone is used for no
other purpose than the making or the breaking of golf engagements.

"Me," cried my eldest son, whose grammar is not as yet on a par with
his activity. "I'll go."

The boy shot out of the dining room and ran to the telephone,
returning in a few moments with the statement that a gentleman with a
husky voice whose name was none of his business wished to speak with
me on a matter of some importance to myself.

I was loath to go. My friends the book agents had recently acquired
the habit of approaching me over the telephone, and I feared that here
was another nefarious attempt to foist a thirty-eight volume tabloid
edition of _The World's Worst Literature_ upon me. Nevertheless I
wisely determined to respond.

"Hello," I said, placing my lips against the rubber cup. "Hello there,
who wants 91162 Nepperhan?"

"Is that you?" came the answering question, and, as my boy had
indicated, in a voice whose chief quality was huskiness.

"I guess so," I replied facetiously;--"It was this morning, but the
heat has affected me somewhat, and I don't feel as much like myself as
I might. What can I do for you?"

"Nothing, but you can do a lot for yourself," was the astonishing
answer. "Pretty hot for literary work, isn't it?" the voice added
sympathetically.

"Very," said I. "Fact is I can't seem to do anything these days but
perspire."

"That's what I thought; and when you can't work ruin stares you in the
face, eh? Now I have a manuscript--"

"Oh Lord!" I cried. "Don't. There are millions in the same fix. Even
my cook writes."

"Don't know about that," he returned instantly. "But I do know that
there's millions in my manuscript. And you can have it for the asking.
How's that for an offer?"

"Very kind, thank you," said I. "What's the nature of your story?"

"It's extremely good-natured," he answered promptly.

I laughed. The twist amused me.

"That isn't what I meant exactly," said I, "though it has some bearing
on the situation. Is it a Henry James dandy, or does it bear the mark
of Caine? Is it realism or fiction?"

"Realism," said he. "Fiction isn't in my line."

"Well, I'll tell you," I replied; "you send it to me by post and I'll
look it over. If I can use it I will."

"Can't do it," said he. "There isn't any post-office where I am."

"What?" I cried. "No post-office? Where in Hades are you?"

"Gehenna," he answered briefly. "The transportation between your
country and mine is all one way," he added. "If it wasn't the
population here would diminish."

"Then how the deuce am I to get hold of your stuff?" I demanded.

"That's easy. Send your stenographer to the 'phone and I'll dictate
it," he answered.

The novelty of the situation appealed to me. Even if my new found
acquaintance were some funny person nearer at hand than Gehenna trying
to play a practical joke upon me, still it might be worth while to get
hold of the story he had to tell. Hence I agreed to his proposal.

"All right, sir," said I. "I'll do it. I'll have him here to-morrow
morning at nine o'clock sharp. What's your number? I'll ring you up."

"Never mind that," he replied. "I'm merely a tapster on your wires.
I'll ring _you_ up as soon as I've had breakfast and then we can get
to work."

"Very good," said I. "And may I ask your name?"

"Certainly," he answered. "I'm Munchausen."

"What? The Baron?" I roared, delighted.

"Well--I used to be Baron," he returned with a tinge of sadness in his
voice, "but here in Gehenna we are all on an equal footing. I'm plain
Mr. Munchausen of Hades now. But that's a detail. Don't forget. Nine
o'clock. Good-bye."

"Wait a moment, Baron," I cried. "How about the royalties on this
book?"

"Keep 'em for yourself," he replied. "We have money to burn over here.
You are welcome to all the earthly rights of the book. I'm satisfied
with the returns on the Asbestos Edition, already in its 468th
thousand. Good-bye."

There was a rattle as of the hanging up of the receiver, a short sharp
click and a ring, and I realised that he had gone.

The next morning in response to a telegraphic summons my stenographer
arrived and when I explained the situation to him he was incredulous,
but orders were orders and he remained. I could see, however, that as
nine o'clock approached he grew visibly nervous, which indicated that
he half believed me anyhow, and when at nine to the second the sharp
ring of the 'phone fell upon our ears he jumped as if he had been
shot.

"Hello," said I again. "That you, Baron?"

"The same," the voice replied. "Stenographer ready?"

"Yes," said I.

The stenographer walked to the desk, placed the receiver at his ear,
and with trembling voice announced his presence. There was a response
of some kind, and then more calmly he remarked, "Fire ahead, Mr.
Munchausen," and began to write rapidly in short-hand.

Two days later he handed me a type-written copy of the following
stories. The reader will observe that they are in the form of
interviews, and it should be stated here that they appeared originally
in the columns of the Sunday edition of the _Gehenna Gazette_, a
publication of Hades which circulates wholly among the best people of
that country, and which, if report saith truly, would not print a line
which could not be placed in the hands of children, and to whose
columns such writers as Chaucer, Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, Jonah and
Ananias are frequent contributors.

Indeed, on the statement of Mr. Munchausen, all the interviews herein
set forth were between himself as the principal and the Hon. Henry B.
Ananias as reporter, or were scrupulously edited by the latter before
being published.




II

THE SPORTING TOUR OF MR. MUNCHAUSEN


"Good morning, Mr. Munchausen," said the interviewer of the _Gehenna
Gazette_ entering the apartment of the famous traveller at the Hotel
Deville, where the late Baron had just arrived from his sporting tour
in the Blue Hills of Cimmeria and elsewhere.

"The interests of truth, my dear Ananias," replied the Baron, grasping
me cordially by the hand, "require that I should state it as my
opinion that it is not a good morning. In fact, my good friend, it is
a very bad morning. Can you not see that it is raining cats and dogs
without?"

"Sir," said I with a bow, "I accept the spirit of your correction but
not the letter. It is raining indeed, sir, as you suggest, but having
passed through it myself on my way hither I can personally testify
that it is raining rain, and not a single cat or canine has, to my
knowledge, as yet fallen from the clouds to the parched earth,
although I am informed that down upon the coast an elephant and three
cows have fallen upon one of the summer hotels and irreparably damaged
the roof."

Mr. Munchausen laughed.

"It is curious, Ananias," said he, "what sticklers for the truth you
and I have become."

"It is indeed, Munchausen," I returned. "The effects of this climate
are working wonders upon us. And it is just as well. You and I are
outclassed by these twentieth century prevaricators concerning whom
late arrivals from the upper world tell such strange things. They tell
me that lying has become a business and is no longer ranked among the
Arts or Professions."

"Ah me!" sighed the Baron with a retrospective look in his eye, "lying
isn't what it used to be, Ananias, in your days and mine. I fear it
has become one of the lost arts."

"I have noticed it myself, my friend, and only last night I observed
the same thing to my well beloved Sapphira, who was lamenting the
transparency of the modern lie, and said that lying to-day is no
better than the truth. In our day a prevarication had all of the
opaque beauty of an opalescent bit of glass, whereas to-day in the
majority of cases it is like a great vulgar plate-glass window,
through which we can plainly see the ugly truths that lie behind. But,
sir, I am here to secure from you not a treatise upon the lost art of
lying, but some idea of the results of your sporting tour. You fished,
and hunted, and golfed, and doubtless did other things. You, of
course, had luck and made the greatest catch of the season; shot all
the game in sight, and won every silver, gold and pewter golf mug in
all creation?"

"You speak truly, Ananias," returned Mr. Munchausen. "My luck _was_
wonderful--even for one who has been so singularly fortunate as I. I
took three tons of speckled beauties with one cast of an ordinary
horse whip in the Blue Hills, and with nothing but a silken line and a
minnow hook landed upon the deck of my steam yacht a whale of most
tremendous proportions; I shot game of every kind in great abundance
and in my golf there was none to whom I could not give with ease seven
holes in every nine and beat him out."

"Seven?" said I, failing to see how the ex-Baron could be right.

"Seven," said he complacently. "Seven on the first, and seven on the
second nine; fourteen in all of the eighteen holes."

"But," I cried, "I do not see how that could be. With fourteen holes
out of the eighteen given to your opponent even if you won all the
rest you still would be ten down."

"True, by ordinary methods of calculation," returned the Baron, "but I
got them back on a technicality, which I claim is a new and valuable
discovery in the game. You see it is impossible to play more than one
hole at a time, and I invariably proved to the Greens Committee that
in taking fourteen holes at once my opponent violated the physical
possibilities of the situation. In every case the point was accepted
as well taken, for if we allow golfers to rise above physical
possibilities the game is gone. The integrity of the Card is the soul
of Golf," he added sententiously.

"Tell me of the whale," said I, simply. "You landed a whale of large
proportions on the deck of your yacht with a simple silken line and a
minnow hook."

"Well it's a tough story," the Baron replied, handing me a cigar. "But
it is true, Ananias, true to the last word. I was fishing for eels.
Sitting on the deck of _The Lyre_ one very warm afternoon in the early
stages of my trip, I baited a minnow hook and dropped it overboard. It
was the roughest day at sea I had ever encountered. The waves were
mountain high, and it is the sad fact that one of our crew seated in
the main-top was drowned with the spray of the dashing billows.
Fortunately for myself, directly behind my deck chair, to which I was
securely lashed, was a powerful electric fan which blew the spray away
from me, else I too might have suffered the same horrid fate. Suddenly
there came a tug on my line. I was half asleep at the time and let the
line pay out involuntarily, but I was wide-awake enough to know that
something larger than an eel had taken hold of the hook. I had hooked
either a Leviathan or a derelict. Caution and patience, the chief
attributes of a good angler were required. I hauled the line in until
it was taut. There were a thousand yards of it out, and when it
reached the point of tensity, I gave orders to the engineers to steam
closer to the object at the other end. We steamed in five hundred
yards, I meanwhile hauling in my line. Then came another tug and I let
out ten yards. 'Steam closer,' said I. 'Three hundred yards
sou-sou-west by nor'-east.' The yacht obeyed on the instant. I called
the Captain and let him feel the line. 'What do you think it is?' said
I. He pulled a half dozen times. 'Feels like a snag,' he said, 'but
seein' as there ain't no snags out here, I think it must be a fish.'
'What kind?' I asked. I could not but agree that he was better
acquainted with the sea and its denizens than I. 'Well,' he replied,
'it is either a sea serpent or a whale.' At the mere mention of the
word whale I was alert. I have always wanted to kill a whale.
'Captain,' said I, 'can't you tie an anchor onto a hawser, and bait
the flukes with a boa constrictor and make sure of him?' He looked at
me contemptuously. 'Whales eats fish,' said he, 'and they don't bite
at no anchors. Whales has brains, whales has.' 'What shall we do?' I
asked. 'Steam closer,' said the Captain, and we did so."

Munchausen took a long breath and for the moment was silent.

"Well?" said I.

"Well, Ananias," said he. "We resolved to wait. As the Captain said to
me, 'Fishin' is waitin'.' So we waited. 'Coax him along,' said the
Captain. 'How can we do it?' I asked. 'By kindness,' said he. 'Treat
him gently, persuasive-like and he'll come.' We waited four days and
nobody moved and I grew weary of coaxing. 'We've got to do something,'
said I to the Captain. 'Yes,' said he, 'Let's _make_ him move. He
doesn't seem to respond to kindness.' 'But how?' I cried. 'Give him an
electric shock,' said the Captain. 'Telegraph him his mother's sick
and may be it'll move him.' 'Can't you get closer to him?' I demanded,
resenting his facetious manner. 'I can, but it will scare him off,'
replied the Captain. So we turned all our batteries on the sea. The
dynamo shot forth its bolts and along about four o'clock in the
afternoon there was the whale drawn by magnetic influence to the side
of _The Lyre_. He was a beauty, Ananias," Munchausen added with
enthusiasm. "You never saw such a whale. His back was as broad as the
deck of an ocean steamer and in his length he exceeded the dimensions
of _The Lyre_ by sixty feet."

"And still you got him on deck?" I asked,--I, Ananias, who can stand
something in the way of an exaggeration.

"Yes," said Munchausen, lighting his cigar, which had gone out.
"Another storm came up and we rolled and rolled and rolled, until I
thought _The Lyre_ was going to capsize."

"But weren't you sea-sick?" I asked.

"Didn't have a chance to be," said Munchausen. "I was thinking of the
whale all the time. Finally there came a roll in which we went
completely under, and with a slight pulling on the line the whale was
landed by the force of the wave and laid squarely upon the deck."

"Great Sapphira!" said I. "But you just said he was wider and longer
than the yacht!"

[Illustration: "There was the whale drawn by magnetic influence to the
side of _The Lyre_." _Chapter II._]

"He was," sighed Munchausen. "He landed on the deck and by sheer force
of his weight the yacht went down under him. I swam ashore and the
whole crew with me. The next day Mr. Whale floated in strangled. He'd
swallowed the thousand yards of line and it got so tangled in his
tonsils that it choked him to death. Come around next week and I'll
give you a couple of pounds of whalebone for Mrs. Ananias, and all the
oil you can carry."

I thanked the old gentleman for his kind offer and promised to avail
myself of it, although as a newspaper man it is against my principles
to accept gifts from public men.

"It was great luck, Baron," said I. "Or at least it would have been if
you hadn't lost your yacht."

"That was great luck too," he observed nonchalantly. "It cost me ten
thousand dollars a month keeping that yacht in commission. Now she's
gone I save all that. Why it's like finding money in the street,
Ananias. She wasn't worth more than fifty thousand dollars, and in six
months I'll be ten thousand ahead."

I could not but admire the cheerful philosophy of the man, but then I
was not surprised. Munchausen was never the sort of man to let little
things worry him.

"But that whale business wasn't a circumstance to my catch of three
tons of trout with a single cast of a horse-whip in the Blue Hills,"
said the Baron after a few moments of meditation, during which I could
see that he was carefully marshalling his facts.

"I never heard of its equal," said I. "You must have used a derrick."

"No," he replied suavely. "Nothing of the sort. It was the simplest
thing in the world. It was along about five o'clock in the afternoon
when with my three guides and my valet I drove up the winding roadway
of Great Sulphur Mountain on my way to the Blue Mountain House where I
purposed to put up for a few days. I had one of those big mountain
wagons with a covered top to it such as the pioneers used on the
American plains, with six fine horses to the fore. I held the reins
myself, since we were in the midst of a terrific thunderstorm and I
felt safer when I did my own driving. All the flaps of the leathern
cover were let down at the sides and at the back, and were securely
fastened. The roads were unusually heavy, and when we came to the last
great hill before the lake all but I were walking, as a measure of
relief to the horses. Suddenly one of the horses balked right in the
middle of the ascent, and in a moment of impatience I gave him a
stinging flick with my whip, when like a whirlwind the whole six
swerved to one side and started on a dead run upward. The jolt and the
unexpected swerving of the wagon threw me from my seat and I landed
clear of the wheels in the soft mud of the roadway, fortunately
without injury. When I arose the team was out of sight and we had to
walk the remainder of the distance to the hotel. Imagine our surprise
upon arriving there to find the six panting steeds and the wagon
standing before the main entrance to the hotel dripping as though they
had been through the Falls of Niagara, and, would you believe it,
Ananias, inside that leather cover of the wagon, packed as tightly as
sardines, were no less than three thousand trout, not one of them
weighing less than a pound and some of them getting as high as four.
The whole catch weighed a trifle over six thousand pounds."

"Great Heavens, Baron," I cried. "Where the dickens did they come
from?"

"That's what I asked myself," said the Baron easily. "It seemed
astounding at first glance, but investigation showed it after all to
be a very simple proposition. The runaways after reaching the top of
the hill turned to the left, and clattered on down toward the bridge
over the inlet to the lake. The bridge broke beneath their weight and
the horses soon found themselves struggling in the water. The harness
was strong and the wagon never left them. They had to swim for it, and
I am told by a small boy who was fishing on the lake at the time that
they swam directly across it, pulling the wagon after them. Naturally
with its open front and confined back and sides the wagon acted as a
sort of drag-net and when the opposite shore was gained, and the wagon
was pulled ashore, it was found to have gathered in all the fish that
could not get out of the way."

The Baron resumed his cigar, and I sat still eyeing the ample pattern
of the drawing-room carpet.

"Pretty good catch for an afternoon, eh?" he said in a minute.

"Yes," said I. "Almost too good, Baron. Those horses must have swam
like the dickens to get over so quickly. You would think the trout
would have had time to escape."

"Oh I presume one or two of them did," said Munchausen. "But the
majority of them couldn't. The horses were all fast, record-breakers
anyhow. I never hire a horse that isn't."

And with that I left the old gentleman and walked blushing back to the
office. I don't doubt for an instant the truth of the Baron's story,
but somehow or other I feel that in writing it my reputation is in
some measure at stake.

    NOTE--Mr. Munchausen, upon request of the Editor of the
    _Gehenna Gazette_ to write a few stories of adventure for his
    Imp's page, conducted by Sapphira, contributed the tales which
    form the substance of several of the following chapters.




III

THREE MONTHS IN A BALLOON


Mr. Munchausen was not handsome, but the Imps liked him very much, he
was so full of wonderful reminiscences, and was always willing to tell
anybody that would listen, all about himself. To the Heavenly Twins he
was the greatest hero that had ever lived. Napoleon Bonaparte, on Mr.
Munchausen's own authority, was not half the warrior that he, the late
Baron had been, nor was Cæsar in his palmiest days, one-quarter so
wise or so brave. How old the Baron was no one ever knew, but he had
certainly lived long enough to travel the world over, and stare every
kind of death squarely in the face without flinching. He had fought
Zulus, Indians, tigers, elephants--in fact, everything that fights,
the Baron had encountered, and in every contest he had come out
victorious. He was the only man the children had ever seen that had
lost three legs in battle and then had recovered them after the fight
was over; he was the only visitor to their house that had been lost in
the African jungle and wandered about for three months without food or
shelter, and best of all he was, on his own confession, the most
truthful narrator of extraordinary tales living. The youngsters had to
ask the Baron a question only, any one, it mattered not what it
was--to start him off on a story of adventure, and as he called upon
the Twins' father once a month regularly, the children were not long
in getting together a collection of tales beside which the most
exciting episodes in history paled into insignificant commonplaces.

"Uncle Munch," said the Twins one day, as they climbed up into the
visitor's lap and disarranged his necktie, "was you ever up in a
balloon?"

"Only once," said the Baron calmly. "But I had enough of it that time
to last me for a lifetime."

"Was you in it for long?" queried the Twins, taking the Baron's watch
out of his pocket and flinging it at Cerberus, who was barking outside
of the window.

"Well, it seemed long enough," the Baron answered, putting his
pocket-book in the inside pocket of his vest where the Twins could not
reach it. "Three months off in the country sleeping all day long and
playing tricks all night seems a very short time, but three months in
a balloon and the constant centre of attack from every source is too
long for comfort."

"Were you up in the air for three whole months?" asked the Twins,
their eyes wide open with astonishment.

"All but two days," said the Baron. "For two of those days we rested
in the top of a tree in India. The way of it was this: I was always,
as you know, a great favourite with the Emperor Napoleon, of France,
and when he found himself involved in a war with all Europe, he
replied to one of his courtiers who warned him that his army was not
in condition: 'Any army is prepared for war whose commander-in-chief
numbers Baron Munchausen among his advisers. Let me have Munchausen at
my right hand and I will fight the world.' So they sent for me and as
I was not very busy I concluded to go and assist the French, although
the allies and I were also very good friends. I reasoned it out this
way: In this fight the allies are the stronger. They do not need me.
Napoleon does. Fight for the weak, Munchausen, I said to myself, and
so I went. Of course, when I reached Paris I went at once to the
Emperor's palace and remained at his side until he took the field,
after which I remained behind for a few days to put things to rights
for the Imperial family. Unfortunately for the French, the King of
Prussia heard of my delay in going to the front, and he sent word to
his forces to intercept me on my way to join Napoleon at all hazards,
and this they tried to do. When I was within ten miles of the
Emperor's headquarters, I was stopped by the Prussians, and had it not
been that I had provided myself with a balloon for just such an
emergency, I should have been captured and confined in the King's
palace at Berlin, until the war was over.

"Foreseeing all this, I had brought with me a large balloon packed
away in a secret section of my trunk, and while my body-guard was
fighting with the Prussian troops sent to capture me, I and my valet
inflated the balloon, jumped into the car and were soon high up out of
the enemy's reach. They fired several shots at us, and one of them
would have pierced the balloon had I not, by a rare good shot, fired
my own rifle at the bullet, and hitting it squarely in the middle, as
is my custom, diverted it from its course, and so saved our lives.

"It had been my intention to sail directly over the heads of the
attacking party and drop down into Napoleon's camp the next morning,
but unfortunately for my calculations, a heavy wind came up in the
night and the balloon was caught by a northerly blast, and blown into
Africa, where, poised in the air directly over the desert of Sahara,
we encountered a dead calm, which kept us stalled up for two miserable
weeks."

"Why didn't you come down?" asked the Twins, "wasn't the elevator
running?"

"We didn't dare," explained the Baron, ignoring the latter part of the
question. "If we had we'd have wasted a great deal of our gas, and our
condition would have been worse than ever. As I told you we were
directly over the centre of the desert. There was no way of getting
out of it except by long and wearisome marches over the hot, burning
sands with the chances largely in favour of our never getting out
alive. The only thing to do was to stay just where we were and wait
for a favouring breeze. This we did, having to wait four mortal weeks
before the air was stirred."

"You said two weeks a minute ago, Uncle Munch," said the Twins
critically.

"Two? Hem! Well, yes it was two, now that I think of it. It's a
natural mistake," said the Baron stroking his mustache a little
nervously. "You see two weeks in a balloon over a vast desert of sand,
with nothing to do but whistle for a breeze, is equal to four weeks
anywhere else. That is, it seems so. Anyhow, two weeks or four,
whichever it was, the breeze came finally, and along about midnight
left us stranded again directly over an Arab encampment near Wady
Halfa. It was a more perilous position really, than the first, because
the moment the Arabs caught sight of us they began to make frantic
efforts to get us down. At first we simply laughed them to scorn and
made faces at them, because as far as we could see, we were safely out
of reach. This enraged them and they apparently made up their minds to
kill us if they could. At first their idea was to get us down alive
and sell us as slaves, but our jeers changed all that, and what should
they do but whip out a lot of guns and begin to pepper us.

"'I'll settle them in a minute,' I said to myself, and set about
loading my own gun. Would you believe it, I found that my last bullet
was the one with which I had saved the balloon from the Prussian
shot?"

"Mercy, how careless of you, Uncle Munch!" said one of the Twins.
"What did you do?"

"I threw out a bag of sand ballast so that the balloon would rise just
out of range of their guns, and then, as their bullets got to their
highest point and began to drop back, I reached out and caught them in
a dipper. Rather neat idea, eh? With these I loaded my own rifle and
shot every one of the hostile party with their own ammunition, and
when the last of the attacking Arabs dropped I found there were enough
bullets left to fill the empty sand bag again, so that the lost
ballast was not missed. In fact, there were enough of them in weight
to bring the balloon down so near to the earth that our anchor rope
dangled directly over the encampment, so that my valet and I, without
wasting any of our gas, could climb down and secure all the
magnificent treasures in rugs and silks and rare jewels these robbers
of the desert had managed to get together in the course of their
depredations. When these were placed in the car another breeze came
up, and for the rest of the time we drifted idly about in the heavens
waiting for a convenient place to land. In this manner we were blown
hither and yon for three months over land and sea, and finally we were
wrecked upon a tall tree in India, whence we escaped by means of a
convenient elephant that happened to come our way, upon which we rode
triumphantly into Calcutta. The treasures we had secured from the
Arabs, unfortunately, we had to leave behind us in the tree, where I
suppose they still are. I hope some day to go back and find them."

Here Mr. Munchausen paused for a moment to catch his breath. Then he
added with a sigh. "Of course, I went back to France immediately, but
by the time I reached Paris the war was over, and the Emperor was in
exile. I was too late to save him--though I think if he had lived some
sixty or seventy years longer I should have managed to restore his
throne, and Imperial splendour to him."

The Twins gazed into the fire in silence for a minute or two. Then one
of them asked:

"But what did you live on all that time, Uncle Munch?"

"Eggs," said the Baron. "Eggs and occasionally fish. My servant had
had the foresight when getting the balloon ready to include, among the
things put into the car, a small coop in which were six pet chickens I
owned, and without which I never went anywhere. These laid enough eggs
every day to keep us alive. The fish we caught when our balloon stood
over the sea, baiting our anchor with pieces of rubber gas pipe used
to inflate the balloon, and which looked very much like worms."

[Illustration: "As their bullets got to their highest point and began
to drop back, I reached out and caught them." _Chapter III._]

"But the chickens?" said the Twins. "What did they live on?"

The Baron blushed.

"I am sorry you asked that question," he said, his voice trembling
somewhat. "But I'll answer it if you promise never to tell anyone. It
was the only time in my life that I ever practised an intentional
deception upon any living thing, and I have always regretted it,
although our very lives depended upon it."

"What was it, Uncle Munch?" asked the Twins, awed to think that the
old warrior had ever deceived anyone.

"I took the egg shells and ground them into powder, and fed them to
the chickens. The poor creatures supposed it was corn-meal they were
getting," confessed the Baron. "I know it was mean, but what could I
do?"

"Nothing," said the Twins softly. "And we don't think it was so bad of
you after all. Many another person would have kept them laying eggs
until they starved, and then he'd have killed them and eaten them up.
You let them live."

"That may be so," said the Baron, with a smile that showed how
relieved his conscience was by the Twins' suggestion. "But I couldn't
do that you know, because they were pets. I had been brought up from
childhood with those chickens."

Then the Twins, jamming the Baron's hat down over his eyes, climbed
down from his lap and went to their play, strongly of the opinion
that, though a bold warrior, the Baron was a singularly kind,
soft-hearted man after all.




IV

SOME HUNTING STORIES FOR CHILDREN


The Heavenly Twins had been off in the mountains during their summer
holiday, and in consequence had seen very little of their good old
friend, Mr. Munchausen. He had written them once or twice, and they
had found his letters most interesting, especially that one in which
he told how he had killed a moose up in Maine with his Waterbury watch
spring, and I do not wonder that they marvelled at that, for it was
one of the most extraordinary happenings in the annals of the chase.
It seems, if his story is to be believed, and I am sure that none of
us who know him has ever had any reason to think that he would deceive
intentionally; it seems, I say, that he had gone to Maine for a week's
sport with an old army acquaintance of his, who had now become a guide
in that region. Unfortunately his rifle, of which he was very fond,
and with which his aim was unerring, was in some manner mislaid on the
way, and when they arrived in the woods they were utterly without
weapons; but Mr. Munchausen was not the man to be daunted by any such
trifle as that, particularly while his friend had an old army musket,
a relic of the war, stored away in the attic of his woodland domicile.

"Th' only trouble with that ar musket," said the old guide, "ain't so
much that she won't shoot straight, nor that she's got a kick onto her
like an unbroke mule. What I'm most afeard 'on about your shootin'
with her ain't that I think she'll bust neither, for the fact is we
ain't got nothin' for to bust her with, seein' as how ammynition is
skeerce. I got powder, an' I got waddin', but I ain't got no shot."

"That doesn't make any difference," the Baron replied. "We can make
the shot. Have you got any plumbing in the camp? If you have, rip it
out, and I'll melt up a water-pipe into bullets."

"No, sir," retorted the old man. "Plumbin' is one of the things I came
here to escape from."

"Then," said the Baron, "I'll use my watch for ammunition. It is only
a three-dollar watch and I can spare it."

With this determination, Mr. Munchausen took his watch to pieces, an
ordinary time-piece of the old-fashioned kind, and, to make a long
story short, shot for several days with the component parts of that
useful affair rammed down into the barrel of the old musket. With the
stem-winding ball he killed an eagle; with pieces of the back cover
chopped up to a fineness of medium-sized shot he brought down several
other birds, but the great feat of all was when he started for moose
with nothing but the watch-spring in the barrel of the gun. Having
rolled it up as tight as he could, fastened it with a piece of twine,
and rammed it well into the gun, he set out to find the noble animal
upon whose life he had designs. After stalking the woods for several
hours, he came upon the tracks which told him that his prey was not
far off, and in a short while he caught sight of a magnificent
creature, his huge antlers held proudly up and his great eyes full of
defiance.

For a moment the Baron hesitated. The idea of destroying so beautiful
an animal seemed to be abhorrent to his nature, which, warrior-like as
he is, has something of the tenderness of a woman about it. A second
glance at the superb creature, however, changed all that, for the
Baron then saw that to shoot to kill was necessary, for the beast was
about to force a fight in which the hunter himself would be put upon
the defensive.

"I won't shoot you through the head, my beauty," he said, softly, "nor
will I puncture your beautiful coat with this load of mine, but I'll
kill you in a new way."

With this he pulled the trigger. The powder exploded, the string
binding the long black spring into a coil broke, and immediately the
strip of steel shot forth into the air, made directly toward the neck
of the rushing moose, and coiling its whole sinuous length tightly
about the doomed creature's throat strangled him to death.

As the Twins' father said, a feat of that kind entitled the Baron to a
high place in fiction at least, if not in history itself. The Twins
were very much wrought up over the incident, particularly, when one
too-smart small imp who was spending the summer at the same hotel
where they were said that he didn't believe it,--but he was an imp who
had never seen a cheap watch, so how should he know anything about
what could be done with a spring that cannot be wound up by a great
strong man in less than ten minutes?

As for the Baron he was very modest about the achievement, for when he
first appeared at the Twins' home after their return he had actually
forgotten all about it, and, in fact, could not recall the incident at
all, until Diavolo brought him his own letter, when, of course, the
whole matter came back to him.

"It wasn't so very wonderful, anyhow," said the Baron. "I should not
think, for instance, of bragging about any such thing as that. It was
a simple affair all through."

"And what did you do with the moose's antlers?" asked Angelica. "I
hope you brought 'em home with you, because I'd like to see 'em."

"I wanted to," said the Baron, stroking the Twins' soft brown locks
affectionately. "I wanted to bring them home for your father to use as
a hat rack, dear, but they were too large. When I had removed them
from the dead animal, I found them so large that I could not get them
out of the forest, they got so tangled up in the trees. I should have
had to clear a path twenty feet wide and seven miles long to get them
even as far as my friend's hut, and after that they would have had to
be carried thirty miles through the woods to the express office."

"I guess it's just as well after all," said Diavolo. "If they were as
big as all that, Papa would have had to build a new house to get 'em
into."

"Exactly," said the Baron. "Exactly. That same idea occurred to me,
and for that reason I concluded not to go to the trouble of cutting
away those miles of trees. The antlers would have made a very
expensive present for your father to receive in these hard times."

"It was a good thing you had that watch," the Twins observed, after
thinking over the Baron's adventure. "If you hadn't had that you
couldn't have killed the moose."

"Very likely not," said the Baron, "unless I had been able to do as I
did in India thirty years ago at a man hunt."

"What?" cried the Twins. "Do they hunt men in India?"?

"That all depends, my dears," replied the Baron. "It all depends upon
what you mean by the word they. Men don't hunt men, but animals, great
wild beasts sometimes hunt them, and it doesn't often happen that the
men escape. In the particular man hunt I refer to I was the creature
that was being hunted, and I've had a good deal of sympathy for foxes
ever since. This was a regular fox hunt in a way, although I was the
fox, and a herd of elephants were the huntsmen."

"How queer," said Diavolo, unscrewing one of the Baron's shirt studs
to see if he would fall apart.

"Not half so queer as my feelings when I realised my position," said
the Baron with a shake of his head. "I was frightened half to death.
It seemed to me that I'd reached the end of my tether at last. I was
studying the fauna and flora of India, in a small Indian village,
known as ah--what was the name of that town! Ah--something like
Rathabad--no, that isn't quite it--however, one name does as well as
another in India. It was a good many miles from Calcutta, and I'd been
living there about three months. The village lay in a small valley
between two ranges of hills, none of them very high. On the other side
of the westerly hills was a great level stretch of country upon which
herds of elephants used to graze. Out of this rose these hills, very
precipitously, which was a very good thing for the people in the
valley, else those elephants would have come over and played havoc
with their homes and crops. To me the plains had a great fascination,
and I used to wander over them day after day in search of new
specimens for my collection of plants and flowers, never thinking of
the danger I ran from an encounter with these elephants, who were very
ferocious and extremely jealous of the territory they had come through
years of occupation to regard as their own. So it happened, that one
day, late in the afternoon, I was returning from an expedition over
the plains, and, as I had found a large number of new specimens, I was
feeling pretty happy. I whistled loudly as I walked, when suddenly
coming to a slight undulation in the plain what should I see before me
but a herd of sixty-three elephants, some eating, some thinking, some
romping, and some lying asleep on the soft turf. Now, if I had come
quietly, of course, I could have passed them unobserved, but as I told
you I was whistling. I forget what the tune was, The Marsellaise or
Die Wacht Am Rhein, or maybe Tommie Atkins, which enrages the
elephants very much, being the national anthem of the British invader.
At any rate, whatever the tune was it attracted the attention of the
elephants, and then their sport began. The leader lifted his trunk
high in the air, and let out a trumpet blast that echoed back from the
cliff three miles distant. Instantly every elephant was on the alert.
Those that had been sleeping awoke, and sprang to their feet. Those
that had been at play stopped in their romp, and under the leadership
of the biggest brute of the lot they made a rush for me. I had no gun;
nothing except my wits and my legs with which to defend myself, so I
naturally began to use the latter until I could get the former to
work. It was nip and tuck. They could run faster than I could, and I
saw in an instant that without stratagem I could not hope to reach a
place of safety. As I have said, the cliff, which rose straight up
from the plain like a stone-wall, was three miles away, nor was there
any other spot in which I could find a refuge. It occurred to me as I
ran that if I ran in circles I could edge up nearer to the cliff all
the time, and still keep my pursuers at a distance for the simple
reason that an elephant being more or less unwieldy cannot turn as
rapidly as a man can, so I kept running in circles. I could run around
my short circle in less time than the enemy could run around his
larger one, and in this manner I got nearer and nearer my haven of
safety, the bellowing beasts snorting with rage as they followed.
Finally, when I began to see that I was tolerably safe, another idea
occurred to me, which was that if I could manage to kill those huge
creatures the ivory I could get would make my fortune. But how! That
was the question. Well, my dearly beloved Imps, I admit that I am a
fast runner, but I am also a fast thinker, and in less than two
minutes I had my plan arranged. I stopped short when about two hundred
feet from the cliff, and waited until the herd was fifty feet away.
Then I turned about and ran with all my might up to within two feet of
the cliff, and then turning sharply to the left ran off in that
direction. The elephants, thinking they had me, redoubled their speed,
but failed to notice that I had turned, so quickly was that movement
executed. They failed likewise to notice the cliff, as I had intended.
The consequence was the whole sixty-three of them rushed head first,
bang! with all their force, into the rock. The hill shook with the
force of the blow and the sixty-three elephants fell dead. They had
simply butted their brains out."

[Illustration: "I got nearer and nearer my haven of safety, the
bellowing beasts snorting with rage as they followed." _Chapter IV._]

Here the Baron paused and pulled vigourously on his cigar, which had
almost gone out.

"That was fine," said the Twins.

"What a narrow escape it was for you, Uncle Munch," said Diavolo.

"Very true," said the great soldier rising, as a signal that his story
was done. "In fact you might say that I had sixty-three narrow
escapes, one for each elephant."

"But what became of the ivory?" asked Angelica.

"Oh, as for that!" said the Baron, with a sigh, "I was disappointed in
that. They turned out to be all young elephants, and they had lost
their first teeth. Their second teeth hadn't grown yet. I got only
enough ivory to make one paper cutter, which is the one I gave your
father for Christmas last year."

Which may account for the extraordinary interest the Twins have taken
in their father's paper cutter ever since.




V

THE STORY OF JANG


"Did you ever own a dog, Baron Munchausen?" asked the reporter of the
_Gehenna Gazette_, calling to interview the eminent nobleman during
Dog Show Week in Cimmeria.

"Yes, indeed I have," said the Baron, "I fancy I must have owned as
many as a hundred dogs in my life. To be sure some of the dogs were
iron and brass, but I was just as fond of them as if they had been
made of plush or lamb's wool. They were so quiet, those iron dogs
were; and the brass dogs never barked or snapped at any one."

"I never saw a brass dog," said the reporter. "What good are they?"

"Oh they are likely to be very useful in winter," the Baron replied.
"My brass dogs used to guard my fire-place and keep the blazing logs
from rolling out into my room and setting fire to the rug the Khan of
Tartary gave me for saving his life from a herd of Antipodes he and I
were hunting in the Himalaya Mountains."

"I don't see what you needed dogs to do that for," said the reporter.
"A fender would have done just as well, or a pair of andirons," he
added.

"That's what these dogs were," said the Baron. "They were fire dogs
and fire dogs are andirons."

Ananias pressed his lips tightly together, and into his eyes came a
troubled look. It was evident that, revolting as the idea was to him,
he thought the Baron was trying to deceive him. Noting his
displeasure, the Baron inwardly resolving to be careful how he handled
the truth, hastened on with his story.

"But dogs were never my favourite animals," he said. "With my pets I
am quite as I am with other things. I like to have pets that are
entirely different from the pets of other people, and that is why in
my day I have made companions of such animals as the sangaree, and the
camomile, and the--ah--the two-horned piccolo. I've had tame bees
even--in fact my bees used to be the wonder of Siam, in which country
I was stationed for three years, having been commissioned by a British
company to make a study of its climate with a view to finding out if
it would pay the company to go into the ice business there. Siam is,
as you have probably heard, a very warm country, and as ice is a very
rare thing in warm countries these English people thought they might
make a vast fortune by sending tug-boats up to the Arctic Ocean, and
with them capture and tow icebergs to Siam, where they might be cut up
and sold to the people at tremendous profit. The scheme was certainly
a good one, and I found many of the wealthy Siamese quite willing to
subscribe for a hundred pounds of ice a week at ten dollars a pound,
but it never came to anything because we had no means of preserving
the icebergs after we got them into the Gulf of Siam. The water was so
hot that they melted before we could cut them up, and we nearly got
ourselves into very serious trouble with the coast people for that
same reason. An iceberg, as you know, is a huge affair, and when a
dozen or two of them had melted in the Gulf they added so to the
quantity of water there that fifty miles of the coast line were
completely flooded, and thousands of valuable fish, able to live in
warm water only, were so chilled that they got pneumonia, and died.
You can readily imagine how indignant the Siamese fishermen were with
my company over the losses they had to bear, but their affection for
me personally was so great that they promised not to sue the company
if I would promise not to let the thing occur again. This I promised,
and all went well. But about the bees, it was while I was living in
Bangkok that I had them, and they were truly wonderful. There was
hardly anything those bees couldn't do after I got them tamed."

"How did you tame them, Baron," asked Ananias.

"Power of the eye, my boy," returned the Baron. "I attracted their
attention first and then held it. Of course, I tried my plan on one
bee first. He tamed the rest. Bees are very like children. They like
to play stunts--I think it is called stunts, isn't it, when one boy
does something, and all his companions try to do the same thing?"

"Yes," said Ananias, "I believe there is such a game, but I shouldn't
like to play it with you."

"Well, that was the way I did with the bees," said Mr. Munchausen. "I
tamed the king bee, and when he had learned all sorts of funny little
tricks, such as standing on his head and humming tunes, I let him go
back to the swarm. He was gone a week, and then he came back, he had
grown so fond of me--as well he might, because I fed him well, giving
him a large basket of flowers three times a day. Back with him came
two or three thousand other bees, and whatever Jang did they did."

"Who was Jang?" asked Ananias.

"That was the first bee's name. King Jang. Jang is Siamese for Billie,
and as I was always fond of the name, Billie, I called him Jang. By
and by every bee in the lot could hum the Star Spangled Banner and
Yankee Doodle as well as you or I could, and it was grand on those
soft moonlight nights we had there, to sit on the back porch of my
pagoda and listen to my bee orchestra discoursing sweet music. Of
course, as soon as Jang had learned to hum one tune it was easy enough
for him to learn another, and before long the bee orchestra could give
us any bit of music we wished to have. Then I used to give musicales
at my house and all the Siamese people, from the King down asked to be
invited, so that through my pets my home became one of the most
attractive in all Asia.

"And the honey those bees made! It was the sweetest honey you ever
tasted, and every morning when I got down to breakfast there was a
fresh bottleful ready for me, the bees having made it in the bottle
itself over night. They were the most grateful pets I ever had, and
once they saved my life. They used to live in a hive I had built for
them in one corner of my room and I could go to bed and sleep with
every door in my house open, and not be afraid of robbers, because
those bees were there to protect me. One night a lion broke loose from
the Royal Zoo, and while trotting along the road looking for something
to eat he saw my front door wide open. In he walked, and began to
sniff. He sniffed here and he sniffed there, but found nothing but a
pot of anchovy paste, which made him thirstier and hungrier than ever.
So he prowled into the parlour, and had his appetite further
aggravated by a bronze statue of the Emperor of China I had there. He
thought in the dim light it was a small-sized human being, and he
pounced on it in a minute. Well, of course, he couldn't make any
headway trying to eat a bronze statue, and the more he tried the more
hungry and angry he got. He roared until he shook the house and would
undoubtedly have awakened me had it not been that I am always a sound
sleeper and never wake until I have slept enough. Why, on one
occasion, on the Northern Pacific Railway, a train I was on ran into
and completely telescoped another while I was asleep in the smoking
car, and although I was severely burned and hurled out of the car
window to land sixty feet away on the prairie, I didn't wake up for
two hours. I was nearly buried alive because they thought I'd been
killed, I lay so still.

"But to return to the bees. The roaring of the lion disturbed them,
and Jang buzzed out of his hive to see what was the matter just as the
lion appeared at my bed-room door. The intelligent insect saw in a
moment what the trouble was, and he sounded the alarm for the rest of
the bees, who came swarming out of the hive in response to the
summons. Jang kept his eye on the lion meanwhile, and just as the
prowler caught sight of your uncle peacefully snoring away on the bed,
dreaming of his boyhood, and prepared to spring upon me, Jang buzzed
over and sat down upon his back, putting his sting where it would do
the most good. The angry lion, who in a moment would have fastened his
teeth upon me, turned with a yelp of pain, and the bite which was to
have been mine wrought havoc with his own back. Following Jang's
example, the other bees ranged themselves in line over the lion's
broad shoulders, and stung him until he roared with pain. Each time he
was stung he would whisk his head around like a dog after a flea, and
bite himself, until finally he had literally chewed himself up, when
he fainted from sheer exhaustion, and I was saved. You can imagine my
surprise when next morning I awakened to find a dying lion in my
room."

"But, Baron," said Ananias. "I don't understand one thing about it. If
you were fast asleep while all this was happening how did you know
that Jang did those things?"

[Illustration: "Jang buzzed over and sat down upon his back, putting
his sting where it would do the most good." _Chapter V._]

"Why, Jang told me himself," replied the Baron calmly.

"Could he talk?" cried Ananias in amazement.

"Not as you and I do," said the Baron. "Of course not, but Jang could
spell. I taught him how. You see I reasoned it out this way. If a bee
can be taught to sing a song which is only a story in music, why can't
he be taught to tell a story in real words. It was worth trying
anyhow, and I tried. Jang was an apt pupil. He was the most
intelligent bee I ever met, and it didn't take me more than a month to
teach him his letters, and when he once knew his letters it was easy
enough to teach him how to spell. I got a great big sheet and covered
it with twenty-six squares, and in each of these squares I painted a
letter of the alphabet, so that finally when Jang came to know them,
and wanted to tell me anything he would fly from one square to another
until he had spelled out whatever he wished to say. I would follow his
movements closely, and we got so after awhile that we could converse
for hours without any trouble whatsoever. I really believe that if
Jang had been a little heavier so that he could push the keys down far
enough he could have managed a typewriter as well as anybody, and when
I think about his wonderful mind and delicious fancy I deeply regret
that there never was a typewriting machine so delicately made that a
bee of his weight could make it go. The world would have been very
much enriched by the stories Jang had in his mind to tell, but it is
too late now. He is gone forever."

"How did you lose Jang, Baron?" asked Ananias, with tears in his eyes.

"He thought I had deceived him," said the Baron, with a sigh. "He was
as much of a stickler for truth as I am. An American friend of mine
sent me a magnificent parterre of wax flowers which were so perfectly
made that I couldn't tell them from the real. I was very proud of
them, and kept them in my room near the hive. When Jang and his tribe
first caught sight of them they were delighted and they sang as they
had never sung before just to show how pleased they were. Then they
set to work to make honey out of them. They must have laboured over
those flowers for two months before I thought to tell them that they
were only wax and not at all real. As I told Jang this, I
unfortunately laughed, thinking that he could understand the joke of
the thing as well as I, but I was mistaken. All that he could see was
that he had been deceived, and it made him very angry. Bees don't seem
to have a well-developed sense of humour. He cast a reproachful glance
at me and returned to his hive and on the morning of the third day
when I waked up they were moving out. They flew to my lattice and
ranged themselves along the slats and waited for Jang. In a moment he
appeared and at a given signal they buzzed out of my sight, humming a
farewell dirge as they went. I never saw them again."

Here the Baron wiped his eyes.

"I felt very bad about it," he went on, "and resolved then never again
to do anything which even suggested deception, and when several years
later I had my crest designed I had a bee drawn on it, for in my eyes
my good friend the bee, represents three great factors of the good and
successful life--Industry, Fidelity, and Truth."

Whereupon the Baron went his way, leaving Ananias to think it over.




VI

HE TELLS THE TWINS OF FIRE-WORKS


There was a great noise going on in the public square of Cimmeria when
Mr. Munchausen sauntered into the library at the home of the Heavenly
Twins.

"These Americans are having a great time of it celebrating their
Fourth of July," said he, as the house shook with the explosion of a
bomb. "They've burnt powder enough already to set ten revolutions
revolving, and they're going to outdo themselves to-night in the park.
They've made a bicycle out of the two huge pin-wheels, and they're
going to make Benedict Arnold ride a mile on it after it's lit."

The Twins appeared much interested. They too had heard much of the
celebration and some of its joys and when the Baron arrived they were
primed with questions.

"Uncle Munch," they said, helping the Baron to remove his hat and
coat, which they threw into a corner so anxious were they to get to
work, "do you think there's much danger in little boys having
fire-crackers and rockets and pin-wheels, or in little girls having
torpeters?"

"Well, I don't know," the Baron answered, warily. "What does your
venerable Dad say about it?"

"He thinks we ought to wait until we are older, but we don't," said
the Twins.

"Torpeters never sets nothing afire," said Angelica.

"That's true," said the Baron, kindly; "but after all your father is
right. Why do you know what happened to me when I was a boy?"

"You burnt your thumb," said the Twins, ready to make a guess at it.

"Well, you get me a cigar, and I'll tell you what happened to me when
I was a boy just because my father let me have all the fire-works I
wanted, and then perhaps you will see how wise your father is in not
doing as you wish him to," said Mr. Munchausen.

The Twins readily found the desired cigar, after which Mr. Munchausen
settled down comfortably in the hammock, and swinging softly to and
fro, told his story.

"My dear old father," said he, "was the most indulgent man that ever
lived. He'd give me anything in the world that I wanted whether he
could afford it or not, only he had an original system of giving which
kept him from being ruined by indulgence of his children. He gave me a
Rhine steamboat once without its costing him a cent. I saw it, wanted
it, was beginning to cry for it, when he patted me on the head and
told me I could have it, adding, however, that I must never take it
away from the river or try to run it myself. That satisfied me. All I
wanted really was the happiness of feeling it was mine, and my dear
old daddy gave me permission to feel that way. The same thing happened
with reference to the moon. He gave it to me freely and ungrudgingly.
He had received it from his father, he said, and he thought he had
owned it long enough. Only, he added, as he had about the steamboat, I
must leave it where it was and let other people look at it whenever
they wanted to, and not interfere if I found any other little boys or
girls playing with its beams, which I promised and have faithfully
observed to this day.

"Of course from such a parent as this you may very easily see
everything was to be expected on such a day as the Tenth of August
which the people in our region celebrated because it was my birthday.
He used to let me have my own way at all times, and it's a wonder I
wasn't spoiled. I really can't understand how it is that I have become
the man I am, considering how I was indulged when I was small.

"However, like all boys, I was very fond of celebrating the Tenth, and
being a more or less ingenious lad, I usually prepared my own
fire-works and many things happened which might not otherwise have
come to pass if I had been properly looked after as you are. The first
thing that happened to me on the Tenth of August that would have a
great deal better not have happened, was when I was--er--how old are
you Imps?"

"Sixteen," said they. "Going on eighteen."

"Nonsense," said the Baron. "Why you're not more than eight."

"Nope--we're sixteen," said Diavolo. "I'm eight and Angelica's eight
and twice eight is sixteen."

"Oh," said the Baron. "I see. Well, that was exactly the age I was at
the time. Just eight to a day."

"Sixteen we said," said the Twins.

"Yes," nodded the Baron. "Just eight, but going on towards sixteen. My
father had given me ten thalers to spend on noises, but unlike most
boys I did not care so much for noises as I did for novelties. It
didn't give me any particular pleasure to hear a giant cracker go off
with a bang. What I wanted to do most of all was to get up some kind
of an exhibition that would please the people and that could be seen
in the day-time instead of at night when everybody is tired and
sleepy. So instead of spending my money on fire-crackers and torpedoes
and rockets, I spent nine thalers of it on powder and one thaler on
putty blowers. My particular object was to make one grand effort and
provide passers-by with a free exhibition of what I was going to call
'Munchausen's Grand Geyser Cascade.' To do this properly I had set my
eye upon a fish pond not far from the town hall. It was a very deep
pond and about a mile in circumference, I should say. Putty blowers
were then selling at five for a pfennig and powder was cheap as sand
owing to the fact that the powder makers, expecting a war, had made a
hundred times as much as was needed, and as the war didn't come off,
they were willing to take almost anything they could get for it. The
consequence was that the powder I got was sufficient in quantity to
fill a rubber bag as large as five sofa cushions. This I sank in the
middle of the pond, without telling anybody what I intended to do, and
through the putty blowers, sealed tightly together end to end, I
conducted a fuse, which I made myself, from the powder bag to the
shore. My idea was that I could touch the thing off, you know, and
that about sixty square feet of the pond would fly up into the air and
then fall gracefully back again like a huge fountain. If it had worked
as I expected everything would have been all right, but it didn't. I
had too much powder, for a second after I had lit the fuse there came
a muffled roar and the whole pond in a solid mass, fish and all, went
flying up into the air and disappeared. Everybody was astonished, not
a few were very much frightened. I was scared to death but I never let
on to any one that I was the person that had blown the pond off. How
high the pond went I don't know, but I do know that for a week there
wasn't any sign of it, and then most unexpectedly out of what appeared
to be a clear sky there came the most extraordinary rain-storm you
ever saw. It literally poured down for two days, and, what I alone
could understand, with it came trout and sunfish and minnows, and most
singular to all but myself an old scow that was recognised as the
property of the owner of the pond suddenly appeared in the sky falling
toward the earth at a fearful rate of speed. When I saw the scow
coming I was more frightened than ever because I was afraid it might
fall upon and kill some of our neighbours. Fortunately, however, this
possible disaster was averted, for it came down directly over the
sharp-pointed lightning-rod on the tower of our public library and
stuck there like a piece of paper on a file.

"The rain washed away several acres of finely cultivated farms, but
the losses on crops and fences and so forth were largely reduced by
the fish that came with the storm. One farmer took a rake and caught
three hundred pounds of trout, forty pounds of sun-fish, eight
turtles, and a minnow in his potato patch in five minutes. Others were
almost as fortunate, but the damage was sufficiently large to teach me
that parents cannot be too careful about what they let their children
do on the day they celebrate."

"And weren't you ever punished?" asked the Twins.

"No, indeed," said the Baron. "Nobody ever knew that I did it because
I never told them. In fact you are the only two persons who ever heard
about it, and you mustn't tell, because there are still a number of
farmers around that region who would sue me for damages in case they
knew that I was responsible for the accident."

[Illustration: "Out of what appeared to be a clear sky came the most
extraordinary rain storm you ever saw." _Chapter VI._]

"That was pretty awful," said the Twins. "But we don't want to blow up
ponds so as to get cascadeses, but we do want torpeters. Torpeters
aren't any harm, are they, Uncle Munch?"

"Well, you can never tell. It all depends on the torpedo. Torpedoes
are sometimes made carelessly," said the Baron. "They ought to be made
as carefully as a druggist makes pills. So many pebbles, so much
paper, and so much saltpeter and sulphur, or whatever else is used to
make them go off. I had a very unhappy time once with a carelessly
made torpedo. I had two boxes full. They were those tin-foil torpedoes
that little girls are so fond of, and I expected they would make quite
a lot of noise, but the first ten I threw down didn't go off at all.
The eleventh for some reason or other, I never knew exactly what, I
hurled with all my force against the side of my father's barn, and my,
what a surprise it was! It smashed in the whole side of the barn and
sent seven bales of hay, and our big farm plough bounding down the
hillside into the town. The hay-bales smashed down fences; one of them
hit a cow-shed on its way down, knocked the back of it to smithereens
and then proceeded to demolish the rear end of a small crockery shop
that fronted on the main street. It struck the crockery shop square in
the middle of its back and threw down fifteen dozen cups and saucers,
thirty-two water pitchers, and five china busts of Shakespeare. The
din was frightful--but I couldn't help that. Nobody could blame me,
because I had no means of knowing that the man who made the torpedoes
was careless and had put a solid ball of dynamite into one of them. So
you see, my dear Imps, that even torpedoes are not always safe."

"Yes," said Angelica. "I guess I'll play with my dolls on my birthday.
They never goes off and blows things up."

"That's very wise of you," said the Baron.

"But what became of the plough, Uncle Munch?" said Diavolo.

"Oh, the plough didn't do much damage," replied Mr. Munchausen. "It
simply furrowed its way down the hill, across the main street, to the
bowling green. It ploughed up about one hundred feet of this before it
stopped, but nobody minded that much because it was to have been
ploughed and seeded again anyhow within a few days. Of course the
furrow it made in crossing the road was bad, and to make it worse the
share caught one of the water pipes that ran under the street, and
ripped it in two so that the water burst out and flooded the street
for a while, but one hundred and sixty thousand dollars would have
covered the damage."

The Twins were silent for a few moments and then they asked:

"Well, Uncle Munch, what kind of fire-works are safe anyhow?"

"My experience has taught me that there are only two kinds that are
safe," replied their old friend. "One is a Jack-o-lantern and the
other is a cigar, and as you are not old enough to have cigars, if you
will put on your hats and coats and go down into the garden and get me
two pumpkins, I'll make each of you a Jack-o'-lantern. What do you
say?"

"We say yes," said the Twins, and off they went, while the Baron
turning over in the hammock, and arranging a pillow comfortably under
his head, went to sleep to dream of more birthday recollections in
case there should be a demand for them later on.




VII

SAVED BY A MAGIC LANTERN


When the Sunday dinner was over, the Twins, on Mr. Munchausen's
invitation, climbed into the old warrior's lap, Angelica kissing him
on the ear, and Diavolo giving his nose an affectionate tweak.

"Ah!" said the Baron. "That's it!"

"What's what, Uncle Munch?" demanded Diavolo.

"Why that," returned the Baron. "I was wondering what it was I needed
to make my dinner an unqualified success. There was something lacking,
but what it was, we have had so much, I could not guess until you two
Imps kissed me and tweaked my nasal feature. Now I know, for really a
feeling of the most blessed contentment has settled upon my soul."

"Don't you wish _you_ had two youngsters like us, Uncle Munch?" asked
the Twins.

"Do I wish I had? Why I have got two youngsters like you," the Baron
replied. "I've got 'em right here too."

"Where?" asked the Twins, looking curiously about them for the other
two.

"On my knees, of course," said he. "You are mine. Your papa gave you
to me--and you are as like yourselves as two peas in a pod."

"I--I hope you aren't going to take us away from here," said the
Twins, a little ruefully. They were very fond of the Baron, but they
didn't exactly like the idea of being given away.

"Oh no--not at all," said the Baron. "Your father has consented to
keep you here for me and your mother has kindly volunteered to look
after you. There is to be no change, except that you belong to me,
and, vice versa, I belong to you."

"And I suppose, then," said Diavolo, "if you belong to us you've got
to do pretty much what we tell you to?"

"Exactly," responded Mr. Munchausen. "If you should ask me to tell you
a story I'd have to do it, even if you were to demand the full
particulars of how I spent Christmas with Mtulu, King of the Taafe
Eatars, on the upper Congo away down in Africa--which is a tale I have
never told any one in all my life."

"It sounds as if it might be interesting," said the Twins. "Those are
real candy names, aren't they?"

"Yes," said the Baron. "Taafe sounds like taffy and Mtulu is very
suggestive of chewing gum. That's the curious thing about the savage
tribes of Africa. Their names often sound as if they might be things
to eat instead of people. Perhaps that is why they sometimes eat each
other--though, of course, I won't say for sure that that is the real
explanation of cannibalism."

"What's cannon-ballism?" asked Angelica.

"He didn't say cannon-ballism," said Diavolo, scornfully. "It was
candy-ballism."

"Well--you've both come pretty near it," said the Baron, "and we'll
let the matter rest there, or I won't have time to tell you how
Christmas got me into trouble with King Mtulu."

The Baron called for a cigar, which the Twins lighted for him and then
he began.

"You may not have heard," he said, "that some twenty or thirty years
ago I was in command of an expedition in Africa. Our object was to
find Lake Majolica, which we hoped would turn up half way between
Lollokolela and the Clebungo Mountains. Lollokolela was the
furthermost point to which civilisation had reached at that time, and
was directly in the pathway to the Clebungo Mountains, which the
natives said were full of gold and silver mines and scattered all over
which were reputed to be caves in which diamonds and rubies and other
gems of the rarest sort were to be found in great profusion. No white
man had ever succeeded in reaching this marvellously rich range of
hills for the reason that after leaving Lollokolela there was, as far
as was known, no means of obtaining water, and countless adventurous
spirits had had to give up because of the overpowering thirst which
the climate brought upon them.

"Under such circumstances it was considered by a company of gentlemen
in London to be well worth their while to set about the discovery of a
lake, which they decided in advance to call Majolica, for reasons best
known to themselves; they probably wanted to jar somebody with it. And
to me was intrusted the mission of leading the expedition. I will
confess that I did not want to go for the very good reason that I did
not wish to be eaten alive by the savage tribes that infested that
region, but the company provided me with a close fitting suit of mail,
which I wore from the time I started until I returned. It was very
fortunate for me that I was so provided, for on three distinct
occasions I was served up for state dinners and each time successfully
resisted the carving knife and as a result, was thereafter well
received, all the chiefs looking upon me as one who bore a charmed
existence."

Here the Baron paused long enough for the Twins to reflect upon and
realise the terrors which had beset him on his way to Lake Majolica,
and be it said that if they had thought him brave before they now
deemed him a very hero of heroes.

"When I set out," said the Baron, "I was accompanied by ten Zanzibaris
and a thousand tins of condensed dinners."

"A thousand what, Uncle Munch?" asked Jack, his mouth watering.

"Condensed dinners," said the Baron, "I had a lot of my favourite
dinners condensed and put up in tins. I didn't expect to be gone more
than a year and a thousand dinners condensed and tinned, together with
the food I expected to find on the way, elephant meat, rhinoceros
steaks, and tiger chops, I thought would suffice for the trip. I could
eat the condensed dinners and my followers could have the elephant's
meat, rhinoceros steaks, and tiger chops--not to mention the bananas
and other fruits which grow wild in the African jungle. It was not
long, however, before I made the discovery that the Zanzibaris, in
order to eat tigers, need to learn first how to keep tigers from
eating them. We went to bed late one night on the fourth day out from
Lollokolela, and when we waked up the next morning every mother's son
of us, save myself, had been eaten by tigers, and again it was nothing
but my coat of mail that saved me. There were eighteen tigers' teeth
sticking into the sleeve of the coat, as it was. You can imagine my
distress at having to continue the search for Lake Majolica alone. It
was then that I acquired the habit of talking to myself, which has
kept me young ever since, for I enjoy my own conversation hugely, and
find myself always a sympathetic listener. I walked on for days and
days, until finally, on Christmas Eve, I reached King Mtulu's palace.
Of course your idea of a palace is a magnificent five-story building
with beautiful carvings all over the front of it, marble stair-cases
and handsomely painted and gilded ceilings. King Mtulu's palace was
nothing of the sort, although for that region it was quite
magnificent, the walls being decorated with elephants' tusks,
crocodile teeth and many other treasures such as delight the soul of
the Central African.

"Now as I may not have told you, King Mtulu was the fiercest of the
African chiefs, and it is said that up to the time when I outwitted
him no white man had ever encountered him and lived to tell the tale.
Consequently, when without knowing it on this sultry Christmas Eve,
laden with the luggage and the tinned dinners and other things I had
brought with me I stumbled upon the blood-thirsty monarch I gave
myself up for lost.

"'Who comes here to disturb the royal peace?' cried Mtulu, savagely,
as I crossed the threshold.

"'It is I, your highness,' I returned, my face blanching, for I
recognized him at once by the ivory ring he wore in the end of his
nose.

"'Who is I?' retorted Mtulu, picking up his battle axe and striding
forward.

"A happy thought struck me then. These folks are superstitious.
Perhaps the missionaries may have told these uncivilised creatures the
story of Santa Claus. I will pretend that I am Santa Claus. So I
answered, 'Who is I, O Mtulu, Bravest of the Taafe Chiefs? I am Santa
Claus, the Children's Friend, and bearer of gifts to and for all.'

"Mtulu gazed at me narrowly for a moment and then he beat lightly upon a
tom-tom at his side. Immediately thirty of the most villainous-looking
natives, each armed with a club, appeared.

"'Arrest that man,' said Mtulu, 'before he goes any farther. He is an
impostor.'

"'If your majesty pleases,' I began.

"'Silence!' he cried, 'I am fierce and I eat men, but I love truth.
The truthful man has nothing to fear from me, for I have been
converted from my evil ways and since last New Year's day I have eaten
only those who have attempted to deceive me. You will be served raw at
dinner to-morrow night. My respect for your record as a man of courage
leads me to spare you the torture of the frying-pan. You are Baron
Munchausen. I recognized you the moment you turned pale. Another man
would have blushed.'

"So I was carried off and shut up in a mud hovel, the interior walls
of which were of white, a fact which strangely enough, preserved my
life when later I came to the crucial moment. I had brought with me,
among other things, for my amusement solely, a magic lantern. As a
child, I had always been particularly fond of pictures, and when I
thought of the lonely nights in Africa, with no books at hand, no
theatres, no cotillions to enliven the monotony of my life, I resolved
to take with me my little magic-lantern as much for company as for
anything else. It was very compact in form. It folded up to be hardly
larger than a wallet containing a thousand one dollar bills, and the
glass lenses of course could be carried easily in my trousers pockets.
The views, instead of being mounted on glass, were put on a substance
not unlike glass, but thinner, called gelatine. All of these things I
carried in my vest pockets, and when Mtulu confiscated my luggage the
magic lantern and views of course escaped his notice.

"Christmas morning came and passed and I was about to give myself up
for lost, for Mtulu was not a king to be kept from eating a man by
anything so small as a suit of mail, when I received word that before
dinner my captor and his suite were going to pay me a formal parting
call. Night was coming on and as I sat despondently awaiting the
king's arrival, I suddenly bethought me of a lantern slide of the
British army, standing and awaiting the command to fire, I happened to
have with me. It was a superb view--lifelike as you please. Why not
throw that on the wall and when Mtulu enters he will find me
apparently with a strong force at my command, thought I. It was no
sooner thought than it was done and my life was saved. Hardly was that
noble picture reflected upon the rear wall of my prison when the door
opened and Mtulu, followed by his suite, appeared. I rose to greet
him, but apparently he saw me not. Mute with terror he stood upon the
threshold gazing at that terrible line of soldiers ready as he thought
to sweep him and his men from the face of the earth with their
death-dealing bullets.

[Illustration: "'I am your slave,' he replied to my greeting, kneeling
before me, 'I yield all to you.'" _Chapter VII._]

"'I am your slave,' he replied to my greeting, kneeling before me, 'I
yield all to you.'

"'I thought you would,' said I. 'But I ask nothing save the discovery
of Lake Majolica. If within twenty-four hours Lake Majolica is not
discovered I give the command to fire!' Then I turned and gave the
order to carry arms, and lo! by a quick change of slides, the army
appeared at a carry. Mtulu gasped with terror, but accepted my
ultimatum. I was freed, Lake Majolica was discovered before ten
o'clock the next morning, and at five o'clock I was on my way home,
the British army reposing quietly in my breast pocket. It was a mighty
narrow escape!"

"I should say so," said the Twins. "But Mtulu must have been awful
stupid not to see what it was."

"Didn't he see through it when he saw you put the army in your
pocket?" asked Diavolo.

"No," said the Baron, "that frightened him worse than ever, for you
see he reasoned this way. If I could carry an army in my pocket-book,
what was to prevent my carrying Mtulu himself and all his tribe off in
the same way! He thought I was a marvellous man to be able to do
that."

"Well, we guess he was right," said the Twins, as they climbed down
from the Baron's lap to find an atlas and search the map of Africa for
Lake Majolica. This they failed to find and the Baron's explanation is
unknown to me, for when the Imps returned, the warrior had departed.




VIII

AN ADVENTURE IN THE DESERT


"The editor has a sort of notion, Mr. Munchausen," said Ananias, as he
settled down in the big arm-chair before the fire in the Baron's
library, "that he'd like to have a story about a giraffe. Public taste
has a necky quality about it of late."

"What do you say to that, Sapphira?" asked the Baron, politely turning
to Mrs. Ananias, who had called with her husband. "Are you interested
in giraffes?"

"I like lions better," said Sapphira. "They roar louder and bite more
fiercely."

"Well, suppose we compromise," said the Baron, "and have a story about
a poodle dog. Poodle dogs sometimes look like lions, and as a rule
they are as gentle as giraffes."

"I know a better scheme than that," put in Ananias. "Tell us a story
about a lion and a giraffe, and if you feel disposed throw in a few
poodles for good measure. I'm writing on space this year."

"That's so," said Sapphira, wearily. "I could say it was a story about
a lion and Ananias could call it a giraffe story, and we'd each be
right."

"Very well," said the Baron, "it shall be a story of each, only I must
have a cigar before I begin. Cigars help me to think, and the
adventure I had in the Desert of Sahara with a lion, a giraffe, and a
slippery elm tree was so long ago that I shall have to do a great deal
of thinking in order to recall it."

So the Baron went for a cigar, while Ananias and Sapphira winked
enviously at each other and lamented their lost glory. In a minute the
Baron returned with the weed, and after lighting it, began his story.

"I was about twenty years old when this thing happened to me," said
he. "I had gone to Africa to investigate the sand in the Desert of
Sahara for a Sand Company in America. As you may already have heard,
sand is a very useful thing in a great many ways, more particularly
however in the building trades. The Sand Company was formed for the
purpose of supplying sand to everybody that wanted it, but land in
America at that time was so very expensive that there was very little
profit in the business. People who owned sand banks and sand lots
asked outrageous prices for their property; and the sea-shore people
were not willing to part with any of theirs because they needed it in
their hotel business. The great attraction of a seaside hotel is the
sand on the beach, and of course the proprietors weren't going to sell
that. They might better even sell their brass bands. So the Sand
Company thought it might be well to build some steam-ships, load them
with oysters, or mowing machines, or historical novels, or anything
else that is produced in the United States, and in demand elsewhere;
send them to Egypt, sell the oysters, or mowing machines, or
historical novels, and then have the ships fill up with sand from the
Sahara, which they could get for nothing, and bring it back in ballast
to the United States."

"It must have cost a lot!" said Ananias.

"Not at all," returned the Baron. "The profits on the oysters and
mowing machines and historical novels were so large that all expenses
both ways were more than paid, so that when it was delivered in
America the sand had really cost less than nothing. We could have
thrown it all overboard and still have a profit left. It was I who
suggested the idea to the President of the Sand Company--his name was
Bartlett, or--ah--Mulligan--or some similar well-known American name,
I can't exactly recall it now. However, Mr. Bartlett, or Mr. Mulligan,
or whoever it was, was very much pleased with the idea and asked me if
I wouldn't go to the Sahara, investigate the quality of the sand, and
report; and as I was temporarily out of employment I accepted the
commission. Six weeks later I arrived in Cairo and set out immediately
on a tour of the desert. I went alone because I preferred not to take
any one into my confidence, and besides one can always be more
independent when he has only his own wishes to consult. I also went on
foot, for the reason that camels need a great deal of care--at least
mine would have, if I'd had one, because I always like to have my
steeds well groomed whether there is any one to see them or not. So to
save myself trouble I started off alone on foot. In twenty-four hours
I travelled over a hundred miles of the desert, and the night of the
second day found me resting in the shade of a slippery elm tree in the
middle of an oasis, which after much suffering and anxiety I had
discovered. It was a beautiful moonlight night and I was enjoying it
hugely. There were no mosquitoes or insects of any kind to interfere
with my comfort. No insects could have flown so far across the sands.
I have no doubt that many of them have tried to get there, but up to
the time of my arrival none had succeeded, and I felt as happy as
though I were in Paradise.

"After eating my supper and taking a draught of the delicious spring
water that purled up in the middle of the oasis, I threw myself down
under the elm tree, and began to play my violin, without which in
those days I never went anywhere."

"I didn't know you played the violin," said Sapphira. "I thought your
instrument was the trombone--plenty of blow and a mighty stretch."

"I don't--now," said the Baron, ignoring the sarcasm. "I gave it up
ten years ago--but that's a different story. How long I played that
night I don't know, but I do know that lulled by the delicious strains
of the music and soothed by the soft sweetness of the atmosphere I
soon dropped off to sleep. Suddenly I was awakened by what I thought
to be the distant roar of thunder. 'Humph!' I said to myself. 'This is
something new. A thunder storm in the Desert of Sahara is a thing I
never expected to see, particularly on a beautifully clear moonlight
night'--for the moon was still shining like a great silver ball in the
heavens, and not a cloud was anywhere to be seen. Then it occurred to
me that perhaps I had been dreaming, so I turned over to go to sleep
again. Hardly had I closed my eyes when a second ear-splitting roar
came bounding over the sands, and I knew that it was no dream, but an
actual sound that I heard. I sprang to my feet and looked about the
horizon and there, a mere speck in the distance, was something--for
the moment I thought a cloud, but in another instant I changed my
mind, for glancing through my telescope I perceived it was not a cloud
but a huge lion with the glitter of hunger in his eye. What I had
mistaken for the thunder was the roar of this savage beast. I seized
my gun and felt for my cartridge box only to discover that I had lost
my ammunition and was there alone, unarmed, in the great desert, at
the mercy of that savage creature, who was drawing nearer and nearer
every minute and giving forth the most fearful roars you ever heard.
It was a terrible moment and I was in despair.

"'It's all up with you, Baron,' I said to myself, and then I caught
sight of the tree. It seemed my only chance. I must climb that. I
tried, but alas! As I have told you it was a slippery elm tree, and I
might as well have tried to climb a greased pole. Despite my frantic
efforts to get a grip upon the trunk I could not climb more than two
feet without slipping back. It was impossible. Nothing was left for me
to do but to take to my legs, and I took to them as well as I knew
how. My, what a run it was, and how hopeless. The beast was gaining on
me every second, and before me lay mile after mile of desert. 'Better
give up and treat the beast to a breakfast, Baron,' I moaned to
myself. 'When there's only one thing to do, you might as well do it
and be done with it. Your misery will be over the more quickly if you
stop right here.' As I spoke these words, I slowed up a little, but
the frightful roaring of the lion unnerved me for an instant, or
rather nerved me on to a spurt, which left the lion slightly more to
the rear--and which resulted in the saving of my life; for as I ran
on, what should I see about a mile ahead but another slippery elm
tree, and under it stood a giraffe who had apparently fallen asleep
while browsing among its upper branches, and filling its stomach with
its cooling cocoanuts. The giraffe had its back to me, and as I sped
on I formed my plan. I would grab hold of the giraffe's tail; haul
myself up onto his back; climb up his neck into the tree, and then
give my benefactor a blow between the eyes which would send him flying
across the desert before the lion could come along and get up into the
tree the same way I did. The agony of fear I went through as I
approached the long-necked creature was something dreadful. Suppose
the giraffe should be awakened by the roaring of the lion before I got
there and should rush off himself to escape the fate that awaited me?
I nearly dropped, I was so nervous, and the lion was now not more than
a hundred yards away. I could hear his breath as he came panting on. I
redoubled my speed; his pants came closer, closer, until at length
after what seemed a year, I reached the giraffe, caught his tail,
raised myself up to his back, crawled along his neck and dropped
fainting into the tree just as the lion sprang upon the giraffe's back
and came on toward me. What happened then I don't know, for as I have
told you I swooned away; but I do know that when I came to, the
giraffe had disappeared and the lion lay at the foot of the tree dead
from a broken neck."

"A broken neck?" demanded Sapphira.

"Yes," returned the Baron. "A broken neck! From which I concluded that
as the lion reached the nape of the giraffe's neck, the giraffe had
waked up and bent his head toward the earth, thus causing the lion to
fall head first to the ground instead of landing as he had expected in
the tree with me."

"It was wonderful," said Sapphira, scornfully.

"Yes," said Ananias, "but I shouldn't think a lion could break his
neck falling off a giraffe. Perhaps it was one of the slippery elm
cocoanuts that fell on him."

"Well, of course," said the Baron, rising, "that would all depend upon
the height of the giraffe. Mine was the tallest one I ever saw."

"About how tall?" asked Ananias.

"Well," returned the Baron, thoughtfully, as if calculating, "did you
ever see the Eiffel Tower?"

"Yes," said Ananias.

"Well," observed the Baron, "I don't think my giraffe was more than
half as tall as that."

With which estimate the Baron bowed his guests out of the room, and
with a placid smile on his face, shook hands with himself.

"Mr. and Mrs. Ananias are charming people," he chuckled, "but amateurs
both--deadly amateurs."

[Illustration: "I reached the giraffe, raised myself to his back, crawled
along his neck and dropped fainting into the tree." _Chapter VIII._]




IX

DECORATION DAY IN THE CANNIBAL ISLANDS


"Uncle Munch," said Diavolo as he clambered up into the old warrior's
lap, "I don't suppose you could tell us a story about Decoration Day
could you?"

"I think I might try," said Mr. Munchausen, puffing thoughtfully upon
his cigar and making a ring with the smoke for Angelica to catch upon
her little thumb. "I might try--but it will all depend upon whether
you want me to tell you about Decoration Day as it is celebrated in
the United States, or the way a band of missionaries I once knew in
the Cannibal Islands observed it for twenty years or more."

"Why can't we have both stories?" said Angelica. "I think that would
be the nicest way. Two stories is twice as good as one."

"Well, I don't know," returned Mr. Munchausen. "You see the trouble is
that in the first instance I could tell you only what a beautiful
thing it is that every year the people have a day set apart upon which
they especially honour the memory of the noble fellows who lost their
lives in defence of their country. I'm not much of a poet and it takes
a poet to be able to express how beautiful and grand it all is, and so
I should be afraid to try it. Besides it might sadden your little
hearts to have me dwell upon the almost countless number of heroes who
let themselves be killed so that their fellow-citizens might live in
peace and happiness. I'd have to tell you about hundreds and hundreds
of graves scattered over the battle fields that no one knows about,
and which, because no one knows of them, are not decorated at all,
unless Nature herself is kind enough to let a little dandelion or a
daisy patch into the secret, so that they may grow on the green grass
above these forgotten, unknown heroes who left their homes, were shot
down and never heard of afterwards."

"Does all heroes get killed?" asked Angelica.

"No," said Mr. Munchausen. "I and a great many others lived through
the wars and are living yet."

"Well, how about the missionaries?" said Diavolo. "I didn't know they
had Decoration Day in the Cannibal Islands."

"I didn't either until I got there," returned the Baron. "But they
have and they have it in July instead of May. It was one of the most
curious things I ever saw and the natives, the men who used to be
cannibals, like it so much that if the missionaries were to forget it
they'd either remind them of it or have a celebration of their own. I
don't know whether I ever told you about my first experience with the
cannibals--did I?"

"I don't remember it, but if you had I would have," said Diavolo.

"So would I," said Angelica. "I remember most everything you say,
except when I want you to say it over again, and even then I haven't
forgotten it."

"Well, it happened this way," said the Baron. "It was when I was
nineteen years old. I sort of thought at that time I'd like to be a
sailor, and as my father believed in letting me try whatever I wanted
to do I took a position as first mate of a steam brig that plied
between San Francisco and Nepaul, taking San Francisco canned tomatoes
to Nepaul and bringing Nepaul pepper back to San Francisco, making
several dollars both ways. Perhaps I ought to explain to you that
Nepaul pepper is red, and hot; not as hot as a furnace fire, but hot
enough for your papa and myself when we order oysters at a club and
have them served so cold that we think they need a little more warmth
to make them palatable and digestible. You are not yet old enough to
know the meaning of such words as palatable and digestible, but some
day you will be and then you'll know what your Uncle means. At any
rate it was on the return voyage from Nepaul that the water tank on
the _Betsy S._ went stale and we had to stop at the first place we
could to fill it up with fresh water. So we sailed along until we came
in sight of an Island and the Captain appointed me and two sailors a
committee of three to go ashore and see if there was a spring anywhere
about. We went, and the first thing we knew we were in the midst of a
lot of howling, hungry savages, who were crazy to eat us. My
companions were eaten, but when it came to my turn I tried to reason
with the chief. 'Now see here, my friend,' said I, 'I'm perfectly
willing to be served up at your breakfast, if I can only be convinced
that you will enjoy eating me. What I don't want is to have my life
wasted!' 'That's reasonable enough,' said he. 'Have you got a sample
of yourself along for me to taste?' 'I have,' I replied, taking out a
bottle of Nepaul pepper, that by rare good luck I happened to have in
my pocket. 'That is a portion of my left foot powdered. It will give
you some idea of what I taste like,' I added. 'If you like that,
you'll like me. If you don't, you won't.'"

"That was fine," said Diavolo. "You told pretty near the truth, too,
Uncle Munch, because you are hot stuff yourself, ain't you?"

"I am so considered, my boy," said Mr. Munchausen. "The chief took a
teaspoonful of the pepper down at a gulp, and let me go when he
recovered. He said he guessed I wasn't quite his style, and he thought
I'd better depart before I set fire to the town. So I filled up the
water bag, got into the row-boat, and started back to the ship, but
the _Betsy S._ had gone and I was forced to row all the way to San
Francisco, one thousand, five hundred and sixty-two miles distant. The
captain and crew had given us all up for lost. I covered the distance
in six weeks, living on water and Nepaul pepper, and when I finally
reached home, I told my father that, after all, I was not so sure that
I liked a sailor's life. But I never forgot those cannibals or their
island, as you may well imagine. They and their home always interested
me hugely and I resolved if the fates ever drove me that way again, I
would go ashore and see how the people were getting on. The fates,
however, were a long time in drawing me that way again, for it was not
until July, ten years ago that I reached there the second time. I was
off on a yachting trip, with an English friend, when one afternoon we
dropped anchor off that Cannibal Island.

"'Let's go ashore,' said I. 'What for?' said my host; and then I told
him the story and we went, and it was well we did so, for it was then
and there that I discovered the new way the missionaries had of
celebrating Decoration Day.

"No sooner had we landed than we noticed that the Island had become
civilised. There were churches, and instead of tents and mud-hovels,
beautiful residences appeared here and there, through the trees. 'I
fancy this isn't the island,' said my host. 'There aren't any
cannibals about here.' I was about to reply indignantly, for I was
afraid he was doubting the truth of my story, when from the top of a
hill, not far distant, we heard strains of music. We went to see
whence it came, and what do you suppose we saw? Five hundred
villainous looking cannibals marching ten abreast along a fine street,
and, cheering them from the balconies of the houses that fronted on
the highway, were the missionaries and their friends and their
children and their wives.

"'This can't be the place, after all,' said my host again.

"'Yes it is,' said I, 'only it has been converted. They must be
celebrating some native festival.' Then as I spoke the procession
stopped and the head missionary followed by a band of beautiful girls,
came down from a platform and placed garlands of flowers and beautiful
wreaths on the shoulders and heads of those reformed cannibals. In
less than an hour every one of the huge black fellows was covered with
roses and pinks and fragrant flowers of all kinds, and then they
started on parade again. It was a fine sight, but I couldn't
understand what it was all done for until that night, when I dined
with the head missionary--and what do you suppose it was?"

"I give it up," said Diavolo, "maybe the missionaries thought the
cannibals didn't have enough clothes on."

"I guess I can't guess," said Angelica.

"They were celebrating Decoration Day," said Mr. Munchausen. "They
were strewing flowers on the graves of departed missionaries."

"You didn't tell us about any graves," said Diavolo.

[Illustration: "They were celebrating Decoration Day ... strewing
flowers on the graves of departed missionaries." _Chapter IX._]

"Why certainly I did," said the Baron. "The cannibals themselves were
the only graves those poor departed missionaries ever had. Every one
of those five hundred savages was the grave of a missionary, my dears,
and having been converted, and taught that it was not good to eat
their fellow-men, they did all in their power afterwards to show their
repentance, keeping alive the memory of the men they had treated so
badly by decorating themselves on memorial day--and one old fellow,
the savagest looking, but now the kindest-hearted being in the world,
used always to wear about his neck a huge sign, upon which he had
painted in great black letters:

                              HERE LIES
                         JOHN THOMAS WILKINS,
                               SAILOR.
                 DEPARTED THIS LIFE, MAY 24TH, 1861.
                   HE WAS A MAN OF SPLENDID TASTE.

"The old cannibal had eaten Wilkins and later when he had been
converted and realised that he himself was the grave of a worthy man,
as an expiation he devoted his life to the memory of John Thomas
Wilkins, and as a matter of fact, on the Cannibal Island Decoration
Day he would lie flat on the floor all the day, groaning under the
weight of a hundred potted plants, which he placed upon himself in
memory of Wilkins."

Here Mr. Munchausen paused for breath, and the twins went out into the
garden to try to imagine with the aid of a few practical experiments
how a cannibal would look with a hundred potted plants adorning his
person.




X

MR. MUNCHAUSEN'S ADVENTURE WITH A SHARK


                    Mr. and Mrs. Henry B. Ananias.
          _THURSDAYS._                         _CIMMERIA._

This was the card sent by the reporter of the _Gehenna Gazette_, and
Mrs. Ananias to Mr. Munchausen upon his return from a trip to mortal
realms concerning which many curious reports have crept into
circulation. Owing to a rumour persistently circulated at one time,
Mr. Munchausen had been eaten by a shark, and it was with the
intention of learning, if possible, the basis for the rumour that
Ananias and Sapphira called upon the redoubtable Baron of other days.

Mr. Munchausen graciously received the callers and asked what he could
do for them.

"Our readers, Mr. Munchausen," explained Ananias, "have been much
concerned over rumours of your death at the hands of a shark."

"Sharks have no hands," said the Baron quietly.

"Well--that aside," observed Ananias. "Were you killed by a shark?"

"Not that I recall," said the Baron. "I may have been, but I don't
remember it. Indeed I recall only one adventure with a shark. That
grew out of my mission on behalf of France to the Czar of Russia. I
carried letters once from the King of France to his Imperial Coolness
the Czar."

"What was the nature of the letters?" asked Ananias.

"I never knew," replied the Baron. "As I have said, it was a secret
mission, and the French Government never took me into its confidence.
The only thing I know about it is that I was sent to St. Petersburg,
and I went, and in the course of time I made myself much beloved of
both the people and his Majesty the Czar. I am the only person that
ever lived that was liked equally by both, and if I had attached
myself permanently to the Czar, Russia would have been a different
country to-day."

"What country would it have been, Mr. Munchausen," asked Sapphira
innocently, "Germany or Siam?"

"I can't specify, my dear madame," the Baron replied. "It wouldn't be
fair. But, at any rate, I went to Russia, and was treated warmly by
everybody, except the climate, which was, as it is at all times, very
freezing. That's the reason the Russian people like the climate. It is
the only thing the Czar can't change by Imperial decree, and the
people admire its independence and endure it for that reason. But as I
have said, everybody was pleased with me, and the Czar showed me
unusual attention. He gave fêtes in my honour. He gave the most
princely dinners, and I met the very best people in St. Petersburg,
and at one of these dinners I was invited to join a yachting party on
a cruise around the world.

"Well, of course, though a landsman in every sense of the word, I am
fond of yachting, and I immediately accepted the invitation. The yacht
we went on was the Boomski Zboomah, belonging to Prince--er--now
what was that Prince's name! Something like--er--Sheeroff or
Jibski--or--er--well, never mind that. I meet so many princes it is
difficult to remember their names. We'll say his name was Jibski."

"Suppose we do," said Ananias, with a jealous grin. "Jibski is such a
remarkable name. It will look well in print."

"All right," said the Baron, "Jibski be it. The yacht belonged to
Prince Jibski, and she was a beauty. There was a stateroom and a
steward for everybody on board, and nothing that could contribute to a
man's comfort was left unattended to. We set sail on the 23rd of
August, and after cruising about the North coast of Europe for a week
or two, we steered the craft south, and along about the middle of
September we reached the Amphibian Islands, and anchored. It was here
that I had my first and last experience with sharks. If they had been
plain, ordinary sharks I'd have had an easy time of it, but when you
get hold of these Amphibian sharks you are likely to get yourself into
twenty-three different kinds of trouble."

"My!" said Sapphira. "All those? Does the number include being struck
by lightning?"

"Yes," the Baron answered, "And when you remember that there are only
twenty-four different kinds altogether you can see what a peck of
trouble an Amphibian shark can get you into. I thought my last hour
had come when I met with him. You see when we reached the Amphibian
Islands, we naturally thought we'd like to go ashore and pick the
cocoanuts and raisins and other things that grow there, and when I got
upon dry land again I felt strongly tempted to go down upon the
beautiful little beach in the harbour and take a swim. Prince Jibski
advised me against it, but I was set upon going. He told me the place
was full of sharks, but I wasn't afraid because I was always a
remarkably rapid swimmer, and I felt confident of my ability, in case
I saw a shark coming after me, to swim ashore before he could possibly
catch me, provided I had ten yards start. So in I went leaving my gun
and clothing on the beach. Oh, it was fun! The water was quite warm,
and the sandy bottom of the bay was deliciously soft and pleasant to
the feet. I suppose I must have sported in the waves for ten or
fifteen minutes before the trouble came. I had just turned a
somersault in the water, when, as my head came to the surface, I saw
directly in front of me, the unmistakable fin of a shark, and to my
unspeakable dismay not more than five feet away. As I told you, if it
had been ten yards away I should have had no fear, but five feet meant
another story altogether. My heart fairly jumped into my mouth. It
would have sunk into my boots if I had had them on, but I hadn't, so
it leaped upward into my mouth as I turned to swim ashore, by which
time the shark had reduced the distance between us by one foot. I
feared that all was up with me, and was trying to think of an
appropriate set of last words, when Prince Jibski, noting my peril,
fired one of the yacht's cannon in our direction. Ordinarily this
would have been useless, for the yacht's cannon was never loaded with
anything but a blank charge, but in this instance it was better than
if it had been loaded with ball and shot, for not only did the sound
of the explosion attract the attention of the shark and cause him to
pause for a moment, but also the wadding from the gun dropped directly
upon my back, so showing that Prince Jibski's aim was not as good as
it might have been. Had the cannon been loaded with a ball or a shell,
you can very well understand how it would have happened that yours
truly would have been killed then and there."

"We should have missed you," said Ananias sweetly.

"Thanks," said the Baron. "But to resume. The shark's pause gave me
the start I needed, and the heat from the burning wadding right
between my shoulders caused me to redouble my efforts to get away from
the shark and it, so that I never swam faster in my life, and was soon
standing upon the shore, jeering at my fearful pursuer, who, strange
to say, showed no inclination to stop the chase now that I was, as I
thought, safely out of his reach. I didn't jeer very long I can tell
you, for in another minute I saw why the shark didn't stop chasing me,
and why Amphibian sharks are worse than any other kind. That shark had
not only fins like all other sharks to swim with, but he had likewise
three pairs of legs that he could use on land quite as well as he
could use the fins in the water. And then began the prettiest chase
you ever saw in your life. As he emerged from the water I grabbed up
my gun and ran. Round and round the island we tore, I ahead, he thirty
or forty yards behind, until I got to a place where I could stop
running and take a hasty shot at him. Then I aimed, and fired. My aim
was good, but struck one of the huge creature's teeth, broke it off
short, and bounded off to one side. This made him more angry than
ever, and he redoubled his efforts to catch me. I redoubled mine,
until I could get another shot at him. The second shot, like the
first, struck the creature in the teeth, only this time it was more
effective. The bullet hit his jaw lengthwise, and knocked every tooth
on that side of his head down his throat. So it went. I ran. He
pursued. I fired; he lost his teeth, until finally I had knocked out
every tooth he had, and then, of course, I wasn't afraid of him, and
let him come up with me. With his teeth he could have ground me to
atoms at one bite. Without them he was as powerless as a bowl of
currant jelly, and when he opened his huge jaws, as he supposed to
bite me in two, he was the most surprised looking fish you ever saw on
land or sea to discover that the effect his jaws had upon my safety
was about as great as had they been nothing but two feather bed
mattresses."

"You must have been badly frightened, though," said Ananias.

"No," said the Baron. "I laughed in the poor disappointed thing's
face, and with a howl of despair, he rushed back into the sea again. I
made the best time I could back to the yacht for fear he might return
with assistance."

"And didn't you ever see him again, Baron?" asked Sapphira.

"Yes, but only from the deck of the yacht as we were weighing anchor,"
said Mr. Munchausen. "I saw him and a dozen others like him doing
precisely what I thought they would do, going ashore to search me out
so as to have a little cold Munch for dinner. I'm glad they were
disappointed, aren't you?"

"Yes, indeed," said Ananias and Sapphira, but not warmly.

Ananias was silent for a moment, and then walking over to one of the
bookcases, he returned in a moment, bringing with him a huge atlas.

"Where are the Amphibian Islands, Mr. Munchausen?" he said, opening
the book. "Show them to me on the map. I'd like to print the map with
my story."

"Oh, I can't do that," said the Baron, "because they aren't on the map
any more. When I got back to Europe and told the map-makers about the
dangers to man on those islands, they said that the interests of
humanity demanded that they be lost. So they took them out of all the
geographies, and all the cyclopædias, and all the other books, so that
nobody ever again should be tempted to go there; and there isn't a
school-teacher or a sailor in the world to-day who could tell you
where they are."

"But, you know, don't you?" persisted Ananias.

"Well, I did," said the Baron; "but, really I have had to remember so
many other things that I have forgotten that. All that I know is that
they were named from the fact that they were infested by Amphibious
animals, which are animals that can live on land as well as on water."

"How strange!" said Sapphira.

"It's just too queer for anything," said Ananias, "but on the whole
I'm not surprised."

And the Baron said he was glad to hear it.

[Illustration: "I laughed in the poor disappointed thing's face, and
with a howl of despair he rushed back into the sea." _Chapter X._]




XI

THE BARON AS A RUNNER


The Twins had been on the lookout for the Baron for at least an hour,
and still he did not come, and the little Imps were beginning to feel
blue over the prospect of getting the usual Sunday afternoon story. It
was past four o'clock, and for as long a time as they could remember
the Baron had never failed to arrive by three o'clock. All sorts of
dreadful possibilities came up before their mind's eye. They pictured
the Baron in accidents of many sorts. They conjured up visions of him
lying wounded beneath the ruins of an apartment house, or something
else equally heavy that might have fallen upon him on his way from his
rooms to the station, but that he was more than wounded they did not
believe, for they knew that the Baron was not the sort of man to be
killed by anything killing under the sun.

"I wonder where he can be?" said Angelica, uneasily to her brother,
who was waiting with equal anxiety for their common friend.

"Oh, he's all right!" said Diavolo, with a confidence he did not
really feel. "He'll turn up all right, and even if he's two hours late
he'll be here on time according to his own watch. Just you wait and
see."

And they did wait and they did see. They waited for ten minutes, when
the Baron drove up, smiling as ever, but apparently a little out of
breath. I should not dare to say that he was really out of breath, but
he certainly did seem to be so, for he panted visibly, and for two or
three minutes after his arrival was quite unable to ask the Imps the
usual question as to their very good health. Finally, however, the
customary courtesies of the greeting were exchanged, and the decks
were cleared for action.

"What kept you, Uncle Munch?" asked the Twins, as they took up their
usual position on the Baron's knees.

"What what?" replied the warrior. "Kept me? Why, am I late?"

"Two hours," said the Twins. "Dad gave you up and went out for a
walk."

"Nonsense," said the Baron. "I'm never that late."

Here he looked at his watch.

"Why I do seem to be behind time. There must be something wrong with
our time-pieces. I can't be two hours late, you know."

"Well, let's say you are on time, then," said the Twins. "What kept
you?"

"A very funny accident on the railroad," said the Baron lighting a
cigar. "Queerest accident that ever happened to me on the railroad,
too. Our engine ran away."

The Twins laughed as if they thought the Baron was trying to fool
them.

"Really," said the Baron. "I left town as usual on the two o'clock
train, which, as you know, comes through in half an hour, without a
stop. Everything went along smoothly until we reached the Vitriol
Reservoir, when much to the surprise of everybody the train came to a
stand-still. I supposed there was a cow on the track, and so kept in
my seat for three or four minutes as did every one else. Finally the
conductor came through and called to the brakeman at the end of our
car to see if his brakes were all right.

"'It's the most unaccountable thing,' he said to me. 'Here's this
train come to a dead stop and I can't see why. There isn't a brake out
of order on any one of the cars, and there isn't any earthly reason
why we shouldn't go ahead.'

"'Maybe somebody's upset a bottle of glue on the track,' said I. I
always like to chaff the conductor, you know, though as far as that is
concerned, I remember once when I was travelling on a South American
Railway our train was stopped by highwaymen, who smeared the tracks
with a peculiar sort of gum. They'd spread it over three miles of
track, and after the train had gone lightly over two miles of it the
wheels stuck so fast ten engines couldn't have moved it. That was a
terrible affair."

"I don't think we ever heard of that, did we?" asked Angelica.

"I don't remember it," said Diavolo.

"Well, you would have remembered it, if you had ever heard of it,"
said the Baron. "It was too dreadful to be forgotten--not for us, you
know, but for the robbers. It was one of the Imperial trains in
Brazil, and if it hadn't been for me the Emperor would have been
carried off and held for ransom. The train was brought to a
stand-still by this gluey stuff, as I have told you, and the
desperadoes boarded the cars and proceeded to rifle us of our
possessions. The Emperor was in the car back of mine, and the robbers
made directly for him, but fathoming their intention I followed close
upon their heels.

"'You are our game,' said the chief robber, tapping the Emperor on the
shoulder, as he entered the Imperial car.

"'Hands off,' I cried throwing the ruffian to one side.

"He scowled dreadfully at me, the Emperor looked surprised, and
another one of the robbers requested to know who was I that I should
speak with so much authority. 'Who am I?' said I, with a wink at the
Emperor. 'Who am I? Who else but Baron Munchausen of the Bodenwerder
National Guard, ex-friend of Napoleon of France, intimate of the
Mikado of Japan, and famed the world over as the deadliest shot in two
hemispheres.'

"The desperadoes paled visibly as I spoke, and after making due
apologies for interfering with the train, fled shrieking from the car.
They had heard of me before.

"'I thank you, sir,' began the Emperor, as the would-be assassins
fled, but I cut him short. 'They must not be allowed to escape,' I
said, and with that I started in pursuit of the desperate fellows,
overtook them, and glued them with the gum they had prepared for our
detention to the face of a precipice that rose abruptly from the side
of the railway, one hundred and ten feet above the level. There I left
them. We melted the glue from the tracks by means of our steam heating
apparatus, and were soon booming merrily on our way to Rio Janeiro
when I was fêted and dined continuously for weeks by the people,
though strange to say the Emperor's behaviour toward me was very
cool."

"And did the robbers ever get down?" asked the Twins.

"Yes, but not in a way they liked," Mr. Munchausen replied. "The sun
came out, and after a week or two melted the glue that held them to
the precipice, whereupon they fell to its base and were shattered into
pieces so small there wasn't an atom of them to be found when a month
later I passed that way again on my return trip."

"And didn't the Emperor treat you well, Uncle Munch?" asked the Imps.

"No--as I told you he was very cool towards me, and I couldn't
understand it, then, but I do now," said the Baron. "You see he was
very much in need of ready cash, the Emperor was, and as the taxpayers
were already growling about the expenses of the Government he didn't
dare raise the money by means of a tax. So he arranged with the
desperadoes to stop the train, capture him, and hold him for ransom.
Then when the ransom came along he was going to divide up with them.
My sudden appearance, coupled with my determination to rescue him,
spoiled his plan, you see, and so he naturally wasn't very grateful.
Poor fellow, I was very sorry for it afterward, because he really was
an excellent ruler, and his plan of raising the money he needed wasn't
a bit less honest than most other ways rulers employ to obtain revenue
for State purposes."

"Well, now, let's get back to the runaway engine," said the Twins.
"You can tell us more about South America after you get through with
that. How did the engine come to run away?"

"It was simple enough," said the Baron. "The engineer, after starting
the train came back into the smoking car to get a light for his pipe,
and while he was there the coupling-pin between the engine and the
train broke, and off skipped the engine twice as fast as it had been
going before. The relief from the weight of the train set its pace to
a mile a minute instead of a mile in two minutes, and there we were at
a dead stop in front of the Vitriol Station with nothing to move us
along. When the engineer saw what had happened he fainted dead away,
because you know if a collision had occurred between the runaway
engine and the train ahead he would have been held responsible."

"Couldn't the fireman stop the engine?" asked the Twins.

"No. That is, it wouldn't be his place to do it, and these railway
fellows are queer about that sort of thing," said the Baron. "The
engineers would go out upon a strike if the railroad were to permit a
stoker to manage the engine, and besides that the stoker wouldn't
undertake to do it at a stoker's wages, so there wasn't any help to be
looked for there. The conductor happened to be nearsighted, and so he
didn't find out that the engine was missing until he had wasted ten or
twenty minutes examining the brakes, by which time, of course, the
runaway was miles and miles up the track. Then the engineer came to,
and began to wring his hands and moan in a way that was heart-rending.
The conductor, too, began to cry, and all the brakemen left the train
and took to the woods. They weren't going to have any of the
responsibility for the accident placed on their shoulders. Whether
they will ever turn up again I don't know. But I realised as soon as
anybody else that something had to be done, so I rushed into the
telegraph office and telegraphed to all the station masters between
the Vitriol Reservoir and Cimmeria to clear the track of all trains,
freight, local, or express, or somebody would be hurt, and that I
myself would undertake to capture the runaway engine. This they all
promised to do, whereupon I bade good-bye to my fellow-travellers, and
set off up the track myself at full speed. In a minute I strode past
Sulphur Springs, covering at least eight ties at a stretch. In two
minutes I thundered past Lava Hurst, where I learned that the engine
had twenty miles start of me. I made a rapid calculation mentally--I
always was strong in mental arithmetic, which showed that unless I was
tripped up or got side-tracked somewhere I might overtake the runaway
before it reached Noxmere. Redoubling my efforts, my stride increased
to twenty ties at a jump, and I made the next five miles in two
minutes. It sounds impossible, but really it isn't so. It is hard to
run as fast as that at the start, but when you have got your start the
impetus gathered in the first mile's run sends you along faster in the
second, and so your speed increases by its own force until finally you
go like the wind. At Gasdale I had gained two miles on the engine, at
Sneakskill I was only fifteen miles behind, and upon my arrival at
Noxmere there was scarcely a mile between me and the fugitive.
Unfortunately a large crowd had gathered at Noxmere to see me pass
through, and some small boy had brought a dog along with him and the
dog stood directly in my path. If I ran over the dog it would kill him
and might trip me up. If I jumped with the impetus I had there was no
telling where I would land. It was a hard point to decide either way,
but I decided in favour of the jump, simply to save the dog's life,
for I love animals. I landed three miles up the road and ahead of the
engine, though I didn't know that until I had run ten miles farther
on, leaving the engine a hundred yards behind me at every stride. It
was at Miasmatica that I discovered my error and then I tried to stop.
It was almost in vain; I dragged my feet over the ties, but could only
slow down to a three-minute gait. Then I tried to turn around and slow
up running backward; this brought my speed down ten minutes to the
mile, which made it safe for me to run into a hay-stack at the side of
the railroad just this side of Cimmeria. Then, of course, I was all
right. I could sit down and wait for the engine, which came booming
along forty minutes later. As it approached I prepared to board it,
and in five minutes was in full control. That made it easy enough for
me to get back here without further trouble. I simply reversed the
lever, and back we came faster than I can describe, and just one hour
and a half from the time of the mishap the runaway engine was restored
to its deserted train and I reached your station here in good order. I
should have walked up, but for my weariness after that exciting run,
which as you see left me very much out of breath, and which made it
necessary for me to hire that worn-out old hack instead of walking up
as is my wont."

[Illustration: "This brought my speed down ten minutes to the mile,
which made it safe for me to run into a haystack." _Chapter XI._]

"Yes, we see you are out of breath," said the Twins, as the Baron
paused. "Would you like to lie down and take a rest?"

"Above all things," said the Baron. "I'll take a nap here until your
father returns," which he proceeded at once to do.

While he slept the two Imps gazed at him curiously, Angelica, a little
suspiciously.

"Bub," said she, in a whisper, "do you think that was a true story?"

"Well, I don't know," said Diavolo. "If anybody else than Uncle Munch
had told it, I wouldn't have believed it. But he hates untruth. I know
because he told me so."

"That's the way I feel about it," said Angelica. "Of course, he can
run as fast as that, because he is very strong, but what I can't see
is how an engine ever could run away from its train."

"That's what stumps me," said Diavolo.




XII

MR. MUNCHAUSEN MEETS HIS MATCH

(Reported by Henry W. Ananias for the _Gehenna Gazette_.)


When Mr. Munchausen, accompanied by Ananias and Sapphira, after a long
and tedious journey from Cimmeria to the cool and wooded heights of
the Blue Sulphur Mountains, entered the portals of the hotel where the
greater part of his summers are spent, the first person to greet him
was Beelzebub Sandboy,--the curly-headed Imp who acted as "Head Front"
of the Blue Sulphur Mountain House, his eyes a-twinkle and his swift
running feet as ever ready for a trip to any part of the hostelry and
back. Beelzy, as the Imp was familiarly known, as the party entered,
was in the act of carrying a half-dozen pitchers of iced-water
upstairs to supply thirsty guests with the one thing needful and best
to quench that thirst, and in his excitement at catching sight once
again of his ancient friend the Baron, managed to drop two of the
pitchers with a loud crash upon the office floor. This, however, was
not noticed by the powers that ruled. Beelzy was not perfect, and as
long as he smashed less than six pitchers a day on an average the
management was disposed not to complain.

"There goes my friend Beelzy," said the Baron, as the pitchers fell.
"I am delighted to see him. I was afraid he would not be here this
year since I understand he has taken up the study of theology."

"Theology?" cried Ananias. "In Hades?"

"How foolish," said Sapphira. "We don't need preachers here."

"He'd make an excellent one," said Mr. Munchausen. "He is a lad of
wide experience and his fish and bear stories are wonderful. If he can
make them gee, as he would put it, with his doctrines he would prove a
tremendous success. Thousands would flock to hear him for his bear
stories alone. As for the foolishness of his choice, I think it is a
very wise one. Everybody can't be a stoker, you know."

At any rate, whatever the reasons for Beelzebub's presence, whether he
had given up the study of theology or not, there he was plying his old
vocation with the same perfection of carelessness as of yore, and
apparently no farther along in the study of theology than he was the
year before when he bade Mr. Munchausen "good-bye forever" with the
statement that now that he was going to lead a pious life the chances
were he'd never meet his friend again.

"I don't see why they keep such a careless boy as that," said
Sapphira, as Beelzy at the first landing turned to grin at Mr.
Munchausen, emptying the contents of one of his pitchers into the lap
of a nervous old gentleman in the office below.

"He adds an element of excitement to a not over-exciting place,"
explained Mr. Munchausen. "On stormy days here the men make bets on
what fool thing Beelzy will do next. He blacked all the russet shoes
with stove polish one year, and last season in the rush of his daily
labours he filled up the water-cooler with soft coal instead of ice.
He's a great bell-boy, is my friend Beelzy."

A little while later when Mr. Munchausen and his party had been shown
to their suite, Beelzy appeared in their drawing-room and was warmly
greeted by Mr. Munchausen, who introduced him to Mr. and Mrs. Ananias.

"Well," said Mr. Munchausen, "you're here again, are you?"

"No, indeed," said Beelzy. "I ain't here this year. I'm over at the
Coal-Yards shovellin' snow. I'm my twin brother that died three years
before I was born."

"How interesting," said Sapphira, looking at the boy through her
lorgnette.

Beelzy bowed in response to the compliment and observed to the Baron:

"You ain't here yourself this season, be ye?"

"No," said Mr. Munchausen, drily. "I've gone abroad. You've given up
theology I presume?"

"Sorter," said Beelzy. "It was lonesome business and I hadn't been at
it more'n twenty minutes when I realised that bein' a missionary ain't
all jam and buckwheats. It's kind o' dangerous too, and as I didn't
exactly relish the idea o' bein' et up by Samoans an' Feejees I made
up my mind to give it up an' stick to bell-boyin' for another season
any how; but I'll see you later, Mr. Munchausen. I've got to hurry
along with this iced-water. It's overdue now, and we've got the
kickinest lot o' folks here this year you ever see. One man here the
other night got as mad as hookey because it took forty minutes to soft
bile an egg. Said two minutes was all that was necessary to bile an
egg softer'n mush, not understanding anything about the science of
eggs in a country where hens feeds on pebbles."

"Pebbles?" cried Mr. Munchausen. "What, do they lay Roc's eggs?"

Beelzy grinned.

"No, sir--they lay hen's eggs all right, but they're as hard as Adam's
aunt."

"I never heard of chickens eating pebbles," observed Sapphira with a
frown. "Do they really relish them?"

"I don't know, Ma'am," said Beelzy. "I ain't never been on speakin'
terms with the hens, Ma'am, and they never volunteered no information.
They eat 'em just the same. They've got to eat something and up here
on these mountains there ain't anything but gravel for 'em to eat.
That's why they do it. Then when it comes to the eggs, on a diet like
that, cobblestones ain't in it with 'em for hardness, and when you
come to bite 'em it takes a week to get 'em soft, an' a steam drill to
get 'em open--an' this feller kicked at forty minutes! Most likely
he's swearin' around upstairs now because this iced-water ain't came;
and it ain't more than two hours since he ordered it neither."

"What an unreasonable gentleman," said Sapphira.

"Ain't he though!" said Beelzy. "And he ain't over liberal neither.
He's been here two weeks now and all the money I've got out of him was
a five-dollar bill I found on his bureau yesterday morning. There's
more money in theology than there is in him."

With this Beelzebub grabbed up the pitcher of water, and bounded out
of the room like a frightened fawn. He disappeared into the dark of
the corridor, and a few moments later was evidently tumbling head over
heels up stairs, if the sounds that greeted the ears of the party in
the drawing-room meant anything.

The next morning when there was more leisure for Beelzy the Baron
inquired as to the state of his health.

"Oh it's been pretty good," said he. "Pretty good. I'm all right now,
barrin' a little gout in my right foot, and ice-water on my knee, an'
a crick in my back, an' a tired feelin' all over me generally. Ain't
had much to complain about. Had the measles in December, and the mumps
in February; an' along about the middle o' May the whoopin' cough got
a holt of me; but as it saved my life I oughtn't to kick about that."

Here Beelzy looked gratefully at an invisible something--doubtless the
recollection in the thin air of his departed case of whooping cough,
for having rescued him from an untimely grave.

"That is rather curious, isn't it?" queried Sapphira, gazing intently
into the boy's eyes. "I don't exactly understand how the whooping
cough could save anybody's life, do you, Mr. Munchausen?"

"Beelzy, this lady would have you explain the situation, and I must
confess that I am myself somewhat curious to learn the details of this
wonderful rescue," said Mr. Munchausen.

"Well, I must say," said Beelzy, with a pleased smile at the very
great consequence of his exploit in the lady's eyes, "if I was a-goin'
to start out to save people's lives generally I wouldn't have thought
a case o' whoopin' cough would be of much use savin' a man from
drownin', and I'm sure if a feller fell out of a balloon it wouldn't
help him much if he had ninety dozen cases o' whoopin' cough concealed
on his person; but for just so long as I'm the feller that has to come
up here every June, an' shoo the bears out o' the hotel, I ain't never
goin' to be without a spell of whoopin' cough along about that time if
I can help it. I wouldn't have been here now if it hadn't been for
it."

"You referred just now," said Sapphira, "to shooing bears out of the
hotel. May I inquire what useful function in the ménage of a hotel a
bear-shooer performs?"

"What useful what?" asked Beelzy.

"Function--duty--what does the duty of a bear-shooer consist in?"
explained Mr. Munchausen. "Is he a blacksmith who shoes bears instead
of horses?"

"He's a bear-chaser," explained Beelzy, "and I'm it," he added. "That,
Ma'am, is the function of a bear-shooer in the menagerie of a hotel."

Sapphira having expressed herself as satisfied, Beelzebub continued.

"You see this here house is shut up all winter, and when everybody's
gone and left it empty the bears come down out of the mountains and
use it instead of a cave. It's more cosier and less windier than their
dens. So when the last guest has gone, and all the doors are locked,
and the band gone into winter quarters, down come the bears and take
possession. They generally climb through some open window somewhere.
They divide up all the best rooms accordin' to their position in bear
society and settle down to a regular hotel life among themselves."

"But what do they feed upon?" asked Sapphira.

"Oh they'll eat anything when they're hungry," said Beelzy. "Sofa
cushions, parlor rugs, hotel registers--anything they can fasten their
teeth to. Last year they came in through the cupola, burrowin' down
through the snow to get at it, and there they stayed enjoyin' life out
o' reach o' the wind and storm, snug's bugs in rugs. Year before last
there must ha' been a hundred of 'em in the hotel when I got here, but
one by one I got rid of 'em. Some I smoked out with some cigars Mr.
Munchausen gave me the summer before; some I deceived out, gettin' 'em
to chase me through the winders, an' then doublin' back on my tracks
an' lockin' 'em out. It was mighty wearin' work.

"Last June there was twice as many. By actual tab I shooed two hundred
and eight bears and a panther off into the mountains. When the last
one as I thought disappeared into the woods I searched the house from
top to bottom to see if there was any more to be got rid of. Every
blessed one of the five hundred rooms I went through, and not a bear
was left that I could see. I can tell you, I was glad, because there
was a partickerly ugly run of 'em this year, an' they gave me a pile
o' trouble. They hadn't found much to eat in the hotel, an' they was
disappointed and cross. As a matter of fact, the only things they
found in the place they could eat was a piano stool and an old hair
trunk full o' paper-covered novels, which don't make a very hearty
meal for two hundred and eight bears and a panther."

"I should say not," said Sapphira, "particularly if the novels were as
light as most of them are nowadays."

"I can't say as to that," said Beelzy. "I ain't got time to read 'em
and so I ain't any judge. But all this time I was sufferin' like
hookey with awful spasms of whoopin' cough. I whooped so hard once it
smashed one o' the best echoes in the place all to flinders, an' of
course that made the work twice as harder. So, naturally, when I found
there warn't another bear left in the hotel, I just threw myself down
anywhere, and slept. My! how I slept. I don't suppose anything ever
slept sounder'n I did. And then it happened."

Beelzy gave his trousers a hitch and let his voice drop to a stage
whisper that lent a wondrous impressiveness to his narration.

"As I was a-layin' there unconscious, dreamin' of home and father, a
great big black hungry bruin weighin' six hundred and forty-three
pounds, that had been hidin' in the bread oven in the bakery, where I
hadn't thought of lookin' for him, came saunterin' along, hummin' a
little tune all by himself, and lickin' his chops with delight at the
idee of havin' me raw for his dinner. I lay on unconscious of my
danger, until he got right up close, an' then I waked up, an' openin'
my eyes saw this great black savage thing gloatin' over me an' tears
of joy runnin' out of his mouth as he thought of the choice meal he
was about to have. He was sniffin' my bang when I first caught sight
of him."

"Mercy!" cried Sapphira, "I should think you'd have died of fright."

[Illustration: "At the first whoop Mr. Bear jumped ten feet and fell
over backwards on the floor." _Chapter XII._]

"I did," said Beelzy, politely, "but I came to life again in a minute.
'Oh Lor!' says I, as I see how hungry he was. 'This here's the end o'
me;' at which the bear looked me straight in the eye, licked his chops
again, and was about to take a nibble off my right ear when 'Whoop!' I
had a spasm of whoopin'. Well, Ma'am, I guess you know what that
means. There ain't nothin' more uncanny, more terrifyin' in the whole
run o' human noises, barrin' a German Opery, than the whoop o' the
whoopin' cough. At the first whoop Mr. Bear jumped ten feet and fell
over backwards onto the floor; at the second he scrambled to his feet
and put for the door, but stopped and looked around hopin' he was
mistaken, when I whooped a third time. The third did the business.
That third whoop would have scared Indians. It was awful. It was like
a tornado blowin' through a fog-horn with a megaphone in front of it.
When he heard that, Mr. Bear turned on all four of his heels and
started on a scoot up into the woods that must have carried him ten
miles before I quit coughin'.

"An' that's why, Ma'am, I say that when you've got to shoo bears for a
livin', an attack o' whoopin' cough is a useful thing to have around."

Saying which, Beelzy departed to find Number 433's left boot which he
had left at Number 334's door by some odd mistake.

"What do you think of that, Mr. Munchausen?" asked Sapphira, as Beelzy
left the room.

"I don't know," said Mr. Munchausen, with a sigh. "I'm inclined to
think that I am a trifle envious of him. The rest of us are not in his
class."




XIII

WRIGGLETTO


It was in the afternoon of a beautiful summer day, and Mr. Munchausen
had come up from the simmering city of Cimmeria to spend a day or two
with Diavolo and Angelica and their venerable parents. They had all
had dinner, and were now out on the back piazza overlooking the
magnificent river Styx, which flowed from the mountains to the sea,
condescending on its way thither to look in upon countless
insignificant towns which had grown up on its banks, among which was
the one in which Diavolo and Angelica had been born and lived all
their lives. Mr. Munchausen was lying comfortably in a hammock,
collecting his thoughts.

Angelica was somewhat depressed, but Diavolo was jubilant and all
because in the course of a walk they had had that morning Diavolo had
killed a snake.

"It was fine sport," said Diavolo. "He was lying there in the sun, and
I took a stick and put him out of his misery in two minutes."

Here Diavolo illustrated the process by whacking the Baron over his
waist-coat with a small malacca stick he carried.

"Well, I didn't like it," said Angelica. "I don't care for snakes, but
somehow or other it seems to me we'd ought to have left him alone. He
wasn't hurting anybody off there. If he'd come walking on our place,
that would have been one thing, but we went walking where he was, and
he had as much right to take a sun-bath there as we had."

"That's true enough," put in Mr. Munchausen, resolved after Diavolo's
whack, to side against him. "You've just about hit it, Angelica. It
wasn't polite of you in the first place, to disturb his snakeship in
his nap, and having done so, I can't see why Diavolo wanted to kill
him."

"Oh, pshaw!" said Diavolo, airily. "What's snakes good for except to
kill? I'll kill 'em every chance I get. They aren't any good."

"All right," said Mr. Munchausen, quietly. "I suppose you know all
about it; but I know a thing or two about snakes myself that do not
exactly agree with what you say. They are some good sometimes, and, as
a matter of fact, as a general rule, they are less apt to attack you
without reason than you are to attack them. A snake is rather inclined
to mind its own business unless he finds it necessary to do otherwise.
Occasionally too you'll find a snake with a truly amiable character.
I'll never forget my old pet Wriggletto, for instance, and as long as
I remember him I can't help having a warm corner for snakes in my
heart."

Here Mr. Munchausen paused and puffed thoughtfully on his cigar as a
far-away half-affectionate look came into his eye.

"Who was Wriggletto?" asked Diavolo, transferring a half dollar from
Mr. Munchausen's pocket to his own.

"Who was he?" cried Mr. Munchausen. "You don't mean to say that I have
never told you about Wriggletto, my pet boa-constrictor, do you?"

"You never told me," said Angelica. "But I'm not everybody. Maybe
you've told some other little Imps."

"No, indeed!" said Mr. Munchausen. "You two are the only little Imps I
tell stories to, and as far as I am concerned, while I admit you are
not everybody you are somebody and that's more than everybody is.
Wriggletto was a boa-constrictor I once knew in South America, and he
was without exception, the most remarkable bit of a serpent I ever
met. Genial, kind, intelligent, grateful and useful, and, after I'd
had him a year or two, wonderfully well educated. He could write with
himself as well as you or I can with a pen. There's a recommendation
for you. Few men are all that--and few boa-constrictors either, as far
as that goes. I admit Wriggletto was an exception to the general run
of serpents, but he was all that I claim for him, nevertheless."

"What kind of a snake did you say he was?" asked Diavolo.

"A boa-constrictor," said Mr. Munchausen, "and I knew him from his
childhood. I first encountered Wriggletto about ten miles out of Para
on the river Amazon. He was being swallowed by a larger
boa-constrictor, and I saved his life by catching hold of his tail and
pulling him out just as the other was getting ready to give the last
gulp which would have taken Wriggletto in completely, and placed him
beyond all hope of ever being saved."

"What was the other boa doing while you were saving Wriggletto?" asked
Diavolo, who was fond always of hearing both sides to every question,
and whose father, therefore, hoped he might some day grow up to be a
great judge, or at least serve with distinction upon a jury.

"He couldn't do anything," returned Mr. Munchausen. "He was powerless
as long as Wriggletto's head stuck in his throat and just before I got
the smaller snake extracted I killed the other one by cutting off his
tail behind his ears. It was not a very dangerous rescue on my part as
long as Wriggletto was likely to be grateful. I must confess for a
minute I was afraid he might not comprehend all I had done for him,
and it was just possible he might attack me, but the hug he gave me
when he found himself free once more was reassuring. He wound himself
gracefully around my body, squeezed me gently and then slid off into
the road again, as much as to say 'Thank you, sir. You're a brick.'
After that there was nothing Wriggletto would not do for me. He
followed me everywhere I went from that time on. He seemed to learn
all in an instant that there were hundreds of little things to be done
about the house of an old bachelor like myself which a willing serpent
could do, and he made it his business to do those things: like picking
up my collars from the floor, and finding my studs for me when they
rolled under the bureau, and a thousand and one other little services
of a like nature, and when you, Master Diavolo, try in future to say
that snakes are only good to kill and are of no use to any one, you
must at least make an exception in favour of Wriggletto."

"I will," said Diavolo, "But you haven't told us of the other useful
things he did for you yet."

"I was about to do so," said Mr. Munchausen. "In the first place,
before he learned how to do little things about the house for me,
Wriggletto acted as a watch-dog and you may be sure that nobody ever
ventured to prowl around my house at night while Wriggletto slept out
on the lawn. Para was quite full of conscienceless fellows, too, at
that time, any one of whom would have been glad to have a chance to
relieve me of my belongings if they could get by my watch-snake. Two
of them tried it one dark stormy night, and Wriggletto when he
discovered them climbing in at my window, crawled up behind them and
winding his tail about them crept down to the banks of the Amazon,
dragging them after him. There he tossed them into the river, and came
back to his post once more."

"Did you see him do it, Uncle Munch?" asked Angelica.

"No, I did not. I learned of it afterwards. Wriggletto himself said
never a word. He was too modest for that," said Mr. Munchausen. "One
of the robbers wrote a letter to the Para newspapers about it,
complaining that any one should be allowed to keep a reptile like that
around, and suggested that anyhow people using snakes in place of dogs
should be compelled to license them, and put up a sign at their gates:

                         BEWARE OF THE SNAKE!

"The man never acknowledged, of course, that he was the robber,--said
that he was calling on business when the thing happened,--but he
didn't say what his business was, but I knew better, and later on the
other robber and he fell out, and they confessed that the business
they had come on was to take away a few thousand gold coins of the
realm which I was known to have in the house locked in a steel chest.

"I bought Wriggletto a handsome silver collar after that, and it was
generally understood that he was the guardian of my place, and robbers
bothered me no more. Then he was finer than a cat for rats. On very
hot days he would go off into the cellar, where it was cool, and lie
there with his mouth wide open and his eyes shut, and catch rats by
the dozens. They'd run around in the dark, and the first thing they'd
know they'd stumble into Wriggletto's mouth; and he swallowed them and
licked his chops afterwards, just as you or I do when we've swallowed
a fine luscious oyster or a clam.

"But pleasantest of all the things Wriggletto did for me--and he was
untiring in his attentions in that way--was keeping me cool on hot
summer nights. Para as you may have heard is a pretty hot place at
best, lying in a tropical region as it does, but sometimes it is awful
for a man used to the Northern climate, as I was. The act of fanning
one's self, so far from cooling one off, makes one hotter than ever.
Maybe you remember how it was with the elephant in the poem:

  "'Oh my, oh dear!' the elephant said,
    'It is so awful hot!
  I've fanned myself for seventy weeks,
    And haven't cooled a jot.'

"And that was the way it was with me in Para on hot nights. I'd fan
and fan and fan, but I couldn't get cool until Wriggletto became a
member of my family, and then I was all right. He used to wind his
tail about a huge palm-leaf fan I had cut in the forest, so large that
I couldn't possibly handle it myself, and he'd wave it to and fro by
the hour, with the result that my house was always the breeziest place
in Para."

"Where is Wriggletto now?" asked Diavolo.

"Heigho!" sighed Mr. Munchausen. "He died, poor fellow, and all
because of that silver collar I gave him. He tried to swallow a jibola
that entered my house one night on wickedness intent, and while
Wriggletto's throat was large enough when he stretched it to take down
three jibolas, with a collar on which wouldn't stretch he couldn't
swallow one. He didn't know that, unfortunately, and he kept on trying
until the jibola got a quarter way down and then he stuck. Each
swallow, of course, made the collar fit more tightly and finally poor
Wriggletto choked himself to death. I felt so badly about it that I
left Para within a month, but meanwhile I had a suit of clothes made
out of Wriggletto's skin, and wore it for years, and then, when the
clothes began to look worn, I had the skin re-tanned and made over
into shoes and slippers. So you see that even after death he was
useful to me. He was a faithful snake, and that is why when I hear
people running down all snakes I tell the story of Wriggletto."

[Illustration: "He used to wind his tail about a fan and he'd wave it
to and fro by the hour." _Chapter XIII._]

There was a pause for a few moments, when Diavolo said, "Uncle Munch,
is that a true story you've been giving us?"

"True?" cried Mr. Munchausen. "True? Why, my dear boy, what a
question! If you don't believe it, bring me your atlas, and I'll show
you just where Para is."

Diavolo did as he was told, and sure enough, Mr. Munchausen did
exactly as he said he would, which Diavolo thought was very
remarkable, but he still was not satisfied.

"You said he could write as well with himself as you or I could with a
pen, Uncle Munch," he said. "How was that?"

"Why that was simple enough," explained Mr. Munchausen. "You see he
was very black, and thirty-nine feet long and remarkably supple and
slender. After a year of hard study he learned to bunch himself into
letters, and if he wanted to say anything to me he'd simply form
himself into a written sentence. Indeed his favourite attitude when in
repose showed his wonderful gift in chirography as well as his
affection for me. If you will get me a card I will prove it."

Diavolo brought Mr. Munchausen the card and upon it he drew the
following:

[Illustration: A snake in the form of 'UncleMunch']

"There," said Mr. Munchausen. "That's the way Wriggletto always used
to lie when he was at rest. His love for me was very affecting."




XIV

THE POETIC JUNE-BUG, TOGETHER WITH SOME REMARKS ON THE GILLYHOOLY BIRD


"Uncle Munch," said Diavolo one afternoon as a couple of bicyclers
sped past the house at breakneck speed, "which would you rather have,
a bicycle or a horse?"

"Well, I must say, my boy, that is a difficult question to answer,"
Mr. Munchausen replied after scratching his head dubiously for a few
minutes. "You might as well ask a man which he prefers, a hammock or a
steam-yacht. To that question I should reply that if I wanted to sell
it, I'd rather have a steam-yacht, but for a pleasant swing on a cool
piazza in midsummer or under the apple-trees, a hammock would be far
preferable. Steam-yachts are not much good to swing in under an apple
tree, and very few piazzas that I know of are big enough--"

"Oh, now, you know what I mean, Uncle Munch," Diavolo retorted,
tapping Mr. Munchausen upon the end of his nose, for a twinkle in Mr.
Munchausen's eye seemed to indicate that he was in one of his chaffing
moods, and a greater tease than Mr. Munchausen when he felt that way
no one has ever known. "I mean for horse-back riding, which would you
rather have?"

"Ah, that's another matter," returned Mr. Munchausen, calmly. "Now I
know how to answer your question. For horse-back riding I certainly
prefer a horse; though, on the other hand, for bicycling, bicycles are
better than horses. Horses make very poor bicycles, due no doubt to
the fact that they have no wheels."

Diavolo began to grow desperate.

"Of course," Mr. Munchausen went on, "all I have to say in this
connection is based merely on my ideas, and not upon any personal
experience. I've been horse-back riding on horses, and bicycling on
bicycles, but I never went horse-back riding on a bicycle, or
bicycling on horseback. I should think it might be exciting to go
bicycling on horse-back, but very dangerous. It is hard enough for me
to keep a bicycle from toppling over when I'm riding on a hard,
straight, level well-paved road, without experimenting with my wheel
on a horse's back. However if you wish to try it some day and will get
me a horse with a back as big as Trafalgar Square I'm willing to make
the effort."

Angelica giggled. It was lots of fun for her when Mr. Munchausen
teased Diavolo, though she didn't like it quite so much when it was
her turn to be treated that way. Diavolo wanted to laugh too, but he
had too much dignity for that, and to conceal his desire to grin from
Mr. Munchausen he began to hunt about for an old newspaper, or a lump
of coal or something else he could make a ball of to throw at him.

"Which would you rather do, Angelica," Mr. Munchausen resumed, "go to
sea in a balloon or attend a dumb-crambo party in a chicken-coop?"

"I guess I would," laughed Angelica.

"That's a good answer," Mr. Munchausen put in. "It is quite as
intelligent as the one which is attributed to the Gillyhooly bird.
When the Gillyhooly bird was asked his opinion of giraffes, he
scratched his head for a minute and said,

  "'The question hath but little wit
    That you have put to me,
  But I will try to answer it
    With prompt candidity.

  The automobile is a thing
    That's pleasing to the mind;
  And in a lustrous diamond ring
    Some merit I can find.

  Some persons gloat o'er French Chateaux;
    Some dote on lemon ice;
  While others gorge on mixed gateaux,
    Yet have no use for mice.

  I'm very fond of oyster-stew,
    I love a patent-leather boot,
  But after all, 'twixt me and you,
    The fish-ball is my favourite fruit.'"

"Hoh" jeered Diavolo, who, attracted by the allusion to a kind of bird
of which he had never heard before, had given up the quest for a paper
ball and returned to Mr. Munchausen's side, "I don't think that was a
very intelligent answer. It didn't answer the question at all."

"That's true, and that is why it was intelligent," said Mr.
Munchausen. "It was noncommittal. Some day when you are older and know
less than you do now, you will realise, my dear Diavolo, how valuable
a thing is the reply that answereth not."

Mr. Munchausen paused long enough to let the lesson sink in and then
he resumed.

"The Gillyhooly bird is a perfect owl for wisdom of that sort," he
said. "It never lets anybody know what it thinks; it never makes
promises, and rarely speaks except to mystify people. It probably has
just as decided an opinion concerning giraffes as you or I have, but
it never lets anybody into the secret."

"What is a Gillyhooly bird, anyhow?" asked Diavolo.

"He's a bird that never sings for fear of straining his voice; never
flies for fear of wearying his wings; never eats for fear of spoiling
his digestion; never stands up for fear of bandying his legs and never
lies down for fear of injuring his spine," said Mr. Munchausen. "He
has no feathers, because, as he says, if he had, people would pull
them out to trim hats with, which would be painful, and he never goes
into debt because, as he observes himself, he has no hope of paying
the bill with which nature has endowed him, so why run up others?"

"I shouldn't think he'd live long if he doesn't eat?" suggested
Angelica.

"That's the great trouble," said Mr. Munchausen. "He doesn't live
long. Nothing so ineffably wise as the Gillyhooly bird ever does live
long. I don't believe a Gillyhooly bird ever lived more than a day,
and that, connected with the fact that he is very ugly and keeps
himself out of sight, is possibly why no one has ever seen one. He is
known only by hearsay, and as a matter of fact, besides ourselves, I
doubt if any one has ever heard of him."

Diavolo eyed Mr. Munchausen narrowly.

"Speaking of Gillyhooly birds, however, and to be serious for a
moment," Mr. Munchausen continued flinching nervously under Diavolo's
unyielding gaze; "I never told you about the poetic June-bug that
worked the typewriter, did I?"

"Never heard of such a thing," cried Diavolo. "The idea of a June-bug
working a typewriter."

"I don't believe it," said Angelica, "he hasn't got any fingers."

"That shows all you know about it," retorted Mr. Munchausen. "You
think because you are half-way right you are all right. However, if
you don't want to hear the story of the June-bug that worked the
type-writer, I won't tell it. My tongue is tired, anyhow."

"Please go on," said Diavolo. "I want to hear it."

"So do I," said Angelica. "There are lots of stories I don't believe
that I like to hear--'Jack the Giant-killer' and 'Cinderella,' for
instance."

"Very well," said Mr. Munchausen. "I'll tell it, and you can believe
it or not, as you please. It was only two summers ago that the thing
happened, and I think it was very curious. As you may know, I often
have a great lot of writing to do and sometimes I get very tired
holding a pen in my hand. When you get old enough to write real long
letters you'll know what I mean. Your writing hand will get so tired
that sometimes you'll wish some wizard would come along smart enough
to invent a machine by means of which everything you think can be
transferred to paper as you think it, without the necessity of
writing. But as yet the only relief to the man whose hand is worn out
by the amount of writing he has to do is the use of the type-writer,
which is hard only on the fingers. So to help me in my work two
summers ago I bought a type-writing machine, and put it in the great
bay-window of my room at the hotel where I was stopping. It was a
magnificent hotel, but it had one drawback--it was infested with
June-bugs. Most summer hotels are afflicted with mosquitoes, but this
one had June-bugs instead, and all night long they'd buzz and butt
their heads against the walls until the guests went almost crazy with
the noise.

"At first I did not mind it very much. It was amusing to watch them,
and my friends and I used to play a sort of game of chance with them
that entertained us hugely. We marked the walls off in squares which
we numbered and then made little wagers as to which of the squares a
specially selected June-bug would whack next. To simplify the game we
caught the chosen June-bug and put some powdered charcoal on his head,
so that when he butted up against the white wall he would leave a
black mark in the space he hit. It was really one of the most exciting
games of that particular kind that I ever played, and many a rainy day
was made pleasant by this diversion.

"But after awhile like everything else June-bug Roulette as we called
it began to pall and I grew tired of it and wished there never had
been such a thing as a June-bug in the world. I did my best to forget
them, but it was impossible. Their buzzing and butting continued
uninterrupted, and toward the end of the month they developed a
particularly bad habit of butting the electric call button at the side
of my bed. The consequence was that at all hours of the night,
hall-boys with iced-water, and house-maids with bath towels, and
porters with kindling-wood would come knocking at my door and routing
me out of bed--summoned of course by none other than those horrible
butting insects. This particular nuisance became so unendurable that I
had to change my room for one which had no electric bell in it.

"So things went, until June passed and July appeared. The majority of
the nuisances promptly got out but one especially vigorous and
athletic member of the tribe remained. He became unbearable and
finally one night I jumped out of bed either to kill him or to drive
him out of my apartment forever, but he wouldn't go, and try as I
might I couldn't hit him hard enough to kill him. In sheer desperation
I took the cover of my typewriting machine and tried to catch him in
that. Finally I succeeded, and, as I thought, shook the heedless
creature out of the window promptly slamming the window shut so that
he might not return; and then putting the type-writer cover back over
the machine, I went to bed again, but not to sleep as I had hoped. All
night long every second or two I'd hear the type-writer click. This I
attributed to nervousness on my part. As far as I knew there wasn't
anything to make the type-writer click, and the fact that I heard it
do so served only to convince me that I was tired and imagined that I
heard noises.

[Illustration: "Most singular of all was the fact that consciously or
unconsciously the insect had butted out a verse." _Chapter XIV._]

"The next morning, however, on opening the machine I found that the
June-bug had not only not been shaken out of the window, but had
actually spent the night inside of the cover, butting his head against
the keys, having no wall to butt with it, and most singular of all was
the fact that, consciously or unconsciously, the insect had butted out
a verse which read:

  "'I'm glad I haven't any brains,
    For there can be no doubt
  I'd have to give up butting
    If I had, or butt them out.'"

"Mercy! Really?" cried Angelica.

"Well I can't prove it," said Mr. Munchausen, "by producing the
June-bug, but I can show you the hotel, I can tell you the number of
the room; I can show you the type-writing machine, and I have recited
the verse. If you're not satisfied with that I'll have to stand your
suspicions."

"What became of the June-bug?" demanded Diavolo.

"He flew off as soon as I lifted the top of the machine," said Mr.
Munchausen. "He had all the modesty of a true poet and did not wish to
be around while his poem was being read."

"It's queer how you can't get rid of June-bugs, isn't it, Uncle
Munch," suggested Angelica.

"Oh, we got rid of 'em next season all right," said Mr. Munchausen. "I
invented a scheme that kept them away all the following summer. I got
the landlord to hang calendars all over the house with one full page
for each month. Then in every room we exposed the page for May and
left it that way all summer. When the June-bugs arrived and saw these,
they were fooled into believing that June hadn't come yet, and off
they flew to wait. They are very inconsiderate of other people's
comfort," Mr. Munchausen concluded, "but they are rigorously bound by
an etiquette of their own. A self-respecting June-bug would no more
appear until the June-bug season is regularly open than a gentleman of
high society would go to a five o'clock tea munching fresh-roasted
peanuts. And by the way, that reminds me I happen to have a bag of
peanuts right here in my pocket."

Here Mr. Munchausen, transferring the luscious goobers to Angelica,
suddenly remembered that he had something to say to the Imps' father,
and hurriedly left them.

"Do you suppose that's true, Diavolo?" whispered Angelica as their
friend disappeared.

"Well it might happen," said Diavolo, "but I've a sort of notion that
it's 'maginary like the Gillyhooly bird. Gimme a peanut."




XV

A LUCKY STROKE


"Mr. Munchausen," said Ananias, as he and the famous warrior drove off
from the first hole at the Missing Links, "you never seem to weary of
the game of golf. What is its precise charm in your eyes,--the
health-giving qualities of the game or its capacity for bad lies?"

"I owe my life to it," replied the Baron. "That is to say to my
precision as a player I owe one of the many preservations of my
existence which have passed into history. Furthermore it is ever
varying in its interest. Like life itself it is full of hazards and no
man knows at the beginning of his stroke what will be the requirements
of the next. I never told you of the bovine lie I got once while
playing a match with Bonaparte, did I?"

"I do not recall it," said Ananias, foozling his second stroke into
the stone wall.

"I was playing with my friend Bonaparte, for the Cosmopolitan
Championship," said Munchausen, "and we were all even at the
thirty-sixth hole. Bonaparte had sliced his ball into a stubble field
from the tee, whereat he was inclined to swear, until by an odd
mischance I drove mine into the throat of a bull that was pasturing on
the fair green two hundred and ninety-eight yards distant. 'Shall we
take it over?' I asked. 'No,' laughed Bonaparte, thinking he had me.
'We must play the game. I shall play my lie. You must play yours.'
'Very well,' said I. 'So be it. Golf is golf, bull or no bull.' And
off we went. It took Bonaparte seven strokes to get on the green
again, which left me a like number to extricate my ball from the
throat of the unwelcome bovine. It was a difficult business, but I
made short work of it. Tying my red silk handkerchief to the end of my
brassey I stepped in front of the great creature and addressing an
imaginary ball before him made the usual swing back and through
stroke. The bull, angered by the fluttering red handkerchief, reared
up and made a dash at me. I ran in the direction of the hole, the bull
in pursuit for two hundred yards. Here I hid behind a tree while Mr.
Bull stopped short and snorted again. Still there was no sign of the
ball, and after my pursuer had quieted a little I emerged from my
hiding place and with the same club and in the same manner played
three. The bull surprised at my temerity threw his head back with an
angry toss and tried to bellow forth his wrath, as I had designed he
should, but the obstruction in his throat prevented him. The ball had
stuck in his pharynx. Nothing came of his spasm but a short hacking
cough and a wheeze--then silence. 'I'll play four,' I cried to
Bonaparte, who stood watching me from a place of safety on the other
side of the stone wall. Again I swung my red-flagged brassey in front
of the angry creature's face and what I had hoped for followed. The
second attempt at a bellow again resulted in a hacking cough and a
sneeze, and lo the ball flew out of his throat and landed dead to the
hole. The caddies drove the bull away. Bonaparte played eight, missed
a putt for a nine, stymied himself in a ten, holed out in twelve and I
went down in five."

"Jerusalem!" cried Ananias. "What did Bonaparte say?"

[Illustration: "Again I swung my red-flagged brassey in front of the angry
creature's face, and what I had hoped for followed." _Chapter XV._]

"He delivered a short, quick nervous address in Corsican and retired
to the club-house where he spent the afternoon drowning his sorrows in
Absinthe high-balls. 'Great hole that, Bonaparte,' said I when his
geniality was about to return. 'Yes,' said he. 'A regular lu-lu, eh?'
said I. 'More than that, Baron,' said he. 'It was a Waterlooloo.' It
was the first pun I ever heard the Emperor make."

"We all have our weak moments," said Ananias drily, playing nine from
behind the wall. "I give the hole up," he added angrily.

"Let's play it out anyhow," said Munchausen, playing three to the
green.

"All right," Ananias agreed, taking a ten and rimming the cup.

Munchausen took three to go down, scoring six in all.

"Two up," said he, as Ananias putted out in eleven.

"How the deuce do you make that out? This is only the first hole,"
cried Ananias with some show of heat.

"You gave up a hole, didn't you?" demanded Munchausen.

"Yes."

"And I won a hole, didn't I?"

"You did--but--"

"Well that's two holes. Fore!" cried Munchausen.

The two walked along in silence for a few minutes, and the Baron
resumed.

"Yes, golf is a splendid game and I love it, though I don't think I'd
ever let a good canvasback duck get cold while I was talking about it.
When I have a canvasback duck before me I don't think of anything else
while it's there. But unquestionably I'm fond of golf, and I have a
very good reason to be. It has done a great deal for me, and as I have
already told you, once it really saved my life."

"Saved your life, eh?" said Ananias.

"That's what I said," returned Mr. Munchausen, "and so of course that
is the way it was."

"I should admire to hear the details," said Ananias. "I presume you
were going into a decline and it restored your strength and vitality."

"No," said Mr. Munchausen, "it wasn't that way at all. It saved my
life when I was attacked by a fierce and ravenously hungry lion. If I
hadn't known how to play golf it would have been farewell forever to
Mr. Munchausen, and Mr. Lion would have had a fine luncheon that day,
at which I should have been the turkey and cranberry sauce and mince
pie all rolled into one."

Ananias laughed.

"It's easy enough to laugh at my peril now," said Mr. Munchausen, "but
if you'd been with me you wouldn't have laughed very much. On the
contrary, Ananias, you'd have ruined what little voice you ever had
screeching."

"I wasn't laughing at the danger you were in," said Ananias. "I don't
see anything funny in that. What I was laughing at was the idea of a
lion turning up on a golf course. They don't have lions on any of the
golf courses that I am familiar with."

"That may be, my dear Ananias," said Mr. Munchausen, "but it doesn't
prove anything. What you are familiar with has no especial bearing
upon the ordering of the Universe. They had lions by the hundreds on
the particular links I refer to. I laid the links out myself and I
fancy I know what I am talking about. They were in the desert of
Sahara. And I tell you what it is," he added, slapping his knee
enthusiastically, "they were the finest links I ever played on. There
wasn't a hole shorter than three miles and a quarter, which gives you
plenty of elbow room, and the fair green had all the qualities of a
first class billiard table, so that your ball got a magnificent roll
on it."

"What did you do for hazards?" asked Ananias.

"Oh we had 'em by the dozen," replied Mr. Munchausen. "There weren't
any ponds or stone walls, of course, but there were plenty of others
that were quite as interesting. There was the Sphynx for instance; and
for bunkers the pyramids can't be beaten. Then occasionally right in
the middle of a game a caravan ten or twelve miles long, would begin
to drag its interminable length across the middle of the course, and
it takes mighty nice work with the lofting iron to lift a ball over a
caravan without hitting a camel or killing an Arab, I can tell you.
Then finally I'm sure I don't know of any more hazardous hazard for a
golf player--or for anybody else for that matter--than a real hungry
African lion out in search of breakfast, especially when you meet him
on the hole furthest from home and have a stretch of three or four
miles between him and assistance with no revolver or other weapon at
hand. That's hazard enough for me and it took the best work I could do
with my brassey to get around it."

"You always were strong at a brassey lie," said Ananias.

"Thank you," said Mr. Munchausen. "There are few lies I can't get
around. But on this morning I was playing for the Mid-African
Championship. I'd been getting along splendidly. My record for fifteen
holes was about seven hundred and eighty-three strokes, and I was
flattering myself that I was about to turn in the best card that had
ever been seen in a medal play contest in all Africa. My drive from
the sixteenth tee was a simple beauty. I thought the ball would never
stop, I hit it such a tremendous whack. It had a flight of three
hundred and eighty-two yards and a roll of one hundred and twenty
more, and when it finally stopped it turned up in a mighty good lie on
a natural tee, which the wind had swirled up. Calling to the monkey
who acted as my caddy--we used monkeys for caddies always in Africa,
and they were a great success because they don't talk and they use
their tails as a sort of extra hand,--I got out my brassey for the
second stroke, took my stance on the hardened sand, swung my club
back, fixed my eye on the ball and was just about to carry through,
when I heard a sound which sent my heart into my boots, my caddy
galloping back to the club house, and set my teeth chattering like a
pair of castanets. It was unmistakable, that sound. When a hungry lion
roars you know precisely what it is the moment you hear it, especially
if you have heard it before. It doesn't sound a bit like the miauing
of a cat; nor is it suggestive of the rumble of artillery in an
adjacent street. There is no mistaking it for distant thunder, as some
writers would have you believe. It has none of the gently mournful
quality that characterises the soughing of the wind through the
leafless branches of the autumnal forest, to which a poet might liken
it; it is just a plain lion-roaring and nothing else, and when you
hear it you know it. The man who mistakes it for distant thunder might
just as well be struck by lightning there and then for all the chance
he has to get away from it ultimately. The poet who confounds it with
the gentle soughing breeze never lives to tell about it. He gets
himself eaten up for his foolishness. It doesn't require a Daniel come
to judgment to recognise a lion's roar on sight.

"I should have perished myself that morning if I had not known on the
instant just what were the causes of the disturbance. My nerve did not
desert me, however, frightened as I was. I stopped my play and looked
out over the sand in the direction whence the roaring came, and there
he stood a perfect picture of majesty, and a giant among lions, eyeing
me critically as much as to say, 'Well this is luck, here's breakfast
fit for a king!' but he reckoned without his host. I was in no mood to
be served up to stop his ravening appetite and I made up my mind at
once to stay and fight. I'm a good runner, Ananias, but I cannot beat
a lion in a three mile sprint on a sandy soil, so fight it was. The
question was how. My caddy gone, the only weapons I had with me were
my brassey and that one little gutta percha ball, but thanks to my
golf they were sufficient.

"Carefully calculating the distance at which the huge beast stood, I
addressed the ball with unusual care, aiming slightly to the left to
overcome my tendency to slice, and drove the ball straight through the
lion's heart as he poised himself on his hind legs ready to spring
upon me. It was a superb stroke and not an instant too soon, for just
as the ball struck him he sprang forward, and even as it was landed
but two feet away from where I stood, but, I am happy to say, dead.

"It was indeed a narrow escape, and it tried my nerves to the full,
but I extracted the ball and resumed my play in a short while, adding
the lucky stroke to my score meanwhile. But I lost the match,--not
because I lost my nerve, for this I did not do, but because I lifted
from the lion's heart. The committee disqualified me because I did not
play from my lie and the cup went to my competitor. However, I was
satisfied to have escaped with my life. I'd rather be a live runner-up
than a dead champion any day."

"A wonderful experience," said Ananias. "Perfectly wonderful. I never
heard of a stroke to equal that."

"You are too modest, Ananias," said Mr. Munchausen drily. "Too modest
by half. You and Sapphira hold the record for that, you know."

"I have forgotten the episode," said Ananias.

"Didn't you and she make your last hole on a single stroke?" demanded
Munchausen with an inward chuckle.

"Oh--yes," said Ananias grimly, as he recalled the incident. "But you
know we didn't win any more than you did."

"Oh, didn't you?" asked Munchausen.

"No," replied Ananias. "You forget that Sapphira and I were two down
at the finish."

And Mr. Munchausen played the rest of the game in silence. Ananias had
at last got the best of him.



      *      *      *      *      *



Transcribers note:

Spellings were left as found.

Illustrations were moved when they interrupted paragraphs.




I

The Culinary Guild


It was before the Idiot's marriage, and in the days when he was nothing
more than a plain boarder in Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog's High-class Home for
Single Gentlemen, that he put what the School-master termed his "alleged
mind" on plans for the amelioration of the condition of the civilized.

"The trials of the barbarian are really nothing as compared with the
tribulations of civilized man," he said, as the waitress passed him a
piece of steak that had been burned to a crisp. "In the Cannibal Islands
a cook who would send a piece of broiled missionary to her employer's
table in this condition would herself be roasted before another day had
dawned. We, however, must grin and bear it, because our esteemed
landlady cannot find anywhere in this town a woman better suited for the
labors of the kitchen than the blank she has had the misfortune to draw
in the culinary lottery, familiarly known to us, her victims, as
Bridget."

"This is an exceptional case," said Mr. Pedagog. "We haven't had a steak
like this before in several weeks."

"True," returned the Idiot. "This is a sirloin, I believe. The last
steak we had was a rump steak, and it was not burned to a crisp, I
admit. It was only boiled, if I remember rightly, by mistake; Bridget
having lost her fifth consecutive cousin in ten days the night before,
and being in consequence so prostrated that she could not tell a
gridiron from a lawn-mower."

"Well, you know the popular superstition, Mr. Idiot," said the Poet.
"The devil sends the cooks."

"I don't believe it," retorted the Idiot. "That's one of those proverbs
that haven't a particle of truth in 'em--nor a foundation in reason
either, like 'Never look a gift horse in the mouth.' Of all absurd
advice ever given to man by a thoughtless thinker, that, I think, bears
the palm. I know a man who didn't look a gift horse in the mouth, and
the consequence was that he accepted a horse that was twenty-eight years
old. The beast died in his stables three days later, and the beneficiary
had to pay five dollars to have him carted away. As for the devil
sending the cooks, I haven't any faith in the theory. Any person who had
come from the devil would know how to manage a fire better than
ninety-nine per cent. of the cooks ever born. It would be a good thing
if every one of 'em were forced to serve an apprenticeship with the
Prince of Darkness. However, steak like this serves a good purpose. It
serves to bind our little circle more firmly together. There's nothing
like mutual suffering to increase the sympathy that should exist between
men situated as we are; and as for Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog, I wish her to
understand distinctly that I am criticising the cook and not herself. If
this particular dainty had been prepared by her own fair hand, I doubt
not I should want more of it."

"I thank you," returned the landlady, somewhat mollified by this remark.
"If I had more time I should occasionally do the cooking myself, but,
as it is, I am overwhelmed with work."

"I can bear witness to that," observed Mr. Whitechoker. "Mrs.
Smithers-Pedagog is one of the most useful ladies in my congregation. If
it were not for her, many a heathen would be going without garments
to-day."

"Well, I don't like to criticise," said the Idiot, "but I think the
heathen at home should be considered before the heathen abroad. If your
congregation would have a guild to look after such heathen as the Poet
and the Doctor and myself, I am convinced it would be more appreciated
by those who benefited by its labors than it is at present by the
barbarians who try to wear the misfits it sends out. A Christian whose
plain but honest breakfast is well cooked is apt to be far more grateful
than a barbarian who is wearing a pair of trousers made of calico and a
coat three sizes too small in the body and nine sizes too large in the
arms. I will go further. I believe that if the domestic heathen were
cared for they would do much better work, would earn better pay, and
would, out of mere gratitude, set apart a sufficiently large portion of
their increased earnings to be devoted to the purchase of tailor-made
costumes, which would please the cannibals better, far better, than the
amateur creations they now get. I know I'd contribute some of my
surplus."

"What would you have such a guild do?" queried Mr. Whitechoker.

"Do? There'd be so much for it to do that the members could hardly find
time to rest," returned the Idiot. "Do? Why, my dear sir, take this
house, for instance, and see what it could do here. What a boon it would
be for me if some kind-hearted person would come here once a week and
sew buttons on my clothes, darn my socks--in short, keep me mended. What
better work for one who desires to make the world brighter, happier, and
less sinful!"

"I fail to see how the world would be brighter, happier, or less sinful
if your suspender-buttons were kept firm, and your stockings darned, and
your wardrobe generally mended," said Mr. Pedagog. "I grant that such a
guild would be doing a noble work if it would take you in hand and
correct many of your impressions, revise your well-known facts so as to
bring them more in accord with indubitable truths, and impart to your
customs some of that polish which you so earnestly strive for in your
dress."

"Thank you," said the Idiot, suavely. "But I don't wish to overburden
the kind ladies to whom I refer. If my costumes could be looked after I
might find time to look after my customs, and, I assure you, Mr.
Pedagog, if at any time you will undertake to deliver a course of
lectures on Etiquette, I will gladly subscribe for two orchestra-chairs
and endeavor to occupy both of them. At any rate, to return to the main
point, I claim that the world would be happier and brighter and less
sinful if the domestic heathen were kept mended by such a guild, and I
challenge any one here to deny, even on so slight a basis as the loose
suspender-button, the truth of what I say. When I arise in the morning
and find a button gone, do I make genial remarks about the joys of life?
I do not. I use words. Sometimes one word, which need not be repeated
here. I am unhappy, and, being unhappy, the world seems dark and dreary,
and in speaking impatiently, though very much to the point, as I do, I
am guilty of an offence that is sinful. With such a start in the
morning, I come here to the table. Mr. Pedagog sees that I am not quite
myself. He asks me if I am not feeling well, an irritating question at
any time, but particularly so to a man with a suspender-button gone. I
retort. He re-retorts, until our converse is warmer than the coffee, and
our relations colder than the waffles. Finally I leave the house,
slamming the door behind me, structurally weakening the house, and go to
business, where I wreak my vengeance upon the second clerk, who takes it
out of the office-boy, who goes home and vents his wrath on his little
sister, who, goaded into recklessness, teases the baby until he yells
and gets spanked by his mother for being noisy. Now, why should a loose
suspender-button be allowed to subject that baby to such humiliation,
and who can deny that, if it had been properly sewed on by a guild, such
as I have mentioned, the baby never would have been spanked for the
causes mentioned? What is _your_ answer, Mr. Whitechoker?"

"Truly, I am so breathless at your logic that I cannot reason," said the
Minister. "But haven't we digressed a little? We were speaking of cooks,
and we conclude with a pathetic little allegory about a suspender-button
and a baby that is not only teased but spanked."

"The baby could get the same spanking for reasons based on the
shortcomings of the cooks," said the Idiot. "I am irritated when I am
served with green pease hard enough to batter down Gibraltar if properly
aimed; when my coffee is a warmed-over reminiscence of last night's
demi-tasse, I leave the house in a frame of mind that bodes ill for the
junior clerk, and the effect on the baby is ultimately the same."

"And--er--you'd have the ladies whose energies are now devoted towards
the clothing of the heathen come here and do the cooking?" queried the
School-master.

"I leave if they do," said the Doctor. "I have seen too much of the
effects of amateur cookery in my profession to want any of it. They are
good cooks in theory, but not in practice."

"There you have it!" said the Idiot, triumphantly. "Right in a nutshell.
That's where the cooks are always weak. They have none of the theory and
all of the practice. If they based practice on theory, they'd cook
better. Wherefore let your theoretical cooks seek out the practical and
instruct them in the principles of the culinary art. Think of what
twelve ladies could do; twelve ladies trained in the sewing-circle to
talk rapidly, working five hours a day apiece, could devote an hour a
week to three hundred and sixty cooks, and tell them practically all
they themselves know in that time; and if, in addition to this, twelve
other ladies, forming an auxiliary guild, would make dresses and bonnets
and things for the same cooks, instead of for the cannibals, it would
keep them good-natured."

"Splendid scheme!" said the Doctor. "So practical. Your brain must weigh
half an ounce."

"I've never had it weighed," said the Idiot, "but, I fancy, it's a good
one. It's the only one I have, anyhow, and it's done me good service,
and shows no signs of softening. But, returning to the cooks,
good-nature is as essential to the making of a good cook as are apples
to the making of a dumpling. You can't associate the word dumpling with
ill-nature, and just as the poet throws himself into his work, and as
he is of a cheerful or a mournful disposition, so does his work appear
cheerful or mournful, so do the productions of a cook take on the
attributes of their maker. A dyspeptic cook will prepare food in a
manner so indigestible that it were ruin to partake of it. A
light-hearted cook will make light bread; a pessimistic cook will serve
flour bricks in lieu thereof."

"I think possibly you are right when you say that," said the Doctor. "I
have myself observed that the people who sing at their work do the best
work."

"But the worst singing," growled the School-master.

"That may be true," put in the Idiot; "but you cannot expect a cook on
sixteen dollars a month to be a prima-donna. Now, if Mr. Whitechoker
will undertake to start a sewing-circle in his church for people who
don't care to wear clothing, but to sow the seeds of concord and good
cookery throughout the kitchens of this land, I am prepared to prophesy
that at the end of the year there will be more happiness and less
depression in this part of the world; and once eliminate dyspepsia from
our midst, and get civilization and happiness controvertible terms, then
you will find your foreign missionary funds waxing so fat that instead
of the amateur garments for the heathen you now send them, you will be
able to open an account at Worth's and Poole's for every barbarian in
creation. The scheme for the sewing on of suspender-buttons and the
miscellaneous mending that needs to be done for lone-lorn savages like
myself might be left in abeyance until the culinary scheme has been
established. Bachelors constitute a class, a small class only, of
humanity, but the regeneration of cooks is a universal need."

"I think your scheme is certainly a picturesque one and novel," said Mr.
Whitechoker. "There seems to be a good deal in it. Don't you think so,
Mr. Pedagog?"

"Yes--I do," said Mr. Pedagog, wearily. "A great deal--of language."

And amid the laugh at his expense which followed, the Idiot, joining in,
departed.




II

A Suggestion for the Cable-cars


"Heigh-ho!" sighed the Idiot, rubbing his eyes sleepily. "This is a
weary world."

"What? This from you?" smiled the Poet. "I never expected to hear that
plaint from a man of your cheerful disposition."

"Humph!" said the Idiot, with difficulty repressing a yawn. "Humph! and
I may add, likewise, tut! What do you take me for--an insulated
sun-beam? I can't help it if shadows camp across my horizon
occasionally. I wouldn't give a cent for the man who never had his
moments of misery. It takes night to enable us to appreciate daytime.
Misery is a foil necessary to the full appreciation of joy. I'm glad I
am sort of down in the mouth to-day. I'll be all right to-morrow, and
I'll enjoy to-morrow all the more for to-day's megrim. But for the
present, I repeat, this is a weary world."

"Oh, I don't think so," observed the School-master. "The world doesn't
seem to me to betray any signs of weariness. It got to work at the usual
hour this morning, and, as far as I can judge, has been revolving at the
usual rate of speed ever since."

"The Idiot's mistake is a common one," put in the Doctor. "I find it
frequently in my practice."

"That's a confession," retorted the Idiot. "Do you find out these
mistakes in your practice before or after the death of the patient?"

"That mistake," continued the Doctor, paying apparently little heed to
the Idiot's remark--"that mistake lies in the Idiot's assumption that
he is himself the world. He regards himself as the earth, as all of
life, and, because he happens to be weary, the world is a weary one."

"It isn't a fatal disease, is it?" queried the Idiot, anxiously. "I am
not likely to become so impressed with that idea, for instance, that I
shall have to be put in a padded cell and manacled so that I may not
turn perpetual handsprings under the hallucination that, being the
world, it is my duty to revolve?"

"No," replied the Doctor, with a laugh. "No, indeed. That is not at all
likely to happen, but I think it would be a good idea if you were to
carry the hallucination out far enough to put a cake of ice on your
head, assuming that to be the north pole, and cool off that brain of
yours."

"That is a good idea," returned the Idiot; "and if Mary will bring me
the ice that was used to cool the coffee this morning, I shall be
pleased to try the experiment. Meanwhile, this is a weary world."

"Then why under the canopy don't you leave it and go to some other
world?" snapped Mr. Pedagog. "You are under no obligation to remain
here. With a river on either side of the city, and a New York Juggernaut
Company, Unlimited, running trolley-cars up and down two of our more
prominent highways, suicide is within the reach of all. Of course, we
should be sorry to lose you, in a way, but I have known men to recover
from even greater afflictions than that."

"Thank you for the suggestion," replied the Idiot, transferring four
large, porous buckwheat-cakes to his plate. "Thank you very much, but I
have a pleasanter and more lingering method of suicide right here. Death
by buckwheat-cakes is like being pierced by a Toledo blade. You do not
realize the terrors of your situation until you cease to be susceptible
to them. Furthermore, I do not believe in suicide. It is, in my
judgment, the worst crime a man can commit, and I cannot but admire the
remarkable discernment evinced by the Fates in making of it its own
inevitable capital punishment. A man may commit murder and escape death,
but in the commission of suicide he is sure of execution. Just as Virtue
is its own reward, so is Suicide its own amercement."

"Been reading the dictionary again?" asked the Poet.

"No, not exactly," said the Idiot, with a smile, "but--it's a kind of
joke on me, I suppose--I have just been stuck, to use a polite term, on
a book called Roget's _Thesaurus_, and, if I want to get hold of a new
word that will increase my seeming importance to the community, I turn
to it. That's where I got 'amercement.' I don't hold that its use in
this especial case is beyond cavil--that's another Thesaurian term--but
I don't suppose any one here would notice that fact. It goes here, and I
shall not use it elsewhere."

"I am interested to know how _you_ ever came to be the owner of a
_Thesaurus_," said the School-master, with a grim smile at the idea of
the Idiot having such a book in his possession. "Except on the score of
affinities. You are both very wordy."

"Meaning pleonastic, I presume," retorted the Idiot.

"I beg your pardon?" said the School-master.

"Never mind," said the Idiot. "I won't press the analogy, but I will say
that those who are themselves periphrastic should avoid criticising
others for being ambaginous."

"I think you mean ambiguous," said the School-master, elevating his
eyebrows in triumph.

"I thought you'd think that," retorted the Idiot. "That's why I used the
word 'ambaginous.' I'll lend you my dictionary to freshen up your
phraseology. Meanwhile, I'll tell you how I happened to get a
_Thesaurus_. I thought it was an animal, and when I saw that a New York
bookseller had a lot of them marked down from two dollars to one, I sent
and got one. I thought it was strange for a bookseller to be selling
rare animals, but that was his business, not mine; and as I was anxious
to see what kind of a creature a _Thesaurus_ was, I invested. When I
found out it was a book and not a tame relic of the antediluvian animal
kingdom, I thought I wouldn't say anything about it, but you people here
are so inquisitive you've learned my secret."

"And wasn't it an animal?" asked Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog.

"My dear--my _dear_!" ejaculated Mr. Pedagog. "Pray--ah--I beg of you,
do not enter into this discussion."

"No, Mrs. Pedagog," observed the Idiot, "it was not. It was nothing more
than a book, which, when once you have read it, you would not be
without, since it gives your vocabulary a twist which makes you proof
against ninety-nine out of every one hundred conversationalists in the
world, no matter how weak your cause."

"I am beginning to understand the causes of your weariness," observed
Mr. Pedagog, acridly. "You have been memorizing syllables. Really, I
should think you were in danger of phonetic prostration."

"Not a bit of it," said the Idiot. "Those words are stimulating, not
depressing. I begin to feel better already, now that I have spoken them.
I am not half so weary as I was, but for my weariness I had good cause.
I suffered all night from a most frightful nightmare. It utterly
destroyed my rest."

"Welsh-rarebit?" queried the Genial Old Gentleman who occasionally
imbibed, with a tone of reproach. "If so, why was I not with you?"

"That question should be its own answer," replied the Idiot. "A man who
will eat a Welsh-rarebit alone is not only a person of a sullen
disposition, but of reckless mould as well. I would no sooner think of
braving a Welsh-rarebit unaccompanied than I would think of trying to
swim across the British Channel without a lifesaving boat following in
my wake."

"I question if so light a body as you could have a wake!" said Mr.
Pedagog, coldly.

"I am sorry, but I can't agree with you, Mr. Pedagog," said the
Bibliomaniac. "A tugboat, most insignificant of crafts, roils up the
surface of the sea more than an ocean steamer does. Fuss goes with
feathers more than with large bodies."

"Well, they're neither of 'em in it with a cake of soap for real,
bona-fide suds," said the Idiot, complacently, as he helped himself to
his thirteenth buckwheat-cake. "However, wakes have nothing to do with
the case. I had a most frightful dream, and it was not due to
Welsh-rarebits, but to my fatal weakness, which, not having my
_Thesaurus_ at hand, I must identify by the commonplace term of
courtesy. You may not have noticed it, but courtesy is my strong point."

"We haven't observed the fact," said Mr. Pedagog; "but what of it? Have
you been courteous to any one?"

"I have," replied the Idiot, "and a nightmare is what it brought me. I
rode up-town on a trolley-car last night, and I gave up my seat to
sixteen ladies, two of whom, by-the-way, thanked me."

"I don't see why more than one of them should thank you," sniffed the
landlady. "If a man gives up a trolley-car seat to sixteen ladies, only
one of them can occupy it."

"I stand corrected," said the Idiot. "I gave up a seat to ladies sixteen
times between City Hall and Twenty-third Street. I can't bring myself to
sit down while a woman stands, and every time I'd get a seat some woman
would get on the car. Hence it was that I gave up my seat to sixteen
ladies. Why two of them should thank me, considering the rules, I do not
know. It certainly is not the custom. At any rate, if I had walked
up-town, I should not have had more exercise than I got on that car,
bobbing up and down so many times, and lurching here and lurching there
every time the car stopped, started, or turned a corner. Whether it was
the thanks or the lurching I got, I don't know, but the incidents of
the ride were so strongly impressed upon me that I dreamed all night,
only in my dreams I was not giving up car seats. The first seat I gave
up to a woman in the dream was an eighty-thousand-dollar seat in the
Stock Exchange. It was expensive courtesy, but I did it, and mourned so
over the result that I waked up and discovered that it was but a dream.
Then I went to sleep again. This time I was at the opera. I had the best
seat in the house, when in came a woman who hadn't a chair. Same result.
I got up. She sat down, and I had to stand behind a pillar where I could
neither see nor hear. More grief; waked up again, more tired than when I
went to bed. In ten minutes I dozed off. Found myself an ambitious
statesman running for the Presidency. Was elected and inaugurated. Up
comes a Woman's Rights candidate. More courtesy. Gave up the
Presidential chair to her and went home to obscurity, when again I
awoke tireder than ever. Clock struck four. Fell asleep again. This time
I was prepared for anything that might happen. I found myself in a
trolley-car, but with me I had a perforated chair-bottom, such as the
street peddlers sell. Lady got aboard. I put the perforated chair-bottom
on my lap and invited her to sit down. She thanked me and did so. Then
another lady got on. The lady on my lap moved up and made room for the
second lady. She sat down. Between them they must have weighed three
hundred pounds. I could have stood that, but as time went on more ladies
got aboard, and every time that happened these first-comers would move
up and make room for them. How they did it I can't say, any more than I
can say how in real life three women can find room in a car-seat vacated
by a little child. They did the former just as they do the latter,
until finally I found myself flattened into the original bench like the
pattern figure of a carpet. I felt like an entaglio; thirty women by
actual count were pressing me to remain, as it were, but the worst of it
all was they none of them seemed to live anywhere. We rode on and on and
on, but nobody got off. I tried to move--and couldn't. We passed my
corner, but there I was fixed. I couldn't breathe, and so couldn't call
out, and I verily believe that if I hadn't finally waked up I should by
this time have reached Hong-Kong, for I have a distinct recollection of
passing through Chicago, Denver, San Francisco, and Honolulu. Finally, I
did wake, however, simply worn out with my night's rest, which,
gentlemen, is why I say, as I have already said, this is a weary world."

"Well, I don't blame you," said Mr. Whitechoker, kindly. "That was a
most remarkable dream."

"Yes," assented Mr. Pedagog. "But quite in line with his waking
thoughts."

"Very likely," said the Idiot, rising and preparing to depart. "It was
absurd in most of its features, but in one of them it was excellent. I
am going to see the president of the Electric Juggernaut Company, as you
call it, in regard to it to-day. I think there is money in that idea of
having an extra chair-seat for every passenger to hold in his lap. In
that way twice as many seated passengers can be accommodated, and
countless people with tender feet will be spared the pain of having
other wayfarers standing upon them."




III

The Transatlantic Trolley Company


"If I were a millionaire," began the Idiot one Sunday morning, as he and
his friends took their accustomed seats at the breakfast-table, "I would
devote a tenth of my income to the poor, a tenth to children's fresh-air
funds, and the balance to the education through travel of a dear and
intimate friend of mine."

"That would be a generous distribution of your wealth," said Mr.
Whitechoker, graciously. "But upon what would you live yourself?"

"I should stipulate in the bargain with my dear and intimate friend
that we should be inseparable; that wherever he should go I should go,
and that, of the funds devoted to his education through travel, one-half
should be paid to me as my commission for letting him into a good
thing."

"You certainly have good business sense," put in the Bibliomaniac. "I
wish I had had when I was collecting rare editions."

"Collecting rare books and a good business sense seldom go together, I
fancy," said the Idiot. "I began collecting books once, but I gave it up
and took to collecting coins. I chose my coin and devoted my time to
getting in that variety alone, and it has paid me."

"I don't exactly gather your meaning," said Mr. Whitechoker. "You chose
your coin?"

"Precisely. I said, 'Here! Most coin collectors spend their time looking
for one or two rare coins, for which, when they are found, they pay
fabulous prices. The result is oftentimes penury. I, on the other hand,
will look for coins of a common sort which do not command fabulous
prices.' So I chose United States five-dollar gold pieces, irrespective
of dates, for my collection, and the result is moderate affluence. I
have between sixty and a hundred of them at my savings-bank, and when I
have found it necessary to realize on them I have not experienced the
slightest difficulty in forcing them back into circulation at cost."

"You are a wise Idiot," said the Bibliomaniac, settling back in his
chair in a disgusted, tired sort of way. He had expected some sympathy
from the Idiot as a fellow-collector, even though their aims were
different. It is always difficult for a man whose ten-thousand-dollar
library has brought six hundred dollars in the auction-room to find,
even in the ranks of collectors, one who understands his woes and helps
him bear the burden thereof by expressions of confidence in his sanity.

"Then you believe in travel, do you?" asked the Doctor.

"I believe there is nothing broadens the mind so much," returned the
Idiot.

"But do you believe it will develop a mind where there isn't one?" asked
the School-master, unpleasantly. "Or, to put it more favorably, don't
you think there would be danger in taking the germ of a mind in a small
head and broadening it until it runs the risk of finding itself confined
to cramped quarters?"

"That is a question for a physician to answer," said the Idiot. "But, if
I were you, I wouldn't travel if I thought there was any such danger."

"_Tu quoque_," retorted the School-master, "is _not_ true repartee."

"I shall have to take your word for that," returned the Idiot, "since I
have not a Latin dictionary with me, and all the Latin I know is to be
found in the quotations in the back of my dictionary, like '_Status quo
ante_,' '_In vino veritas_,' and '_Et tu, Brute_.' However, as I said
before, I'd like to travel, and I would if it were not that the sea and
I are not on very good terms with each other. It makes me ill to cross
the East River on the bridge, I'm so susceptible to sea-sickness."

"You'd get over that in a very few days," said the Genial Old Gentleman
who occasionally imbibed. "I have crossed the ocean a dozen times, and
I'm never sea-sick after the third day out."

"Ah, but those three days!" said the Idiot. "They must resemble the
three days of grace on a note that you know you couldn't pay if you had
three years of grace. I couldn't stand them, I am afraid. Why, only
last summer I took a drive off in the country, and the motion of the
wagon going over the thank-ye-marms in the road made me so sea-sick
before I'd gone a mile that I wanted to lie down and die. I think I
should have done so if the horse hadn't run away and forced me to ride
back home whether I wanted to or not."

"You ought to fight that," said the Doctor. "By-and-by, if you give way
to a weakness of that sort, the creases in your morning newspaper will
affect you similarly as you read it. If you ever have a birthday, let us
know, and we'll help you to overcome the tendency by buying you a
baby-jumper for you to swing around in every morning until you get used
to the motion."

"It would be more to the purpose," replied the Idiot, "if you as a
physician would invent a preventive of sea-sickness. I'd buy a bottle
and go abroad at once on my coin collection if you would guarantee it
to kill or to cure instantaneously."

"There is such a nostrum," said the Doctor.

"There is, indeed," put in the Genial Old Gentleman who occasionally
imbibes. "I've tried it."

"And were you sea-sick?" asked the Doctor.

"I never knew," replied the Genial Old Gentleman. "It made me so ill
that I never thought to inquire what was the matter with me. But one
thing is certain, I'll take my sea-voyages straight after this."

"I'd like to go by rail," said the Idiot, after a moment's thought.

"That is a desire quite characteristic of you," said the School-master.
"It is so probable that you could. Why not say that you'd like to cross
the Atlantic on a tight-rope?"

"Because I have no such ambition," replied the Idiot. "Though it might
be fun if the tight-rope were a trolley-wire, and one could sit
comfortably in a spacious cab while speeding over the water. I should
think that would be exhilarating enough. Just imagine how fine it would
be on a stormy day to sit looking out of your cab-window far above the
surface of the raging and impotent sea, skipping along at electric
speed, and daring the waves to do their worst--that would be bliss."

"And so practical," growled the Bibliomaniac.

"Bliss rarely is practical," said the Idiot. "Bliss is a sort of mugwump
blessing--too full of the ideal and too barren in practicability."

"Well," said Mr. Whitechoker. "I don't know why we should say that
trolley-cars between New York and London never can be. If we had told
our grandfathers a hundred years ago that a cable for the transmission
of news could be laid under the sea, they would have laughed us to
scorn."

"That's true," said the School-master. "But we know more than our
grandfathers did."

"Well, rather," interrupted the Idiot. "My great-grandfather, who died
in 1799, had never even heard of Andrew Jackson, and if you had asked
him what he thought of Darwin, he'd have thought you were guying him."

"Respect for age, sir," retorted Mr. Pedagog, "restrains me from
characterizing your great-grandfather, if, as you intimate, he knew less
than you do. However, apart from the comparative lack of knowledge in
the Idiot's family, Mr. Whitechoker, you must remember that with the
advance of the centuries we have ourselves developed a certain amount of
brains--enough, at least, to understand that there is a limit even to
the possibilities of electricity. Now, when you say that just because
an Atlantic cable would have been regarded as an object of derision in
the eighteenth century, we should not deride one who suggests the
possibility of a marine trolley-road between London and New York in the
twentieth century, it appears to me that you are talking--er--talking--I
don't like to say nonsense to one of your cloth, but--"

"Through his hat is the idiom you are trying to recall, I think, Mr.
Pedagog," said the Idiot. "Mr. Whitechoker is talking through his hat is
what you mean to say?"

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Idiot," said the School-master; "but when I find
that I need your assistance in framing my conversation, I shall--er--I
shall give up talking. I mean to say that I do not think Mr. Whitechoker
can justify his conclusions, and talks without having given the subject
concerning which he has spoken due reflection. The cable runs along the
solid foundation of the bed of the sea. It is a simple matter,
comparatively, but a trolley-wire stretched across the ocean by the
simplest rules of gravitation could not be made to stay up."

"No doubt you are correct," said Mr. Whitechoker, meekly. "I did not
mean that I expected ever to see a trolley-road across the sea, but I
did mean to say that man has made such wonderful advances in the past
hundred years that we cannot really state the limit of his
possibilities. It is manifest that no one to-day can devise a plan by
means of which such a wire could be carried, but--"

"I fear you gentlemen would starve as inventors," said the Idiot.
"What's the matter with balloons?"

"Balloons for what?" retorted Mr. Pedagog.

"For holding up the trolley-wires," replied the Idiot. "It is perfectly
feasible. Fasten the ends of your wire in London and New York, and from
coast to coast station two lines of sufficient strength to keep the wire
raised as far above the level of the sea as you require. That's simple
enough."

"And what, pray, in this frenzy of the elements, this raging storm of
which you have spoken," said Mr. Pedagog, impatiently--"what would then
keep your balloons from blowing away?"

"The trolley-wire, of course," said the Idiot. Mr. Pedagog lapsed into a
hopelessly wrathful silence for a moment, and then he said:

"Well, I sincerely hope your plan is adopted, and that the promoters
will make you superintendent, with an office in the mid-ocean balloon."

"Thanks for your good wishes, Mr. Pedagog," the Idiot answered. "If they
are realized I shall remember them, and show my gratitude to you by
using my influence to have you put in charge of the gas service.
Meantime, however, it seems to me that our ocean steamships could be
developed along logical lines so that the trip from New York to
Liverpool could be made in a very much shorter period of time than is
now required."

"We are getting back to the common-sense again," said the Bibliomaniac.
"That is a proposition to which I agree. Ten years ago eight days was
considered a good trip. With the development of the twin-screw steamer
the time has been reduced to approximately six days."

"Or a saving, really, of two days because of the extra screw," said the
Idiot.

"Precisely," observed the Bibliomaniac.

"So that, provided there are extra screws enough, there isn't any reason
why the trip should not be made in two or three hours."

"Ah--what was that?" said the Bibliomaniac. "I don't exactly follow
you."

"One extra screw, you say, has saved two days?"

"Yes."

"Then two extra screws would save four days, three would save six days,
and five extra screws would send the boat over in approximately no
time," said the Idiot. "So, if it takes a man two hours to succumb to
sea-sickness, a boat going over in less than that time would eliminate
sea-sickness; more people would go; boats could run every hour, and Mr.
Whitechoker could have a European trip every week without deserting his
congregation."

"Inestimable boon!" cried Mr. Whitechoker, with a laugh.

"Wouldn't it be!" said the Idiot. "Unless I change my mind, I think I
shall stay in this country until this style of greyhound is perfected.
Then, gentlemen, I shall tear myself away from you, and seek knowledge
in foreign pastures."

"Well, I am sure," said Mr. Pedagog--"I am sure that we all hope you
will change your mind."

"Then you want me to go abroad?" said the Idiot.

"No," said Mr. Pedagog. "No--not so much that as that we feel if you
were to change your mind the change could not fail to be for the better.
A mind like yours ought to be changed."

"Well, I don't know," said the Idiot. "I suppose it would be a good
thing if I broke it up into smaller denominations, but I've had it so
long that I have become attached to it; but there is one thing about it,
there is plenty of it, so that in case any of you gentlemen find your
own insufficient I shall be only too happy to give you a piece of it
without charge. Meanwhile, if Mrs. Pedagog will kindly let me have my
bill for last week, I'll be obliged."

"It won't be ready until to-morrow, Mr. Idiot," said the landlady, in
surprise.

"I'm sorry," said the Idiot, rising. "My scribbling-paper has run out. I
wanted to put in this morning writing a poem on the back of it."

"A poem? What about?" said Mr. Pedagog, with an irritating chuckle.

"It was to be a triolet on Omniscience," said the Idiot. "And, strange
to say, sir, you were to be the hero, if by any possibility I could
squeeze you into a French form."




IV

The Incorporation of the Idiot


"How is business these days, Mr. Idiot?" asked the Poet, as the one
addressed laid down the morning paper with a careworn expression on his
face. "Good, I hope?"

"Fair, only," replied the Idiot. "My honored employer was quite blue
about things yesterday, and if I hadn't staved him off I think he'd have
proposed swapping places with me. He has said quite often of late that I
had the best of it, because all I had to earn was my salary, whereas he
had to earn my salary and his own living besides. I offered to give him
ten per cent. of my salary for ten per cent. of his living, but he said
he guessed he wouldn't, adding that I seemed to be as great an Idiot as
ever."

"I fancy he was right there," said Mr. Pedagog. "I should really like to
know how a man of your peculiar mental construction can be of the
slightest practical value to a banker. I ask the question in all
kindness, too, meaning to cast no reflections whatever upon either you
or your employer. You are a roaring success in your own line, which is
all any one could ask of you."

"There's hominy for you, as the darky said to the hotel guest," returned
the Idiot. "Any person who says that discord exists at this table
doesn't know what he is talking about. Even the oil and the vinegar mix
in the caster--that is, I judge they do from the oleaginous appearance
of the vinegar. But I am very useful to my employer, Mr. Pedagog. He
says frequently that he wouldn't know what not to do if it were not for
me."

"Aren't you losing control of your tongue?" queried the Bibliomaniac,
looking at the Idiot in wonderment. "Don't you mean that he says he
wouldn't know what to do if it were not for you?"

"No, I don't," said the Idiot. "I never lose control of my tongue. I
meant exactly what I said. Mr. Barlow told me, in so many words, that if
it were not for me he wouldn't know what _not_ to do. He calls me his
Back Action Patent Reversible Counsellor. If he is puzzled over an
intricate point he sends for me and says: 'Such and such a thing being
the case, Mr. Idiot, what would you do? Don't think about it, but tell
me on impulse. Your thoughtless opinions are worth more to me than I can
tell you.' So I tell him on impulse just what I should do, whereupon he
does the other thing, and comes out ahead in nine cases out of ten."

"And you confess it, eh?" said the Doctor, with a curve on his lip.

"I certainly do," said the Idiot. "The world must take me for what I am.
I'm not going to be one thing for myself, and build up a fictitious
Idiot for the world. The world calls you men of pretence conceited,
whereas, by pretending to be something that you are not, you give to the
world what I should call convincing evidence that you are not at all
conceited, but rather somewhat ashamed of what you know yourselves to
be. Now, I rather believe in conceit--real honest pride in yourself as
you know yourself to be. I am an Idiot, and it is my ambition to be a
perfect Idiot. If I had been born a jackass, I should have endeavored to
be a perfect jackass."

"You'd have found it easy," said Mr. Pedagog, dryly.

"Would I?" said the Idiot. "I'll have to take your word for it, sir, for
_I_ have never been a jackass, and so cannot form an opinion on the
subject."

"Pride goeth before a fall," said Mr. Whitechoker, seeing a chance to
work in a moral reflection.

"Exactly," said the Idiot. "Wherefore I admire pride. It is a
danger-signal that enables man to avoid the fall. If Adam had had any
pride he'd never have fallen--but speaking about my controlling my
tongue, it is not entirely out of the range of possibilities that I
shall lose control of myself."

"I expected that, sooner or later," said the Doctor. "Is it to be
Bloomingdale or a private mad-house you are going to?"

"Neither," replied the Idiot, calmly. "I shall stay here. For, as the
poet says,

  "''Tis best to bear the ills we hov
  Nor fly to those we know not of.'"

"Ho!" jeered the Poet. "I must confess, my dear Idiot, that I do not
think you are a success in quotation. Hamlet spoke those lines
differently."

"Shakespeare's Hamlet did. My little personal Shakespeare makes his
Hamlet an entirely different, less stilted sort of person," said the
Idiot.

"You have a personal Shakespeare, have you?" queried the Bibliomaniac.

"Of course I have," the Idiot answered. "Haven't you?"

"I have not," said the Bibliomaniac, shortly.

"Well, I'm sorry for you then," sighed the Idiot, putting a fried potato
in his mouth. "Very sorry. I wouldn't give a cent for another man's
ideals. I want my own ideals, and I have my own ideal of Shakespeare. In
fancy, Shakespeare and I have roamed over the fields of Warwickshire
together, and I've had more fun imagining the kind of things he and I
would have said to each other than I ever got out of his published
plays, few of which have escaped the ungentle hands of the devastators."

"You mean commentators, I imagine," said Mr. Pedagog.

"I do," said the Idiot. "It's all the same, whether you call them
commentors or devastators. The result is the same. New editions of
Shakespeare are issued every year, and people buy them to see not what
Shakespeare has written, but what new quip some opinionated devastator
has tried to fasten on his memory. In a hundred years from now the works
of Shakespeare will differ as much from what they are to-day as to-day's
versions differ from what they were when Shakespeare wrote them. It's
mighty discouraging to one like myself who would like to write works."

"You are convicted out of your own mouth," said the Bibliomaniac. "A
moment since you wasted your pity on me because I didn't mutilate
Shakespeare so as to make him my own, and now you attack the
commentators for doing precisely the same thing. They're as much
entitled to their opinions as you are to yours."

"Did you ever learn to draw parallels when you were in school?" asked
the Idiot.

"I did, and I think I've made a perfect parallel in this case. You
attack people in one breath for what you commiserate me for not doing in
another," said the Bibliomaniac.

"Not exactly," said the Idiot. "I don't object to the commentators for
commentating, but I do object to their putting out their versions of
Shakespeare as Shakespeare. I might as well have my edition published.
It certainly would be popular, especially where, in 'Julius Cæsar,' I
introduce five Cassiuses and have them all fall on their swords
together with military precision, like a 'Florodora' sextette, for
instance."

"Well, I hope you'll never print such an atrocity as that," cried the
Bibliomaniac, hotly. "If there's one thing in literature without excuse
and utterly contemptible it is the comic version, the parody of a
masterpiece."

"You need have no fear on that score," returned the Idiot. "I haven't
time to rewrite Shakespeare, and, since I try never to stop short of
absolute completeness, I shall not embark on the enterprise. If I do,
however, I shall not do as the commentators do, and put on my title-page
'Shakespeare. Edited by Willie Wilkins,' but 'Shakespeare As He Might
Have Been, Had His Plays Been Written By An Idiot.'"

"I have no doubt that you could do great work with 'Hamlet,'" observed
the Poet.

"I think so myself," said the Idiot. "But I shall never write 'Hamlet.'
I don't want to have my fair fame exposed to the merciless hands of the
devastators."

"I shall never cease to regret," said Mr. Pedagog, after a moment's
thought, "that you are so timid. I should very much like to see 'The
Works of the Idiot.' I admit that my desire is more or less a morbid
one. It is quite on a plane with the feeling that prompts me to wish to
see that unfortunate man on the Bowery who exhibits his forehead, which
is sixteen inches high, beginning with his eyebrows, for a dime. The
strange, the bizarre in nature, has always interested me. The more
unnatural the nature, the more I gloat upon it. From that point of view
I do most earnestly hope that when you are inspired with a work you will
let me at least see it."

"Very well," answered the Idiot. "I shall put your name down as a
subscriber to the _Idiot Monthly Magazine_, which some of my friends
contemplate publishing. That is what I mean when I say I may shortly
lose control of myself. These friends of mine profess to have been so
impressed by my dicta that they have asked me if I would allow myself to
be incorporated into a stock company, the object of which should be to
transform my personality into printed pages. Hardly a day goes by but I
devote a portion of my time to a poem in which the thought is
conspicuous either by its absence or its presence. My schemes for the
amelioration of the condition of the civilized are notorious among those
who know me; my views on current topics are eagerly sought for; my
business instinct, as I have already told you, is invaluable to my
employer, and my fiction is unsurpassed in its fictitiousness. What more
is needed for a magazine? You have the poetry, the philanthropy, the
man of to-day, the fictitiousness, and the business instinct necessary
for the successful modern magazine all concentrated in one person. Why
not publish that person, say my friends, and I, feeling as I do that no
man has a right to the selfish enjoyment of the great gifts nature has
bestowed upon him, of course can only agree. I am to be incorporated
with a capital stock of five hundred thousand dollars. One hundred
thousand dollars' worth of myself I am to be permitted to retain; the
rest my friends will subscribe for at fifty cents on the dollar. If any
of you want shares in the enterprise I have no doubt you can be
accommodated."

"I'm obliged to you for the opportunity," said the Doctor. "But I have
to be very careful about things I take stock in, and in general I
regard you as a thing in which I should prefer not to take stock."

"And I," observed Mr. Pedagog--"I have never up to this time taken any
stock in you, and I make it a rule to be guided in life by precedent.
Therefore I must be counted out."

"I'll wait until you are listed at the Stock Exchange," put in the
Bibliomaniac, "while thanking you just the same for the chance."

"You can put me down for one share, to be paid for in poetry," said the
Poet, with a wink at the Idiot.

"You'll never make good," said the Idiot, slyly.

"And I," said the Genial Old Gentleman who occasionally imbibes, "shall
be most happy to take five shares to be paid for in advice and
high-balls. Moreover, if your company needs good-will to establish its
enterprise, you may count upon me for unlimited credit."

"Oh, as for that," said the Idiot, "I have plenty of good-will. Even
Mr. Pedagog supplies me with more of it than I deserve, though by no
means with all that I desire."

"That good-will is yours as an individual, Mr. Idiot," returned the
School-master. "As a corporation, however, I cannot permit you to trade
upon me even for that. Your value is, in my eyes, entirely too
fluctuating."

"And it is in the fluctuating stock that the great fortunes are made,
Mr. Pedagog," said the Idiot. "As an individual I appreciate your
good-will. As a corporation I am soulless, without emotions, and so
cherish no disappointments over your refusal. I think if the scheme goes
through it will be successful, and I fully expect to see the day when
Idiot Preferred will be selling as high, if not higher, than Steel, and
leaving utterly behind any other industrial that ever was known, copper
or rope."

"If, like the railways, you could issue betterment bonds you might do
very well," said the Doctor. "I think ten million dollars spent in
bettering you might bring you up to par."

"Or a consolidated first-mortgage bond," remarked the Bibliomaniac.
"Consolidate the Idiot with a man like Chamberlain or the German
Emperor, and issue a five-million-dollar mortgage on the result, and you
might find people who'd take those bonds at seventy-five."

"You might if they were a dollar bond printed on cartridge-paper," said
Mr. Pedagog. "Then purchasers could paper their walls with them."

"Rail on," said the Idiot. "I can stand it. When I begin paying
quarterly dividends at a ten-per-cent. rate you'll wish you had come
in."

"I don't know about that," said Mr. Pedagog. "It would entirely
depend."

"On what?" queried the Idiot, unwarily.

"On whether that ten per cent. was declared upon your own estimate of
your value or upon ours. On yours it would be fabulous; on ours--oh,
well, what is the use of saying anything more about it. We are not going
in it, and that's an end to it."

"Well, I'll go in it if you change your scheme," said the Doctor. "If
instead of an Idiot Publishing Company you will try to float yourself as
a Consolidated Gas Company you may count on me to take a controlling
interest."

"I will submit the proposition to my friends," said the Idiot, calmly.
"It would be something to turn out an honest gas company, which I
should, of course, try to be, but I am afraid the public will not accept
it. There is little demand for laughing-gas, and, besides, they would
fear to intrust you with a controlling interest for fear that you might
blow the product out and the bills up--coining millions by mere
inflation. They've heard of you, Doctor, and they know that is the sort
of thing you'd be likely to do."




V

University Extension


"I was surprised and gratified last evening, Mr. Idiot," observed the
School-master as breakfast was served, "to see you at the University
Extension Lecture. I did not know that you admitted the necessity of
further instruction in any matter pertaining to human knowledge."

"I don't know that I do admit the necessity," returned the Idiot.
"Sometimes when I take an inventory of the contents of my mind it seems
to me that about everything I need is there."

"There you go again!" said the Bibliomaniac. "Why do you persist in your
refusal to allow any one to get a favorable impression concerning you?
Mr. Pedagog unbends sufficiently to tell you that you have at last done
something which he can commend, and you greet him with an Idiotism which
is practically a rebuff."

"Very well said," observed the School-master, with an acquiescent nod.
"I came to this table this morning encouraged to believe that this young
man was beginning to see the error of his ways, and I must confess to a
great enough interest in him to say that I was pleased at that
encouragement. I saw him at a lecture on literature at the Lyceum Hall
last evening, and he appeared to be interested, and yet this morning he
seems to show that he is utterly incorrigible. May I ask, sir, why you
attended that lecture if, as you say, your mind is already sufficiently
well furnished?"

"Certainly you may ask that question," replied the Idiot. "I went to
that lecture to have my impressions confirmed, that is all. I have
certain well-defined notions concerning University Extension, and I
wished to see if they were correct. I found that they were."

"The lecture was not upon University Extension, but upon Romanticism,
and it was a most able discourse," retorted Mr. Pedagog.

"Very likely," said the Idiot. "I did not hear it. I did not want to
hear it. I have my own ideas concerning Romanticism, which do not need
confirmation or correction. I have already confirmed and corrected them.
I went to see the audience and not to hear Professor Peterkin exploding
theories."

"It is a pity the chair you occupied was wasted upon you," snapped Mr.
Pedagog.

"I agree with you," said the Idiot. "I could have got a much better view
of the audience if I had been permitted to sit on the stage, but
Professor Peterkin needed all that for his gestures. However, I saw
enough from where I sat to confirm my impression that University
Extension is not so much of a public benefit as a social fad. There was
hardly a soul in the audience who could not have got all that Professor
Peterkin had to tell him out of his books; there was hardly a soul in
the audience who could not have afforded to pay one dollar at least for
the seat he occupied; there was not a soul in the audience who had paid
more than ten cents for his seat or her seat, and those for whose
benefit the lecture was presumably given, the ten-cent people, were
crowded out. The lectures themselves are not instructive--Professor
Peterkin's particularly--except in so far as it is instructive to hear
what Professor Peterkin thinks on this or that subject, and his desire
to be original forces him to cook up views which no one else ever held,
with the result that what he says is most interesting and proper to be
presented to the attention of a discriminating audience, but not proper
to be presented to an audience that is supposed to come there to receive
instruction."

"You have just said that you did not listen to the lecture. How do you
know that what you say is true?" put in the Bibliomaniac.

"I know Professor Peterkin," said the Idiot.

"Does he know you?" sneered Mr. Pedagog.

"I don't think he would remember me if you should speak my name in his
presence," observed the Idiot, calmly. "But that is easily accounted
for. The Professor never remembers anybody but himself."

"Well, I admit," said Mr. Pedagog, "that the Professor's lectures were
rather advanced for the comprehension of a person like the Idiot,
nevertheless it was an enjoyable occasion, and I doubt if the
fulminations of our friend here will avail against University
Extension."

"You speak a sad truth," said the Idiot. "Social fads are impervious to
fulmination, as Solomon might have said had he thought of it. As long as
a thing is a social fad it will thrive, and, on the whole, perhaps it
ought to thrive. Anything which gives society something to think about
has its value, and the mere fact that it makes society _think_ is proof
of that value."

"We seem to be in a philosophic frame of mind this morning," said Mr.
Whitechoker.

"We are," returned the Idiot. "That's one thing about University
Extension. It makes us philosophic. It has made a stoic of my dear old
daddy."

"Oh yes!" cried Mr. Pedagog. "You _have_ a father, haven't you? I had
forgotten that."

"Wherein," said the Idiot, "we differ. _I_ haven't forgotten that I have
one, and, by-the-way, it is from him that I first heard of University
Extension. He lives in a small manufacturing town not many miles from
here, and is distinguished in the town because, without being stingy, he
lives within his means. He has a way of paying his grocer's bills which
makes of him a marked man. He hasn't much more money than he needs, but
when the University Extension movement reached the town he was
interested. The prime movers in the enterprise went to him and asked him
if he wouldn't help it along, dilating upon the benefits which would
accrue to those whose education stopped short with graduation from the
high-schools. It was most plausible. The notion that for ten cents a
lecture the working masses could learn something about art, history,
and letters, could gather in something about the sciences, and all that,
appealed to him, and while he could afford it much more ill than the
smart people, the four hundred of the town, he chipped in. He paid fifty
dollars and was made an honorary manager. He was proud enough of it,
too, and he wrote a long, enthusiastic letter to me about it. It was a
great thing, and he hoped the State, which had been appealed to to help
the movement along, would take a hand in it. 'If we educate the masses
to understand and to appreciate the artistic, the beautiful,' he wrote,
'we need have little fear for the future. Ignorance is the greatest foe
we have to contend against in our national development, and it is the
only thing that can overthrow a nation such as ours is.' And then what
happened? Professor Peterkin came along and delivered ten or a dozen
lectures. The masses went once or twice and found the platform occupied
by a man who talked to them about Romanticism and Realism; who told them
that Dickens was trash; who exalted Tolstoi and Ibsen; but who never let
them into the secret of what Romanticism was, and who kept them equally
in the dark as to the significance of Realism. They also found the best
seats in the lecture-hall occupied by the smart set in full
evening-dress, who talked almost as much and as loudly as did Professor
Peterkin. The masses did not even learn manners at Professor Peterkin's
first and second lectures, and the third and fourth found them
conspicuous by their absence. All they learned was that they were
ignorant, and that other people were better than they, and what my
father learned was that he had subscribed fifty dollars to promote a
series of social functions for the diversion of the four hundred and the
aggrandizement of Professor Peterkin. He started in for what might be
called Romanticism, and he got a Realism that he did not like in less
time than it takes to tell of it, and to-day in that town University
Extension is such a fad that when, some weeks ago, the swell club of
that place talked of appointing Thursday evening as its club night, it
was found to be impossible, for the reason that it might interfere with
the attendance upon the University Extension lectures. That, Mr.
Pedagog, is a matter of history and can be proven, and last night's
audience confirmed the impression which I had formed from what my father
had told me. Professor Peterkin's lectures are interesting to you, a
school-master, but they are pure Greek to me, who would like to know
more about letters. I would gather more instruction from your table-talk
in an hour than I could from Professor Peterkin's whole course."

"You flatter me," said Mr. Pedagog.

"No," returned the Idiot. "If you knew how little the ignorant gain from
Peterkin you would not necessarily call it flattery if one should say he
learned more from your conversation over a griddle-cake."

"You misconceive the whole situation, I think, nevertheless," said Mr.
Whitechoker. "As I understand it, supplementary lectures, and
examinations based on them, are held after the lectures, when the
practical instruction is given with great thoroughness."

"I'm glad you spoke of that," said the Idiot. "I had forgotten that part
of it. Professor Peterkin received pay for his lectures, which dealt in
theories only; plain Mr. Barton, who delivered the supplementary
lectures, got nothing. Professor Peterkin taught nothing, but he
represented University Extension. Plain Mr. Barton did the work and
represented nothing. Both reached society. Neither reached the masses.
In my native town plain Mr. Barton's supplementary lectures, which were
simply an effort to unravel the Peterkin complications, were attended by
the same people in smaller crowds--people of social standing who were
curious enough to devote an hour a week to an endeavor to find out the
meaning of what Professor Peterkin had told them at the function the
week before. The students examined were mostly ladies, and I happen to
know that in a large proportion they were ladies whose husbands could
have afforded to pay Professor Peterkin his salary ten times over as a
private tutor."

"As I look at it," said Mr. Pedagog, gravely, "it does not make much
difference to whom your instruction is given, so long as it instructs.
What if these lectures do interest those who are comparatively well
off? Your society woman may be as much in need of an extended education
as your factory girl. The University Extension idea is to convey
knowledge to people who would not otherwise get it. It simply sets out
to improve minds. If the social mind needs improvement, why not improve
it? Why condemn a system because it does not discriminate in the minds
selected for improvement?"

"I don't condemn a system which sets out to improve minds irrespective
of conditions," replied the Idiot. "But I should most assuredly condemn
a man, or a set of men, who induced me to subscribe to a bread fund for
the poor and who afterwards expended that money on cream-cakes for the
Czar of Russia. The fact that the Czar of Russia wanted the cream-cakes
and was willing to accept them would not affect my feelings in the
matter, though I have no doubt the people in charge of the fund would
find themselves far more conspicuous for having departed from the
original idea. Some of them might be knighted for it if the Czar
happened to be passionately fond of cream-cakes."

"Then, having attacked this system, what would you have? Would you have
University Extension stop?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

"Not at all," returned the Idiot. "Anything which can educate society is
a good thing, but I should change the name of it from University
Extension to Social Expansion, and I should compel those whose minds
were broadened by it to pay the bills."

"But as yet you have failed to hit the nail on the head," persisted the
Bibliomaniac. "The masses can attend these lectures if they wish to, and
on your own statement they don't. You don't seem to consider that point,
or, if you do, you don't meet it."

"I don't think it necessary to meet it," said the Idiot. "Though I will
say that if you were one of the masses--a girl, say, with one dress,
threadbare, poor, and ill-fitting, and possessed of a natural bit of
pride--you would find little pleasure in attending a lecture your
previous education does not permit of your comprehending, and sitting
through an evening with a lot of finely dressed, smart folk, with their
backs turned towards you. The plebeians have _some_ pride, my dear
Bibliomaniac, and they are decidedly averse to mixing with the swells.
They would like to be educated, but they don't care to be snubbed for
the privilege of being mystified by a man like Professor Peterkin, even
for so small a sum as ten cents an evening."




VI

Social Expansion


"We were talking about University Extension the other day, Mr. Pedagog,"
said the Idiot, as the School-master folded up the newspaper and put it
in his pocket, "and I, as you remember, suggested that it might better
be called Social Expansion."

"Did you?" said Mr. Pedagog, coldly. "I don't remember much about it. I
rarely make a note of anything you may say."

"Well, I did suggest the change of name, whether your memory is
retentive or not, and I have been thinking the matter over a good deal
since, and I think I've got hold of an idea," returned the Idiot.

"In that case," said the Bibliomaniac, "we would better lock the door.
If you have really got hold of an idea you should be very careful not to
let it get away from you."

"No danger of that," said the Idiot, with a smile. "I have it securely
locked up here," tapping his forehead.

"It must be lonesome," said Mr. Pedagog.

"And rather uncomfortable--if it is a real idea," observed the Doctor.
"An idea in the Idiot's mind must feel somewhat as a tall, stout Irish
maid feels when she goes to her bedroom in one of those Harlem
flat-houses."

"You men are losing a great opportunity," said the Idiot, with a
scornful glance at the three professional gentlemen. "The idea of your
following the professions of pedagogy, medicine, and literature, when
the three of you combined could make a fortune as an incarnate comic
paper. I don't see why you don't make a combination like those German
bands that play on the street corners, and go about from door to door,
and crack your jokes just as they crack their music. I am sure you'd
take, particularly in front of barber-shops."

"It would be hard on the comic papers," said the Poet, who was getting a
little unpopular with his fellow-boarders because of his tendency,
recently developed, to take the Idiot's part in the breakfast-table
discussions. "They might be so successful that the barber-shops, instead
of taking the comic papers for their customers to read, would employ one
or more of them to sit in the middle of the room and crack jokes aloud."

"We couldn't rival the comic papers though," said the Doctor, wishing to
save his dignity by taking the bull by the horns. "We might do the
jokes well enough, but the comic papers are chiefly pictorial."

"You'd be pictorial enough," said the Idiot. "Wasn't it you, Mr.
Pedagog, that said the Doctor here looked like one of Cruikshank's
physicians, or as if he had stepped out of Dickens's pages, or something
like it?"

"I never said anything of the sort!" cried the School-master,
wrathfully; "and you know I didn't."

"Who was it said that?" asked the Idiot, innocently, looking about the
table. "It couldn't have been Mr. Whitechoker, and I know it wasn't the
Poet or my Genial Friend who occasionally imbibes. Mr. Pedagog denies
it; I didn't say it; Mrs. Pedagog wouldn't say it. That leaves only two
of us--the Bibliomaniac and the Doctor himself. I don't think the Doctor
would make a personal remark of that kind, and--well, there is but one
conclusion. Mr. Bibliomaniac, I am surprised."

"What?" roared the Bibliomaniac, glaring at the Idiot. "Do you mean to
fasten the impertinence on me?"

"Far from it," returned the Idiot, meekly. "Very far from it. It is
fate, sir, that has done that--the circumstantial evidence against you
is strong; but then, mercifully enough, circumstantial evidence is not
permitted to hang a man."

"Now see here, Mr. Idiot," said the Bibliomaniac, firmly and
impressively, "I want you to distinctly understand that I am not going
to have you put words into my mouth that I never uttered. I--"

"Pray, don't attack me," said the Idiot. "I haven't made any charge
against you. I only asked who could have said that the Doctor looked
like a creation of Cruikshank. I couldn't have said it, because I don't
think it. Mr. Pedagog denies it. In fact, every one here has a clear
case of innocence excepting yourself, and I don't believe _you_ said
it, only the chain of circumstance--"

"Oh, hang your chain of circumstance!" interrupted the Bibliomaniac.

"It is hung," said the Idiot, "and it appears to make you very
uncomfortable. However, as I was saying, I think I have got hold of an
idea involving a truly philanthropic and by no means selfish scheme of
Social Expansion."

"Heigho!" sighed Mr. Pedagog. "I sometimes think that if I had not the
honor to be the husband of our landlady I'd move away from here. Your
views, sir, are undermining my constitution."

"You only think so, Mr. Pedagog," replied the Idiot. "You are simply
going through a process of intellectual reconstruction at my hands. You
feel exactly as a man feels who has been shut up in the dark for years
and suddenly finds himself in a flood of sunlight. I am doing with you
as an individual what I would have society do for mankind at large--in
other words, while I am working for individual expansion upon the raw
material I find here, I would have society buckle down to the
enlargement of itself by the improvement of those outside of itself."

"If you swim in water as well as you do in verbiage," said the
Bibliomaniac, "you must be able to go three or four strokes without
sinking."

"Oh, as for that, I can swim like a duck," said the Idiot. "You can't
sink me."

"I fancied not," observed Mr. Pedagog, with a smile at his own joke.
"You are so light I wonder, indeed, that you don't rise up into space,
anyhow."

"What a delightful condition of affairs that suggestion opens up!" said
the Idiot, turning to the Poet. "If I were you I'd make a poem on that.
Something like this, for instance:

  "I am so very, very light
    That gravitation curbs not me.
  I rise up through the atmosphere
    Till all the world I plainly see.

  "I dance about among the clouds,
    An airy, happy, human kite.
  The breezes toss me here and there,
    To my exceeding great delight.

  "And when I would return to sup,
    To breakfast, or perchance to dine,
  I haul myself once more to earth
    By tugging on a piece of twine."

Mr. Pedagog grinned broadly at this.

"You aren't entirely without your good points," he said. "If we ever
accept your comic-paper idea we'll have to rely on you for the nonsense
poetry."

"Thank you," said the Idiot. "I'll help. If I had a man like you to give
me the suggestions I could make a fortune out of poetry. The only
trouble is I have to quarrel with you before I can get you to give me a
suggestion, and I despise bickering."

"So do I," returned Mr. Pedagog. "Let's give up bickering and turn our
attention to--er--Social Extension, is it?"

"Yes--or Social Expansion," said the Idiot. "Some years ago the world
was startled to hear that in the city of New York there were not more
than four hundred people who were entitled to social position, and, as I
understand it, as time has progressed the number has still further
diminished. Last year the number was only one hundred and fifty, and, as
I read the social news of to-day, not more than twenty-five people are
now beyond all question in the swim. At dinners, balls, functions of all
sorts, you read the names of these same twenty-five over and over again
as having been present. Apparently no others attended--or, if they did,
they were not so indisputably entitled to be present that their names
could be printed in the published accounts. Now all of this shows that
society is dying out, and that if things keep on as they are now going
it will not be many years before we shall become a people without
society, a nation of plebeians."

"Your statement so far is lucid and logical," said Mr. Pedagog, who did
not admire society--so called--and who did not object to the goring of
an ox in which he was not personally interested.

"Well, why is this social contraction going on?" asked the Idiot.
"Clearly because Social Expansion is not an accepted fact. If it were,
society would grow. Why does it not grow? Why are its ranks not
augmented? There is raw material enough. You would like to get into the
swim; so would I. But we don't know how. We read books of etiquette,
but they are far from being complete. I think I make no mistake when I
say they are utterly valueless. They tell us no more than the funny
journal tells us when it says:

  "'Never eat pease with a spoon;
    Never eat pie with a knife;
  Never put salt on a prune;
    Never throw crumbs at your wife.'"

They tell most of us what we all knew before. They tell us not to wear
our hats in the house; they tell us all the obvious things, but the
subtleties of how to get into society they do not tell us. The comic
papers give us some idea of how to behave in society. We know from
reading the funny papers that a really swell young man always leans
against a mantel-piece when he is calling; that the swell girl sits on a
comfortable divan with her feet on a tiger-skin rug, and they converse
in epigram. Sometimes the epigram is positively rude; when it is not
rude it is so dull that no one wonders that the tiger's head on the rug
represents the tiger as yawning. But, while this is instructive, it
teaches us how to behave on special occasions only. You or I might call
upon a young woman who did not sit on a divan, who had no tiger-skin rug
to put her feet on, and whose parlor had a mantel-piece against which we
could not lean comfortably. What are we to do then? As far as they go,
the funny papers are excellent, but they don't go far enough. They give
us attractive pictures of fashionable dinners, but it is always of the
dinner after the game course. Some of us would like to know how society
behaves while the soup is being served. We know that after the game
course society girls reach across the table and clink wine-glasses with
young men, but we do not know what they do before they get to the clink
stage. Nowhere is this information given. Etiquette books are silent on
the subject, and though I have sought everywhere for information, I do
not know to this day how many salted almonds one may consume at dinner
without embarrassing one's hostess. Now, if I can't find out, the
million can't find out. Wherefore, instead of shutting themselves
selfishly up and, by so doing, forcing society finally into dissolution,
why cannot some of these people who know what is what give
object-lessons to the million; educate them in _savoir-faire_?

"Last summer there was a play put on at one of our theatres in which
there was a scene at a race-track. At one side was a tally-ho coach. For
the first week the coach was an utterly valueless accessory, because the
people on it were the ordinary supers in the employ of the theatre. They
did not know how to behave on a coach, and nobody was interested. The
management were suddenly seized with a bright idea. They invited several
swell young men who knew how things were done on coaches to come and do
these things on their coach. The young men came and imparted a realism
to the scene that made that coach the centre of attraction. People who
went to that play departed educated in coach etiquette. Now there lies
my scheme in a nutshell. If these twenty-five, the Old Guard of society,
which dines but never surrenders, will give once a week a social
function in some place like Madison Square Garden, to which the million
may go merely as spectators, not as participators, is there any doubt
that they would fail to be instructed? The Garden will seat eight or ten
thousand people. Suppose, for an instance, that a dozen of your best
exponents of what is what were to give a dinner in the middle of the
arena, with ten thousand people looking on. Do you mean to say that of
all that vast audience no one would learn thereby how to behave at a
dinner?"

"It is a great scheme," said the Doctor.

"It is!" said the Idiot, "and I venture to say that a course of, say,
twelve social functions given in that way would prove so popular that
the Garden would turn away every night twice as many people as it could
accommodate."

"It would be instructive, no doubt," said the Bibliomaniac; "but how
would it expand society? Would you have examinations?"

"Most assuredly," said the Idiot. "At the end of the season I should
have a rigid examination of all who chose to apply. I would make them
dine in the presence of a committee of expert diners, I would have them
pass a searching examination in the Art of Wearing a Dress Suit, in the
Science of Entering a Drawing-room, in the Art of Behavior at Afternoon
Teas, and all the men who applied should also be compelled to pass a
physical examination as an assurance that they were equal to the task of
getting an ice for a young lady at a ball."

"Society would get to be too inclusive and would cease to be exclusive,"
suggested Mr. Whitechoker.

"I think not," said the Idiot. "I should not give a man or a woman the
degree of B.S. unless he or she had passed an examination of one hundred
per cent."

"B.S.?" queried Mr. Pedagog.

"Yes," returned the Idiot. "Bachelor of Society--a degree which, once
earned, should entitle one to recognition as a member of the upper ten
anywhere in Christendom."

"It is superb!" cried Mr. Pedagog, enthusiastically.

"Yes," said the Idiot. "At ten cents a function it would beat University
Extension out of sight, and, further, it would preserve society. If we
lose society we lose caste, and, worse than all, our funny men would
have to go out of business, for there would be no fads or Willieboys
left to ridicule."




VII

A Beggar's Hand-book


"Mr. Idiot," said the Poet one morning, as the waffles were served, "you
are an inventive genius. Why don't you invent an easy way to make a
fortune? The trouble with most methods of making money is that they
involve too much labor."

"I have thought of that," said the Idiot. "And yet the great fortunes
have been made in a way which involved very little labor, comparatively
speaking. You, for instance, probably work harder over a yard of poetry
that brings you in ten dollars than any of our great railroad magnates
have over a mile of railroad which has brought them in a million."

"Which simply proves that it is ideas that count rather than labor,"
said the Poet.

"Not exactly," said the Idiot. "If you put a hundred ideas into a
quatrain you will get less money for it than you would for a two-volume
epic in which you have possibly only half an idea. It isn't idea so much
as nerve that counts. The man who builds railroads doesn't advance any
particular idea, but he shows lots of nerve, and it is nerve that makes
wealth. I believe that if you literary men would show more nerve force
and spare the public the infliction of what you call your ideas, you
would make more money."

"How would you show nerve in writing?" queried the Bibliomaniac.

"If I knew I'd write and make my fortune," said the Idiot.
"Unfortunately, I don't know how one can show nerve in writing, unless
it be in taking hold of some particularly popular idiosyncrasy of
mankind and treating it so contemptuously that every one would want to
mob you. If you could get the public mad enough at you to want to mob
you they'd read everything you'd write, simply to nourish their wrath,
and you'd soon be cutting coupons for a living, and could then afford to
take up more ideas--coupon-cutters can afford theories. For my own part,
one reason why I do not myself take up literature for a profession is
that I have neither the nerve nor the coupons. I'd probably run along in
the rut like a majority of the writers of to-day, and wouldn't have the
grit to strike out in a new line of my own. Men say, and perhaps very
properly, this is the thing that has succeeded in the past. I'll do
this. Something else that appears alluring enough in the abstract has
never been done, and for that reason I won't do it. There have been
clever men before me, men clever enough to think of this something that
I fondly imagine is original, and they haven't done it. Doubtless they
refrained from doing it for good and sufficient reasons, and I am not
going to be fool enough to set my judgment up against theirs. In other
words, I lack the nerve to go ahead and write as I feel. I prefer to
study past successes, with the result that I am moderately successful
only. It's the same way in every line of business. Precedent guides in
all things, but where occasionally you find a man courageous enough to
cast precedent to the winds, one of two things happens. Either fortune
or ruin follows. Hence, the thing to do if you want to make a fortune is
to eliminate the possibility of ruin as far as may be. You cannot ruin a
man who has nothing. He is down on bed-rock, anyhow; so for a receipt
for fortune I should say, start a pauper, show your nerve, and you'll
make a pile, or you won't make a pile. If you make it you are fortunate.
If you fail to make it you are no more unfortunate than you were before
you started."

"For plausibility, Mr. Idiot," said Mr. Pedagog, "you are to me a
perfect wonder. I do not think that any one can deny, with confidence
born of certainty, the truth of your premises, and it must be admitted
that your conclusions are based properly upon those premises, and yet
your conclusions are almost invariably utterly absurd, if not absolutely
grotesque. Here is a man who says, to make a fortune become a beggar!"

"Precisely," said the Idiot. "There is nothing like having a clean slate
to work on. If you are not a beggar you have something, and having
something promotes caution and tends to destroy nerve. As a beggar you
have everything to gain and nothing to lose, so you can plunge. You can
swim better in deep water than in the shallow."

"Well," said the Doctor, "enlighten us on this point. You may not know
how to show nerve as a writer--in fact, you confess that you don't. How
would you show nerve as a beggar? Would you strive to enforce your
demands and degenerate into a common highwayman, or would you simply go
in for big profits, and ask passers-by for ten dollars instead of ten
cents?"

"He'd probably take a bag of dynamite into a millionaire's office and
threaten to blow him to pieces if he didn't give him a house and lot,"
sneered the Bibliomaniac.

"Not at all," said the Idiot. "That's cowardice, not nerve. If I went
into a millionaire's office and demanded a million--or a house and lot
even--armed with a bag full of newspapers, pretending it held dynamite,
it might be more like nerve; but my beggar would do nothing contrary to
the law. He'd simply be nervy, that's all--cheeky, perhaps you'd call
it. For instance, I believe that if I were to hire in the elevated cars
one of those advertising spaces above the windows, and were to place in
that space a placard saying that I was by nature too lazy to work, too
fond of life to starve, too poor to live, and too honest to steal, and
would be placed in affluence if every man and woman who saw that sign
would send me ten cents a week in two-cent postage-stamps for five weeks
running, I should receive enough money to enable me to live at the most
expensive hotel in town during that period. By living at that hotel and
paying my bills regularly I could get credit enough to set myself up in
business, and with credit there is practically no limit to the
possibilities of fortune. It is simply honest nerve that counts. The
beggar who asks you on the street for five cents to keep his family from
starving is rebuffed. You don't believe his story, and you know that
five cents wouldn't keep a family from starving very long. But the
fellow who accosts you frankly for a dime because he is thirsty, and
hasn't had a drink for two hours, in nine cases out of ten properly
selected ones will get a quarter for his nerve."

"You ought to write a _Manual for Beggars_," said the Bibliomaniac. "I
have no doubt that the Idiot Publishing Company would publish it."

"Yes," said Mr. Pedagog. "A sort of beggar's _Don't_, for instance. It
would be a benefit to all men, as well as a boon to the beggars. That
mendicancy is a profession to-day there is no denying, and anything
which could make of it a polite calling would be of inestimable value."

"I have had it in mind for some time," said the Idiot, blandly. "I
intended to call it _Mendicancy Made Easy_, or _the Beggar's Don't: With
Two Chapters on Etiquette for Tramps_."

"The chief trouble with such a book I should think," said the Poet,
"would be that your beggars and tramps could not afford to buy it."

"That wouldn't interfere with its circulation," returned the Idiot.
"It's a poor tramp who can't steal. Every suburban resident in creation
would buy a copy of the book out of sheer curiosity. I'd get my
royalties from them; the tramps could get the books by helping
themselves to the suburbanites' copies as they do to chickens,
fire-wood, and pies put out to cool. As for the beggars, I'd have it put
into their hands by the people they beg from. When a man comes up to a
wayfarer, for instance, and says, 'Excuse me, sir, but could you spare
a nickel to a hungry man?' I'd have the wayfarer say, 'Excuse _me_, sir,
but unfortunately I have left my nickels in my other vest; but here is a
copy of the Idiot's _Mendicancy Made Easy, or the Beggar's Don't_.'"

"And you think the beggar would read it, do you?" asked the
Bibliomaniac.

"I don't know whether he would or not. He'd probably either read it or
pawn it," the Idiot answered. "In either event he would be better off,
and I would have got my ten per cent. royalty on the book. After the
_Beggars' Manual_ I should continue my good work if I found the class
for whom it was written had benefited by my first effort. I should
compile as my contribution to the literature of mendicancy for the
following season what I should call _The Beggar's Élite Directory_. This
would enlarge my sphere a trifle. It would contain as complete lists as
could be obtained of persons who give to street beggars, with their
addresses, so that the beggars, instead of infesting the streets at
night might go to the houses of these people and collect their incomes
in a more business-like and less undignified fashion. Added to this
would be two lists, one for tramps, stating what families in the suburbs
kept dogs, what families gave, whether what they gave was digestible or
not, rounding up with a list of those who do not give, and who have
telephone connection with the police station. This would enable them to
avoid dogs and rebuffs, would save the tramp the time he expends on
futile efforts to find work he doesn't want, and as for the people who
have to keep the dogs to ward off the tramps, they, too, would be
benefited, because the tramps would begin to avoid them, and in a short
while they would be able to dispense with the dogs. The other list
would be for organ-grinders, who are, after all, only beggars of a
different type. This list would comprise the names of persons who are
musical and who would rather pay a quarter than listen to a hand-organ.
By a judicious arrangement with these people, carried on by
correspondence, the organ-grinder would be able to collect a large
revenue without venturing out, except occasionally to play before the
house of a delinquent subscriber in order to remind him that he had let
his contract expire. So, by slow degrees, we should find beggars doing
their work privately and not publicly, tramps circulating only among
those whose sympathies they have aroused, and organ-grinding only a
memory."

"The last, I think, would not come about," said Mr. Pedagog. "For there
are people who like the music of hand-organs."

"True--I'm one of 'em. I'd hire a hansom to follow a piano-organ about
the city if I could afford it, but as a rule the hand-organ lovers are
of the one-cent class," returned the Idiot. "The quarter class are
people who would rather not hear the hand-organ, and it is to them that
a grinder of business capacity would naturally address himself. It is
far pleasanter to stay at home and be paid large money for doing nothing
than to undertake a weary march through the city to receive small sums
for doing something. That's human nature, Mr. Pedagog."

"I presume it is," said Mr. Pedagog; "but I don't think your scheme is.
Human nature works, but your plan wouldn't."

"Well, of course," said the Idiot, "you never can tell about ideals. The
fact that an ideal is ideal is the chief argument against its amounting
to much. But I am confident that if my _Beggar's Don't_ and _Élite
Directory_ fail, my other book will go."

"You appear to have the writing of a library in mind," sneered the
Bibliomaniac.

"I have," said the Idiot. "If I write all the books I have in mind, the
public library will be a small affair beside mine."

"And your other book is to be what?" queried Mr. Whitechoker.

"_Plausible Tales for Beggars to Tell_," said the Idiot. "If the beggar
could only tell an interesting story he'd be surer of an ear in which to
whisper it. The usual beggar's tale is commonplace. There's no art in
it. There are no complications of absorbing interest. There is not a
soul in creation, I venture to say, but would be willing to have a
beggar stop right in the middle of his story. The tales I'd write for
them would be so interesting that the attention of the wayfarer would be
arrested at once. His mind would be riveted on the situation at once,
and, instead of hurrying along and trying to leave the beggar behind, he
would stop, button-hole him, and ask him to sit down on a convenient
doorstep and continue. If a beggar could have such a story to tell as
would enable him in the midst of one of its most exciting episodes to
whisper hoarsely into the ear of the man whose nickel he was seeking,
'The rest of this interesting story I will tell you in Central Park at
nine o'clock to-morrow night,' in such a manner as would impel the
listener to meet him in the Park the following evening, his fortune
would be made. Such a book I hope some day to write."

"I have no doubt," said Mr. Whitechoker, "that it will be an
entertaining addition to fiction."

"Nor have I," said the Idiot. "It will make the writers of to-day green
with envy, and, as for the beggars, if it is not generally known that
it is I and not they who are responsible for the work, the beggars will
shortly find themselves in demand as writers of fiction for the
magazines."

"And you?" suggested the Poet.

"I shall be content. Mere gratitude will force the beggars to send me
the magazine orders, and _I'll_ write their articles and be glad of the
opportunity, giving them ten per cent. of the profits. I know a man who
makes fifty dollars a year at magazine work, and one of my ambitions is
to rival the Banker-Poets and Dry Goods Essayists by achieving fame as
the Boarding-house Dickens."




VIII

Progressive Waffles


"I am afraid," said Mr. Pedagog, in a loud whisper to the Bibliomaniac,
"that the Idiot isn't feeling well this morning. He has eaten three
fish-cakes and a waffle without opening his mouth."

The Idiot looked up, and, gazing wearily at Mr. Pedagog for a moment,
shrugged his shoulders and ejaculated, "Tutt!"

"He's off," said the Bibliomaniac. "Whenever he says 'Tutt!' you can
make up your mind that his vocabulary is about to be loosed."

"If my vocabulary were as warped as some other vocabularies I might
mention," said the Idiot, helping himself to another waffle modelled
after the six of hearts, "I'd keep it in a cage. A man who observes that
I have eaten three fish-cakes and a waffle without opening my mouth
hasn't a very good command of language. He simply states as a fact what
is in reality an impossibility, granting that I eat with my mouth, which
I am told I do."

"You know what I mean," retorted Mr. Pedagog, impatiently. "I am so much
in your society that I have acquired the very bad habit of speaking in
the vernacular. When I say you haven't opened your mouth I do not refer
to the opening you make for the receipt of waffles and fish-cakes, but
for those massive openings which you require for your exuberant
loquacity. In other words, I mean that you haven't spoken a word for at
least three minutes, which is naturally an indication to us that you
aren't feeling well. You and talk are synonymous as far as we are
concerned."

"I _have_ been known to speak--that is true," said the Idiot. "That I am
not feeling very well this morning is also true. I have a headache."

"A what ache?" asked the Doctor, scornfully.

"A very bad headache," returned the Idiot, looking about him for a third
waffle.

"How singular!" said the Bibliomaniac. "Reminds me of a story I heard of
a man who had lost his foot. He'd had his foot shot off at Gettysburg,
and yet for years after he could feel the pangs of rheumatism in that
foot from which he had previously suffered."

"Pardon me for repeating," observed the Idiot. "But, as I have already
said, and as I expect often to have to say again, Tutt! I can't blame
you for thinking that I have no head, however. I find so little use for
one here that in most instances I do not obtrude it upon you."

"I haven't noticed any lack of head in the Idiot," put in the
School-master. "As a rule, I can agree to almost anything my friend the
Bibliomaniac says, but in this case I cannot accept his views. You have
a head. I have always said you had a head--in fact, that is what I
complain about chiefly, it is such a big head."

"Thank you," said the Idiot, ignoring the shaft. "I shall never forget
your kindness in coming to my aid, though I can't say that I think I
needed it. Even with a racking headache sustained by these delicious
waffles, I believe I can handle the Doctor and my bookish friend without
assistance. I am what the mathematicians would call an arithmetical
absurdity--I am the one that is equal to the two they represent. At
present, however, I prefer to let them talk on. I am too much absorbed
in thought and waffles to bandy words."

"If I had a headache," said Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog, without, it must be
said, in any way desiring to stem the waffle tide which was slowly but
surely eating into the profits of the week--"if I had a headache I
should not eat so many waffles, Mr. Idiot."

"I suppose I ought not to," replied the Idiot, "but I can't help it,
ma'am. Waffles are my weakness. Some men take to drink, some to gaming;
I seek forgetfulness of woe in waffles. Mr. Whitechoker, will you kindly
pass me that steaming ten of diamonds that is wasting its warmth upon
the desert air before you?"

Mr. Whitechoker, with a sigh which indicated that he had had his eye on
the ten of diamonds himself, did as he was requested.

"Many thanks," said the Idiot, transferring the waffle to his plate.
"Let me see--that is how many?"

"Five," said Mr. Pedagog.

"Eight," said the Bibliomaniac.

"Dear me!" ejaculated the Idiot. "Why can't you agree? I never eat less
than twelve waffles, and now that you have failed to keep tab I shall
have to begin all over again. Mary, bring me one dozen fresh waffles in
squads of four. This is an ideal breakfast, Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog."

"I am glad you are pleased," said the landlady, graciously. "My one aim
is to satisfy."

"You are a better shot than most women," said the Idiot. "I wonder why
it is," he added, "that waffles are so generally modelled after
playing-cards, and also why, having been modelled after playing-cards,
there is not a full pack?"

"Fifty-two waffles," said Mr. Whitechoker, "would be too many."

"Fifty-three, including the joker," said Mr. Pedagog.

"What do _you_ know about cards, John?" asked Mrs. Pedagog, severely.

The Idiot laughed.

"Did you ever hear that pretty little song of Gilbert and Sullivan's,
Mr. Poet, 'Things are seldom what they seem'?" he asked.

"Why shouldn't I know about playing-cards?" said Mr. Pedagog, acridly.
"Mr. Whitechoker seems to be aware that a pack holds fifty-two cards--if
he, why not I?"

"I--ah--I of course have to acquaint myself with many vicious things
with which I have very little sympathy," observed Mr. Whitechoker,
blandly. "I regard cards as an abomination."

"So do I," said Mr. Pedagog--"so do I. But even then I know a full
house--I should say a full pack from a--er--a--er--"

"Bob-tail flush," suggested the Idiot.

"Sir," said Mr. Pedagog, "I am not well up in poker terms."

"Then you ought to play," said the Idiot. "The man who doesn't know the
game has usually great luck. But I am sorry, Mrs. Pedagog, that you are
so strongly opposed to cards, for I was going to make a suggestion which
I think would promote harmony in our little circle on waffle days. If
you regard cards as wholly immoral, of course the suggestion is without
value, since it involves two complete packs of cards--one cardboard pack
and one waffle pack."

"I don't object to cards as cards, Mr. Idiot," said the landlady. "It is
the games people play with cards that I object to. They bring a great
deal of unnecessary misery into the world, and for that reason I think
it is better to avoid them altogether."

"That is quite true," said the Idiot. "They do bring about much
unhappiness. I know a young woman who became a victim of insomnia once
because in a series of ten games of old maid she got the odd card seven
times. Of course it wasn't entirely the cards' fault. Superstition had
something to do with it. In fact, I sometimes think the fault lies with
the people who play, and not with the cards. I owe much to the game of
whist. It taught me to control my tongue. I should have been a regular
talk-fiend if it hadn't been for whist."

Mr. Pedagog looked unutterable things at the Idiot.

"Are you laboring under the delusion that you have any control over your
tongue?" he asked, savagely.

"Most certainly," said the Idiot.

"Well, I'll have to make a note of that," said Mr. Pedagog. "I have a
friend who is making a collection of hallucinations."

"If you'll give me his address," said the Idiot, "I'll send him
thousands. For five dollars a dozen I'll invent hallucinations for him
that people ought to have but haven't."

"No," returned the School-master. "In his behalf, however, I thank you.
He collects only real hallucinations, and he finds there are plenty of
them without retaining a professional lunatic to supply him."

"Very well," said the Idiot, returning to his waffles. "If at any time
he finds the supply running short, I shall be glad to renew my offer."

"You haven't unfolded your Harmony Promoting Scheme for Waffle Days,"
suggested the Poet. "It has aroused my interest."

"Oh, it is simple," said the Idiot. "I have noticed that on waffle days
here most of us leave the table more or less dissatisfied. We find
ourselves plunged into acrimonious discussions, which, to my mind,
arise entirely from the waffles. Mr. Pedagog is a most amiable
gentleman, and yet we find him this morning full of acerbity. On the
surface of things I seem to be the cause of his anger, but in reality it
is not I, but the waffles. He has seen me gradually absorbing them and
it has irritated him. Every waffle that I eat _he_ might have had if I
had not been here. If there had been no one here but Mr. Pedagog, he
would have had all the waffles; as it is, his supply is limited. This
affects his geniality. It makes him--"

"Pardon me," said Mr. Pedagog. "But you are all wrong. I haven't thought
of the things at all."

"Consciously to yourself you have not," said the Idiot. "Subconsciously,
however, you have. The Philosophy of the Unconscious teaches us that
unknown to ourselves our actions are directly traceable to motives we
wot not of. The truth of this is conclusively proven in this case. Even
when I point out to you the facts in the case you deny their truth,
thereby showing that you are not conscious of the real underlying motive
for your irritation. Now, why is that irritation there? Because our
several rights to the individual waffles that are served here are not
clearly defined at the outset. When Mary brings in a steaming platter
full of these delicious creations of the cook, Mr. Pedagog has quite as
much right to the one with the six of hearts on it as I have, but I get
it. He does not. Hence he is irritated, although he does not know it. So
with Mr. Whitechoker. Five minutes ago he was hastening through the four
of spades in order that he might come into possession of the ten of
diamonds that lay smoking before him. As he was about to put the last
spade in his mouth I requested him to hand me the ten of diamonds,
having myself gulped down the deuce of clubs to get ahead of him. He
couldn't decline to give me that waffle because he wanted it himself. He
had to give it to me. He was irritated--though he did not know it. He
sighed and gave me the waffle."

"I did want it," said Mr. Whitechoker. "But I did not know that I
sighed."

"There you are," said the Idiot. "It is the Philosophy of the
Unconscious again. If you are not conscious of so actual a thing as a
sigh, how much the more unconscious must you be of something so subtle
as motive?"

"And your waffle-deck?" said the Genial Old Gentleman who occasionally
imbibes. "How will that solve the problem? It seems to me to complicate
the problem. As it is, we have about thirty waffles, each one of which
is a germ of irritation in the breast of the man who _doesn't_ eat it.
If you have fifty-two waffles you have twenty-two more germs to sow
discord in our midst."

"You would have but for my scheme," said the Idiot. "I'd have a pack of
cards at the table, and I'd deal them out just as you do in whist. Each
card would represent the corresponding waffle. We'd begin breakfast by
playing one hand after the manner of whist. Each man would keep his
tricks, and when the waffles were served he would receive those, and
those only, represented by the cards in the tricks he had taken. If you
took a trick with the king of diamonds in it, you'd get the waffle with
the king of diamonds on it, and so on. Every man would be clearly
entitled through his skill in the game to the waffles that he ate."

"Very good," said Mr. Whitechoker. "But suppose you had bad luck and
took no tricks?"

"Then," said the Idiot, "you'd have bad luck and get no waffles."

"Tutt!" said Mr. Pedagog.

And that was the sole criticism any of the boarders had to make,
although there is reason to believe that the scheme had objectionable
features to the majority of them, for as yet Progressive Waffles has not
been played at Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog's.




IX

A Clearing-house for Poets


"How is your Muse these days, Mr. Idiot?" asked the Bibliomaniac one
Sunday morning while the mush was being served.

"Flourishing," said the Idiot. "Just flourishing--and no more."

"I should think you'd be pleased if she is flourishing," said the
Doctor.

"I'd rather she'd stop flourishing and do a little writing," said the
Idiot. "She's a queer Muse, that one of mine. She has all the airs and
graces of an ordinary type-writer with an unconquerable aversion to
work."

"You look upon your Muse as you would upon your type-writer, eh?" said
Mr. Pedagog.

"Yes," said the Idiot. "That's all my Muse is, and she isn't even a
capable type-writer. The general run of type-writers make sense of what
you write, but my Muse won't. You may not believe it, but out of ten
inspirations I had last week not one of them is fit for publication
anywhere but in a magazine or a puzzle column. I don't know what is the
matter with her, but when I sit down to dictate a comic sonnet she turns
it into a serious jingle, and _vice versa_. We can't seem to get our
moods to fit. When I want to be serious she's flippant, and when I
become flippant she's serious."

"She must be very serious most of the time," said the Doctor.

"She is," said the Idiot, innocently. "But that's only because I'm
flippant most of the time. I'm going to give her warning. If she doesn't
brace up and take more interest in her work I'm going to get another
Muse, that's all. I can't afford to have my income cut down fifty per
cent. just because she happens to be fickle."

"Maybe she is flirting with somebody else," suggested the Poet. "My Muse
does that occasionally."

"I doubt it," said the Idiot. "I haven't observed any other poet
encroaching upon my particular province. Even you, good as you are,
can't do it. But in any event I'm going to have a change. The day has
gone by when a one-muse poet achieves greatness. I'm going to employ a
half-dozen and try to corner the poetry market. Queer that in all these
years that men have been writing poetry no one has thought of that.
People get up grain corners, corners in railway stock, monopolies in gas
and oil and everything else, about, but as yet no poet has cornered the
market in his business."

"That's easily accounted for," said the Bibliomaniac. "The poet
controls only his own work, and if he has any sense he doesn't want to
monopolize that."

"That isn't my scheme at all," said the Idiot. "You have a monopoly of
your own work always if you choose to avail yourself of it, and, as you
say, a man would be crazy to do so. What I'd like to see established is
a sort of Poetic Clearing-house Association. Supposing, for instance,
that I opened an office in Wall Street--a Bank for Poets, in which all
writers of verse could deposit their rhymes as they write them, and draw
against them just as they do in ordinary banks with their money. It
would be fine. Take a man like Swinburne, for instance, or our friend
here. Our poet could take a sonnet he had written, endorse it, and put
it in the bank. He'd be credited with one sonnet, and wouldn't have to
bother his head about it afterwards. He could draw against it. If the
Clearing-house company could dispose of it to a magazine his draft
would be honored in cash to its full value, less discount charges, which
would include postage and commissions to the company."

"And suppose the company failed to dispose of it?" suggested the Poet.

"They'd do just as ordinary banks do with checks--stamp it 'Not Good,'"
said the Idiot. "That, however, wouldn't happen very often if the
concern had an intelligent receiving-teller to detect counterfeits. If
the receiving-teller were a man fit for the position and a poet brought
in a quatrain with five lines in it, he could detect it at once and hand
it back. So with comic poems. I might go there with a poem I thought was
comic, and proceed to deposit it with the usual deposit slip. The teller
would look at it a second, scrutinize the humor carefully, and then if
it was not what I thought it, would stamp it 'Not Comic' or
'Counterfeit.' It is perfectly simple."

"Very simple," said Mr. Pedagog. "Though I should have used a synonym of
simple to describe it. It's idiotic."

"That's what people said of Columbus's idea that he could discover
America," said the Idiot. "Everything that doesn't have dollars
slathered all over it in plain view is idiotic."

"The word slathered is new to me," said the School-master; "but I fancy
I know what you mean."

"The word slathered may be new to you," said the Idiot, "but it is a
good word. I have used it with great effect several times. Whenever any
one asks me that foolish question that is asked so often, 'What is the
good word?' I always reply 'Slathered,' and the what's-the-good-word
fiend goes off hurt in his mind. He doesn't know what I mean any more
than I do, but it shuts him up completely, which is just so much
gained."

"I must confess," said the Poet, "that I cannot myself see where there
is any money for your Rhyme Clearing-house. Ordinarily I quite approve
of your schemes, but in this instance I go over to the enemy."

"I don't say that it is a gold-mine," said the Idiot. "I doubt if I had
every cent that is paid for poetry in a year by everybody to everybody
that my income would reach one hundredth part of what I'd receive as a
successful manufacturer of soap; but there would be more money in poetry
than there is if by some pooling of our issues we could corner the
market. Suppose every writer of a quatrain in America should send his
whole product to us. We could say to the magazines, 'Gentlemen,
quatrains are not quatraining as hard as they were. If you need a
four-line bit of gloom and rhyme to finish off your thirty-second page,
our price is twenty-five dollars instead of seventy-five cents, as of
yore.' So with all other kinds of verse. We'd simply name our figure,
force the editors to accept it, and unload. We might get caught on the
last thirty or forty thousand, but our profits on the others would
enable us to more than meet the losses."

"And would you pay the author the twenty-five dollars?" asked Mr.
Whitechoker.

"Not if we were sane," replied the Idiot. "We'd pay the author two
dollars and fifty cents, which is one dollar and seventy-five cents more
than he gets now. _He_ couldn't complain."

"And those that you couldn't sell?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

"We'd simply mark 'Not Good' and return to the author. That's what
happens to him now, so no objection could be raised to that. But there's
still another side to this matter," said the Idiot. "Publishers would
be quite as anxious to help it along as the poets. Dealing through us,
they would be spared the necessity of interviewing poets, which I am
informed is always painful because of the necessity which publishers
labor under to give the poet to understand that they are in the business
for profit, not for pleasure or mere love of sinking money in a
magazine. So the publishers would keep a standing account of hard cash
in our bank. Say a magazine used one hundred dollars' worth of verse in
a month. The publisher at the beginning of the year would deposit twelve
hundred dollars with us, and throughout the year would draw out sonnets,
ballads, or pastels-in-metre just as he needed them. The checks would
read something like this: 'The Poets' Clearing-house Association of the
City of New York will pay to John Bluepencil, Editor, or Order, Ten
Sonnets. (Signed) Blank Brothers & Co.' Or perhaps we'd receive a
notice from a Southern publisher to this effect: 'Have drawn on you at
sight for eight quatrains and a triolet.' Now, when you consider how
many publishers there are who would always keep a cash balance in the
treasury, you begin to get some notion as to how we could meet our
running expenses and pay our quarterly dividends to our stockholders
anyhow; and as for future dividends, I believe our loan department would
net us a sufficient amount to make the stock gilt-edged."

"You would have a loan department, eh?" said Mr. Pedagog.

"That would be popular," said the Poet; "but there again I dispute the
profit. You could find plenty of poets who would borrow your funds, but
I doubt the security of the loans."

"All of your objections are based on misconceptions," said the Idiot.
"The loan department would not lend money. It would lend poems for a
consideration to those who are short and who need them to fulfil their
obligations."

"Who on earth would want to borrow a poem, I'd like to know?" said the
Bibliomaniac.

"Lovers, chiefly," said the Idiot. "Never having been a poet yourself,
sir, you have no notion how far the mere faculty of being able to dash
off a sonnet to a lady's eyebrow helps a man along in ultimately
becoming the possessor of that eyebrow, together with the rest of the
lady. _I_ have seen women won, sir, by a rondeau. In fact, I have myself
completely routed countless unpoetic rivals by exploding in their ranks
burning quatrains to the fair objects of our affections. With woman the
man who can write a hymn of thanksgiving that he is permitted to gaze
into her cerulean orbs has a great advantage over the wight who has to
tell her she has dandy blue eyes in commonplace prose. The
commonplace-prose wight knows it, too, and he'd pay ten per cent. of his
salary during courtship if he could devise a plan by means of which he
could pass himself off as a poet. To meet this demand, our loan
department would be established. An unimaginative lover could come in
and describe the woman he adored; the loan clerk would fish out a sonnet
to fit the girl, and the lover could borrow it for ten days, just as
brokers borrow stock. Armed with this he could go up to Harlem, or
wherever else the maiden lived, and carry consternation into the hearts
of his rivals by spouting the sonnet as nonchalantly as though he had
just thought of it. So it would go on. For the following call he could
borrow a ballad singing the glories of her raven locks, likening them to
the beautiful night, or, if the locks were red instead of black, to the
aurora borealis."

"You'd have trouble finding a rhyme to borealis," said the Poet.

"Tutt!" said the Idiot. "What's the matter with 'Glory, Alice,' 'Listen
to my story, Alice,' 'I'm going to war so gory, Alice,' 'I fear you are
a Tory, Alice' (this for a Revolutionary poem), or 'Come rowing in my
dory, Alice'? There's no end to 'em."

"If you'll write a rhyming dictionary I'll buy a copy," was the Poet's
sole comment.

"That will come later," said the Idiot. "Once get our clearing-house
established, we can branch out into a general Poetry Trust and Supply
Company that will make millions. We'll make so much money, by Jove!" he
added, slapping the table enthusiastically, "that we can afford to go
into the publishing business ourselves and bring out volumes of verse
for anybody and everybody. We can deal in Fame! A man that couldn't
write his own name so that anybody could read it could come to us and
say: 'Gentlemen, I've got everything but brains. I want to be an author
and 'mongst the authors stand. I am told it is delightful to see one's
book in print. I haven't a book, but I've got a dollar or two, and if
you'll put out a first-class book of poems under my name I'll pay all
expenses and give you a royalty of twenty per cent. on every copy I give
away!' No money in it? Bah! You gentlemen don't know. If you say fortune
would not wait upon this venture _I_ say you are the kind of men who
would sell government bonds for their value as mere engravings if you
had the chance."

"You certainly do draw a roseate picture," said Mr. Whitechoker.

"I do indeed," said the Idiot, "and the paint is laid on thick."

"Well, I hope it goes," said the Poet. "I'll make a deposit the first
day of three hundred and sixty-seven ballads, four hundred and
twenty-three couplets, eighty-nine rondeaus, and one epic about ten
yards in length, all of which I have in my desk at this moment."

"Very well," said the Idiot, rising, "With that encouragement from you I
feel warranted in ordering the 'Not Good' stamp at least."




X

Some Electrical Suggestions


"If I were beginning life all over again," said the Idiot, "I'd be an
electrician. It seems to me that of all modern pursuits, barring
architecture perhaps, electricity is the most fascinating."

"There's probably more money in it than there is in Idiocy, too, I
fancy," said the Bibliomaniac, dryly.

"Well, I should think so," assented the Idiot. "Idiocy is merely an
intellectual diversion. Electricity is a practical science. Idiocy
cannot be said to be anything more than a luxury, while electricity has
become a necessity. I do not even claim that any real lasting benefit
can come to the world through Idiocy, but in electricity are
possibilities, not yet realized, for which the world will be distinctly
better and happier."

"It is kind of you to speak so highly of electricity," said the Doctor.
"The science may now advance, knowing that you approve."

"Approve?" cried the Idiot. "Approve is not the word, sir. I
enthuse--and why should I not, feeling, as I do, that in the electrical
current lies the germ of the Elixir of Life! I thoroughly believe that a
bottle of liquefied electricity would make us all young."

"Then don't take it!" said the School-master. "You have suffered from an
aggravated case of youngness for as long a time as I have known you.
Pray do nothing to intensify your youth."

"I fear I shall be forced to deny myself that pleasure, Mr. Pedagog,"
returned the Idiot, mildly, "for the unhappy reason that as yet the
formula for the Electrical Elixir has not been discovered; that it will
be discovered before I die I hope and pray, because, unlike the man in
the hymn, I would live always. I'd like to be an immortal."

"An immortal Idiot! Think of it!" said the Doctor.

"I didn't expect much sympathy from you, Dr. Capsule," said the Idiot.
"The man with car-horses to sell does not dote upon the trolley-car."

"The application of the allegory is not entirely apparent," said the
Doctor.

"No?" said the Idiot. "I am surprised. I thought you intellectuals
absorbed ideas more quickly. To deal in plain terms, since it appears to
be necessary, a plan which involves the indefinite extension of mortal
life and the elimination of bodily ills is not likely to receive the
hearty endorsement of the medical profession. If a man could come home
on a stormy night and offset the deleterious effects of wet feet by
swallowing an electric pill, one containing two volts, like a two-grain
quinine pill, for instance, with greater certainty than one feels in
taking quinine, your profession would have to put up the shutters and go
into some such business as writing articles on 'Measles as It Used to
Be,' or 'Disorders of the Ante-Electrical Period.' The fine part of it
all is that we should not have to rely for our medicines upon the state
of the arsenic market, or the quinine supply, or the squill product of
the year. Electric sparks can be made without number whether the sun
shines or not. The failure of the Peruvian Bark Crop, or the destruction
by an early frost of the Castor Oil Wells, would cease to be a hideous
possibility to delicate natures. They could all fail for all mankind
need fear, for electricity can be generated when and wherever one has
need of it. If your electric pills were used up, and the chemist too far
away from your house for you to get the supply replenished at the
moment, you could put on your slippers and by walking up and down your
carpeted floor for ten or fifteen minutes generate enough electricity to
see you through. Of course you'd have to have a pair of
dynamic-storage-reservoir slippers to catch the sparks as they flew, but
I fancy they'd be less costly in the long run than the medicines we have
to-day."

"Why have wet feet at all if electricity is to be so all-powerful?"
suggested Mr. Whitechoker. "Why not devise an electrical foot-protector
and ward off all possibility of damp, cold feet?"

"You couldn't do that with men and women constituted as they are," said
the Idiot. "Your foot-protector would no doubt be a good thing, but so
are rubber overshoes. Nothing will ever be patented to compel a man to
keep his feet dry, and he won't do it except under compulsion, but once
having his feet wet he will seek the remedy. It's the Elixir of Life
that I bank on most, however. I don't believe there is one among us,
excepting Mrs. Pedagog, to whom twenty-five was not the most delightful
period of existence. To Mrs. Pedagog, as to all women, eighteen is
the limit. But men at twenty-five and women at eighteen know so much,
enjoy so much, regard themselves so highly! There is nothing _blasé_
about them then. Disillusion--which I think ought to be called
dissolution--comes later. At thirty a man discovers that the things he
knew at twenty-five aren't so; and as for a woman at twenty-five, if so
be she is unmarried, her life is empty, and if so be she is married, she
has cares in the shape of children and a husband, who as a theory was a
poet, but who as a reality is a mere business machine who is oftentimes
no fonder of staying at home than he was before he was married and went
out to see her every night."

"What a wise little pessimist he is!" said Mr. Pedagog to the Doctor.

"Very. But I fail to comprehend why he branches off into Pessimism when
Electricity was his text," said the Doctor.

"Because he's the Id--" began the Bibliomaniac, but the Idiot
interrupted him.

"Don't jump fences, gentlemen, before you know whether they are made of
barbed wire or not. I'm coming to the points you are bringing up, and if
you are not careful they may puncture you," he said. "I am not in any
sense a pessimist. Quite the contrary. I am an optimist. I'm not old
enough or cross-grained enough as yet to be a pessimist, and it's
because I don't want to be a pessimist that I want this Elixir of
Electricity to hurry up and have itself patented. If men when they
reached the age of twenty-five, and women at eighteen, would begin to
take this they might live to be a thousand and yet retain all the spirit
and feelings of twenty-five and eighteen. That's the connection, Dr.
Capsule. If I could be twenty-five all my life I'd be as happy as a
bird--and if I were the Poet here I'd immortalize that idea in verse--

  "A man's the biggest thing alive
  When he has got to twenty-five;
  And as for woman, she's a queen
  Whose summers number just eighteen."

"That's a good idea," returned the Poet. "I'll make a note of that, and
if I sell it I'll give you a commission."

"No, don't do that," said the Idiot, slyly. "I shall be satisfied to see
your name in print."

The Poet having accepted this sally in the spirit in which it was
intended, the Idiot resumed:

"But of course the Elixir and the Electrical Pills are as yet all in the
air. We haven't even taken a step in that direction. Mr. Edison and
other wizards have been too much occupied with electric lights and
telephones and phonographs and transatlantic notions to pay any
attention to schemes to prolong life and keep us, despite our years,
perpetually young."

"I fancy they are likely to continue to do so," said the Doctor.
"Whatever motive you may attribute to me for pooh-poohing your notions,
I do so. No sane person wants to live forever, and if it were possible
that all men might live forever, you'd soon find the world so crowded
that the slighter actors in the human comedy would be shoved off the
stage. There are enough people in the world now, without man's adding
all future generations to their number and making death an
impossibility."

"That's all nonsense," said the Idiot. "My Elixir wouldn't make death an
impossibility. Any man who thought he'd had enough at the end of a
thousand years could stop taking the Elixir and shuffle off the mortal
coil. As a matter of fact, not more than ten per cent. of the people in
the world would have any faith in the Elixir at all. I know people
to-day who do not take advantage of the many patent remedies that are
within their reach, preferring the mustard-plaster and catnip-tea of
their forefathers. There's where human nature works again. I believe
that if I were myself the discoverer of the formula for my mixture, and
for an advertisement secured a letter from a man saying, 'I was dying of
old age, having reached the advanced period of ninety-seven; I took two
bottles of your Electrical Elixir and am now celebrating my
twenty-fifth birthday again,' ninety-nine per cent. of the people who
read it would laugh and think it had strayed out of the funny column.
People lack confidence in their fellow-men--that's all; but if they were
twenty-five and eighteen that would all be changed. We are very trustful
at twenty-five and eighteen, which is one of the things I like about
those respective ages. When I was twenty-five I believed in everybody,
including myself. Now--well, I'm older. But enough of schemes, which I
must admit are somewhat visionary--as the telephone would have seemed
one hundred years ago. Let us come down to realities in electricity. I
can't see why more is not made of the phonograph for the benefit of the
public. Take a man like Chauncey M. De Choate. He goes here and he goes
there to make speeches, when I've no doubt he'd much prefer to stay at
home cutting coupons off his bonds. Why can't the phonograph voice do
_his_ duty? Instead of making the same speech over and over again, why
can't some electrician so improve the phonograph that De Choate can say
what he has to say through a funnel, have it impressed on a cylinder,
duplicated and reduplicated and scattered broadcast over the world? If
Mr. Edison could impart what poets call stentorian tones to the
phonograph, he'd be doing a great and noble work. Again, for smaller
things, like a dance, Why can't the phonograph be made useful at a ball?
I attended one the other night, and when I wanted to dance the two-step
the band played the polka; if I wished the polka it played a waltz. Some
men can only dance the two-step--they don't know the waltz, the polka,
or the schottische. Now why can't the phonograph come to the rescue? In
almost any hotel in New York you can drop a nickel in a slot and hear
Sousa's band on the phonograph. Why not extend the principle and have a
phonograph for men who can dance nothing but the two-step, charged with
'The Washington Post March,' and supplied with four tubes with receivers
to put in the ears of the listeners? Make it small enough for a man to
carry in his pocket; then at a ball he could go up to a young lady, ask
her to dance, put two of the receivers in her ears, two in his, and trip
the light fantastic toe utterly independently of what other people were
dancing. It's possible. Mr. Edison could do it in five minutes, and
every one would be satisfied. It might be rather droll to see two people
dancing the two-step while eight others were fastened on to a lanciers
phonograph, and a dozen or more other couples were dancing respectively
the waltz, schottische, and Virginia reel, but we'd soon get used to
that, and no man need become a wall-flower because he couldn't dance the
dance that happened to be on. Furthermore, you'd be able to do away with
the musicians, who always cast a pall over dances because of their
superiority to the rest of the world in general and the dancers in
particular."

"How about your couple that prefer to sit out the dance on the stairs?"
said the Poet, who, in common with the Idiot, knew several things about
dances that Messrs. Pedagog and Whitechoker did not.

"It would be particularly attractive to them," said the Idiot. "They
could sit on the stairs and wax sentimental over any dreamy air the man
happened to have in his vest-pocket. He could arrange all that
beforehand--find out what song she thought divinest, and go loaded
accordingly. And as for the things that usually happen on stairs at
dances, as well as in conservatories at balls, with the aid of a
phonograph a man could propose to a girl in the presence of a thousand
people, and nobody but the maiden herself would be the wiser. I tell
you, gentlemen," the Idiot added, enthusiastically, as he rose to
depart, "if the phonograph people only knew their power they'd do great
things. The patent vest-pocket phonograph for music at balls and
proposals for bashful men alone would make their fortunes if they only
could see it. I almost wish I were an electrician and not an Idiot."

With which he left the room, and Mr. Pedagog whispered to Mrs. Pedagog
that while he considered the Idiot very much of an idiot, there was no
denying that at times he did get hold of ideas that were not wholly bad.

"That's true," said the good landlady. "I think if you had proposed to
me through a phonograph I should not have had to guess at what you meant
and lead you on to express yourself more clearly. I didn't want to say
yes until I was fully convinced that you meant what you didn't seem able
to say."




XI

Concerning Children


The Poet had been away for a week, and on his return to his accustomed
post at the breakfast-table seemed but a shadow of his former self. His
eyes were heavy and his long locks appeared straggly enough for a man of
far more extended reputation as a singer of melodious verse.

"To judge from your appearance, Mr. Poet," said the Idiot, after
welcoming his friend, "you've had a lively vacation. You certainly do
not look as if you had devoted much of it to sleep."

"I haven't," said the Poet, wearily, "I haven't averaged more than two
hours of sleep daily since I went away."

"I thought you told me you were going off into the country for a rest?"
observed the Idiot.

"I did--and this is what comes of it," returned the Poet. "I went to
visit my sister up in Saratoga County. She has seven children."

"Aha!" smiled the Idiot. "That's it, is it--well, I can sympathize with
you. I've had experience with youngsters myself. I love 'em, but I like
to take 'em on the instalment plan--very little at a time. I have a
small cousin with a capacity for play and impudence that can't be
equalled. His mother wrote me once and asked if I thought Hagenbeck, the
wild-animal tamer, could be induced to take him in hand."

"That's the kind," put in the Poet, his face lighting up a little upon
discovering that there was some one at least at the board who could
sympathize with him. "My sister's seven are all of the wild-animal
variety. I'd rather fall in with seven tigers than put in another week
with my beloved nephews and nieces."

"Did they play Alp with you?" the Idiot asked, with a grin.

"Alp?" said the Poet. "No--not that I know of. They may have, however. I
was hardly conscious of what they were doing the last two days of my
stay there. They simply overpowered me, and I gave in and became a toy
for the time."

"It isn't much fun being a toy," said the Idiot. "I think I'd rather
play Alp."

"What on earth is Alp?" asked Mr. Pedagog, his curiosity aroused. "I've
heard enough absurd names for games in the last five years, but I must
say, for pure idiocy and lack of suggestiveness, the name of Alp
surpasses all."

"That's as it should be," said the Idiot. "My small cousin invented
Alp, and anything that boy does is apt to surpass all. He takes after me
in some things. But Alp, while it may seem to lack suggestiveness as a
name, is really just the name for the game. It's very simple. It is
played by one Alp and as many chamois as desire to take a hand. As a
rule the man plays the Alp and the children are the chamois. The man
gets down on his hands and knees, puts his head on the floor, and has a
white rug put on his back, the idea being that he is an Alp and the rug
represents its snow-clad top."

"And the chamois?" asked Mr. Whitechoker.

"The chamois climbs the Alp and jumps about on the top of it," said the
Idiot. "My experience, based upon two hours a day of it for ten
consecutive days, is that it's fun for the chamois but rough on the
Alp; and I got so after a while that I really preferred business to
pleasure and gave up playing Alp to return to work before my vacation
was half over."

"How do you score in this game of Alp?" said Mr. Pedagog, smiling
broadly as he thought of there being an embryo idiot somewhere who could
discomfit the one fate had thrown across his path.

"I never had the strength to inquire," said the Idiot. "But my
impression is that the game is to see which has the greater endurance,
the chamois or the Alp. The one that gets tired of playing first loses.
I always lost. My small cousin is a storehouse of nervous energy. I
believe he could play choo-choo cars with a real engine and last longer
than the engine--which being the case, I couldn't hope to hold out
against him."

"My nephews didn't play Alp," said the Poet. "I believe Alp would have
been a positive relief to me. They made me tell them stories and poems
from morning until night, and all night too, for one of them shared his
room with me, and the worst of it all was that they all had to be new
stories and new poems, so I was kept composing from one week's end to
the other."

"Why weren't you firm with them and say you wouldn't, and let that end
it?" said Mr. Pedagog.

"Ha--ha!" laughed the Idiot. "That's fine, isn't it, Mr. Poet? It's very
evident, Mr. Pedagog, that you're not acquainted with children. Now, my
small cousin can make the same appeal over and over again in a hundred
and fifty different ways. You may have the courage to say no a hundred
and forty-nine times, but I have yet to meet the man who could make his
no good with a boy of real persistent spirit. I can't do it. I've
tried, but I've had to give in sooner or later."

"Same way with me, multiplied by seven," said the Poet, with difficulty
repressing a yawn. "I tried the no business on the morning of the third
day, and gave it up as a hopeless case before the clock struck twelve."

"I'd teach 'em," said Mr. Pedagog.

"You'd have to learn 'em first," retorted the Idiot. "You can't do
anything with children unless you understand them. You've got to
remember several things when you have small boys to deal with. In the
first place, they are a great deal more alert than you are. They are a
great deal more energetic; they know what they want, and in getting it
they haven't any dignity to restrain them, wherein they have a distinct
advantage over you. Worst of all, down in your secret heart you want to
laugh, even when they most affront you."

"I don't," said Mr. Pedagog, shortly.

"And why? Because you don't know them, cannot sympathize with them, and
look upon them as evils to be tolerated rather than little minds to be
cultivated. Hard a time as I have had as an Alp, I'd feel as if a great
hole had been punched in my life if anything should deprive me of my
cousin Sammie. He knows it and I know it, and that is why we are chums,"
said the Idiot. "What I like about Sammie is that he believes in me," he
added, a little wistfully. "I wouldn't mind doing that myself--if I
could."

"You might think differently if you suffered from seven Sammies the way
the Poet does," said the Bibliomaniac.

"There couldn't be seven Sammies," said the Idiot. "Sammie is unique--to
me. But I am not at all narrow in this matter. I can very well imagine
how Sammie could be very disagreeable to some people. I shouldn't care
much for Alp, I suppose, if when night came on Sammie didn't climb up on
my lap and tell me he thought I was the greatest man that ever lived
next to his mother and father. That's the thing, Mr. Pedagog, that makes
Alp tolerable--it's the sugar sauce to the batter pudding. There's a
good deal of plain batter in the pudding, but with the sauce generously
mixed in you don't mind it so much. That boy would be willing to go to
sleep on a railway track if I told him I'd stand between him and the
express train. If I told him I could hammer down Gibraltar with putty
he'd believe it, and bring me his putty-blower to help along in the
great work. That's why I think a man's so much better off if he is a
father. Somebody has fixed a standard for him which, while he may know
he can't live up to it, he'll try to live up to, and by aiming high he
won't be so apt to hit low as he otherwise might. As Sammie's father
once said to me: 'By Jove, Idiot,' he said, 'if men could _only_ be what
their children think them!'"

"Nevertheless they should be governed, curbed, brought up!" said the
Bibliomaniac.

"They should, indeed," said the Idiot. "And in such a fashion that when
they are governed, curbed, and brought up they do not realize that they
have been governed, curbed, and brought up. The man who plays the tyrant
with his children isn't the man for me. Give me the man who, like my
father, is his son's intimate, personal friend, his confidant, his chum.
It may have worked badly in my case. I don't think it has--in any event,
if I were ever the father of a boy I'd try to make him feel that I was
not a despot in whose hands he was powerless, but a mainstay to fall
back on when things seemed to be going wrong--fountain-head of good
advice, a sympathizer--in short, a chum."

"You certainly draw a pleasant picture," said Mr. Whitechoker, kindly.

"Thank you," said the Idiot. "It's not original with me. My father drew
it. But despite my personal regard for Sammie, I do think something
ought to be done to alleviate the sufferings of the parent. Take the
mother of a boy like Sammie, for instance. She has him all day and
generally all night. Sammie's father goes to business at eight o'clock
and returns at six, thinking he has worked hard, and wonders why it is
that Sammie's mother looks so confoundedly tired. It makes him slightly
irritable. She has been at home taking things easy all day. He has been
in town working like a dog. What right has she to be tired? He doesn't
realize that she has had to entertain Sammie at those hours of the day
when Sammie is in his best form. She has found him trying to turn
somersaults at the top of the back stairs; she has patiently borne his
musical efforts on the piano, upon which he practises daily for a few
minutes, generally with a hammer or a stick, or something else equally
well calculated to beautify the keys; she has had to interfere in
Sammie's well-meant efforts to instruct his small brother in the art of
being an Indian who can whoop and scalp all in the same breath, thereby
incurring for the moment Sammie's undying hatred; she has heard Sammie
using language which an inconsiderate hired man has not scrupled to use
in Sammie's presence; she has, with terror in her soul, watched him at
play with a knife which some friend of the family who admires Sammie had
given him, and has again incurred his enmity by finally, to avoid
nervous prostration, taken that treasure from him. In short, she has
passed a day of real tragedy. Sammie is farce to me, comedy to his
father, and tragedy to his mother. Cannot something be done for her? Is
there no way by means of which Sammie can be entertained during the day,
for entertained he must be, that does not utterly destroy the nervous
system of his mother? Can't some inventive genius who has studied the
small boy, who knows the little ins and outs of his nature, and who,
above all, sympathizes with those ins and outs, put his mind on the life
of the woman of domestic inclination, and do something to make her life
less of a burden and more of a joy?"

"You are the man to do it," said the Bibliomaniac. "An inventive genius
such as you are ought to be able to solve the problem."

"Perhaps he ought to be," said the Idiot; "but we are not all what we
ought to be, I among the number. Almost anything seems possible to me
until I think of the mother at home all day with a dear, sweet, bright,
energetic boy like Sammie. Then, I confess, I am utterly at a loss to
know what to do."

And then, as none of the boarders had any solution of the problem to
suggest, I presume there was none among them who knew "How To Be
Tranquil Though A Mother."

Perhaps when women take up invention matters will seem more hopeful.




XII

Dreamaline


"Well, Mr. Idiot," said Mr. Pedagog, as the guests gathered about the
table, "how goes the noble art of invention with you? You've been at it
for some time now. Do you find that you have succeeded in your
self-imposed mission and made the condition of the civilized less
unbearable?"

"Frankly, Mr. Pedagog, I have failed," said the Idiot, sadly. "Failed
egregiously. I cannot find that of all the many schemes I have evolved
for the benefit of the human race any single one has been adopted by
those who would be benefited. Wherefore, with the exception of
Dreamaline, which I have not yet developed to my satisfaction, I shall
do no more inventing. What is the use? Even you, gentlemen, here have
tacitly declined to accept my plan for the elimination of irritation on
Waffle Days, a plan at once simple, picturesque, and efficacious. With
such discouragement at home, what hope have I for better fortune
abroad?"

"It is dreadful to be an unappreciated genius!" said the Bibliomaniac,
gruffly. "It's better to be a plain lunatic. A plain lunatic is at least
free from the consciousness of failure."

"Nevertheless, I'd rather be myself than any one else at this board,"
rejoined the Idiot. "Unappreciated though I be, I am at least happy.
Consciousness of failure need not necessarily destroy one's happiness.
If I do the best I can with the tools I have I needn't weep because I
fail, and with his consciousness of failure the unappreciated genius
always has the consolation of knowing that it is not he but the world
that is wrong. If I am a philanthropist and offer a thousand dollars to
a charity, and the charity declines to accept it because I happen to
have made it out of my interest in 'A Widows' and Orphans' Speculation
Company, Large Losses a Surety,' it is the charity that loses, not I. So
with my plans. Social expansion is not taken up by society--who dies, I
or society? Capitalists decline to consider my proposition for a General
Poetry Trust and Supply Company. Who loses a fine chance, I or the
capitalists? I may be a little discouraged for the time being, but what
of that? Invention isn't the only occupation in the world for me. I can
give up Philanthropy and take up Misanthropy in a moment if I want
to--and with Dreamaline I can rule the world."

"Ah--just what is this Dreamaline?" asked Mr. Whitechoker, interested.

"That, sir, is the question which I am now trying to answer for myself,"
returned the Idiot. "If I could answer it, as I have said, I could rule
the world--everybody could rule the world; that is to say, his own
world. It is based on an old idea which has been found by some to be
practicable, but it has never been developed to the point which I hope
to attain."

"Wake me up when he gets to the point, will you, kindly?" whispered the
Doctor to the Bibliomaniac.

"If you sleep until then you'll never wake," said the Bibliomaniac. "To
my mind the Idiot never comes to a point."

"You are a little too mysterious for me," observed Mr. Whitechoker. "I
know no more about Dreamaline now than I did when you began."

"Which is my case exactly," said the Idiot. "It is a vague, shadowy
something as yet. It is only a germ lost in my cerebral wrinkles, but I
hope by a persistent smoothing out of those wrinkles with what I might
call the flat-iron of thought, I may yet lay hold of the microbe, and
with it electrify the world. Once Dreamaline is discovered all other
discoveries become as nothing; all other inventions for the amelioration
of the condition of the civilized will be unnecessary, and even
Progressive Waffles will cease to fascinate."

"Perhaps," said the Bibliomaniac, "if you will give us a hint as to the
nature of your plan in general we may be able to help you in carrying it
out."

"The Doctor might," said the Idiot. "My genial friend who occasionally
imbibes might--even the Poet, with his taste for Welsh rarebits,
might--but from you and Mr. Pedagog and Mr. Whitechoker I fear I should
receive little assistance. Indeed, I am not sure but that Mr.
Whitechoker might disapprove of the plan altogether."

"Any plan which makes life happier and better is sure to meet with my
approval," said Mr. Whitechoker.

"With that encouragement, then," said the Idiot, "I will endeavor to lay
before you my crowning invention. Dreamaline, as its name may suggest,
should be a patent medicine, by taking which man should become oblivious
to care."

"What's the matter with champagne for that?" interrupted the Genial Old
Gentleman who occasionally imbibes.

"Champagne has some good points," said the Idiot. "But there are two
drawbacks--the effects and the price. Both of these drawbacks, so far
from making us oblivious to our cares, add to them. The superiority of
Dreamaline over champagne, or even over beer, which is comparatively
cheap, is that one dose of Dreamaline, costing one cent, will do more
for the patient than one case of champagne or one keg of beer; it is not
intoxicating or ruinous to the purse. Furthermore, it is more potent for
good, since, under its genial influences, man can do that to which he
aspires, or, what is perhaps better yet, merely imagine that he is doing
that to which he aspires, and so avoid the disappointment which I am
told always comes with ambition achieved.

"Take, for instance, the literary man. We know of many cases in which
the literary man has stimulated his imagination by means of drugs, and
while under the influence has penned the most marvellous tales. That man
sacrifices himself for the delectation of others. In order to write
something for the world to rave over, he takes a dose which makes him
rave, and which ultimately kills him. Dreamaline will make this
entirely unnecessary. Instead of the writers taking hasheesh, the reader
takes Dreamaline. Instead of one man having to smoke opium for millions,
the millions take Dreamaline for themselves as individuals. I would have
the scientists, then, the chemists, study the subject carefully, decide
what quality it is in hasheesh that makes a writer conceive of these
horrible situations, put this into a nostrum, and sell it to those who
like horrible situations, and let them dream their own stories."

"Very interesting," said the Bibliomaniac, "but all readers do not like
horrible situations. We are not _all_ morbid."

"For which we should be devoutly thankful," said the Idiot. "But your
point is not well taken. On each bottle of what I should call 'Literary
Dreamaline,' to distinguish it from 'Art Dreamaline,' 'Scientific
Dreamaline,' and so on, I should have printed explicit directions
showing consumers how the dose should be modified to meet the consumer's
taste. One man likes a De Maupassant story. Let him take his Dreamaline
straight, lie down and dream. He'd get his De Maupassant story with a
vengeance. Another likes the modern story in realism--a story in which a
prize might be offered to the reader who finds a situation, an incident
in the three hundred odd pages of the book he reads. This man could take
a spoonful of Dreamaline and dilute it to his taste. A drop of
Dreamaline, which taken raw would give a man a dream like Doctor Jekyll
and Mr. Hyde, put into a hogshead of pure water would enable the man who
took a spoonful of it before going to bed to fall asleep and walk
through a three-volume novel by Henry James. Thus every man could get
what he wanted at small expense. Dreamaline for readers sold at a
dollar a quart would give every consumer as big and varied a library as
he wished, and would be a great saving to the eyes. People would have
more time for other pleasures if by taking a dose of Dreamaline before
retiring they could get all their literature in their sleeping hours.
Then every bottle would pay for itself ten times over if on awakening
the next morning the consumer would write out the story he had dreamed
and publish it for the benefit of those who were afraid to take the
medicine."

"You wouldn't make much money out of it, though," said the Poet. "If one
bottle sufficed for a library you wouldn't find much of a demand."

"That could be got around in two ways," said the Idiot. "We could
copyright every bottle of Dreamaline and require the consumers to pay us
a royalty on every book inspired by it, or we could ourselves take what
I would call Financial Dreamaline, one dose of which would make a man
feel like a millionaire. Life is only feeling after all. If you feel
like a millionaire you are as happy as a millionaire--happier, in fact,
because in reality you do not have to wear your thumbs out cutting
coupons on the first of every month. Then I should have Art Dreamaline.
You could have it arranged so that by a certain dose you could have old
masters all over your house; by another dose you could get a collection
of modern French paintings, and by swallowing a whole bottle you could
dream that your walls were lined with mysteries that would drive the
Impressionists crazy with envy. In Scientific Dreamaline you would get
ideas for invention that would revolutionize the world."

"How about the poets and the humorists?" asked the Poet.

"They'd be easy," said the Idiot. "I wouldn't have any hasheesh in the
mixture for them. Welsh rarebit would do, and you'd get poems so
mysterious and jokes so uproarious that the whole world would soon be
filled with wonder and with laughter. In short, Dreamaline would go into
every walk of life. Music, letters, art, poetry, finance. Every man
according to his bent or his tastes could partake. Every man could make
with it his own little world in which he was himself the prime mover,
and so harmless would it be that when next morning he awoke he would be
as tranquil and as happy as a babe. I hope, gentlemen, to see the day
when Dreamaline is an established fact, when we cannot enter a household
in the land that does not have hanging on its walls, after the manner of
those glass fire hand-grenades, a wire rack holding a row of bottles
labelled Art, Letters, Music, and so on, instead of libraries,
picture-galleries, music-rooms, and laboratories. The rich and the poor
alike may have it. The child who loves to have stories told to him will
cry for it; the poor wanderer who loves opera and cannot afford even to
pass the opera-house in a cable-car, can go into a drug-store, and for a
cent, begged of a kind-hearted pedestrian on the street, purchase a
sufficient quantity to imagine himself a box-holder; the ambitious
statesman can through its influences enjoy the sensation of thinking
himself President of the United States. Not a man, woman, or child lives
but would find it a boon, and as harmless as a Graham cracker. That,
gentlemen, is my crowning invention, and until I see it realized I
invent no more. Good-morning."

And in a moment he was gone.

"Well!" said Mr. Pedagog. "That's the cap to the climax."

"Yes," said Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog.

"Where do you suppose he got the idea?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

"I don't know," said the Doctor. "But I suspect that without knowing it
he's had some of the stuff he describes. Most of his schemes indicate
it, and Dreamaline, I think, proves it."


                                THE END






CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCING MR. HOPKINS TOPPLETON.


MR. HOPKINS TOPPLETON, Barrister of London and New York, was considered
by his intimates a most fortunate young man. He was accounted the happy
possessor of an income of something over fifty thousand dollars a year,
derived from investments which time had shown to be as far removed from
instability, and as little influenced by the fluctuations of the stock
market, as the pyramids of Egypt themselves. Better than this, however,
better even than personal beauty, with which he was plentifully endowed,
Mr. Hopkins Toppleton was blessed with a great name, which he had
received ready-made from his illustrious father, late head of the legal
firm of Toppleton, Morley, Harkins, Perkins, Mawson, Bronson, Smithers
and Hicks. The value of the name to Hopkins was unquestionable, since it
enabled him, at his father's death, to enter that famous aggregation of
legal talent as a special partner, although his knowledge of law was
scant, receiving a share of the profits of the concern for the use of
his patronymic, which, owing to his father's pre-eminent success at the
Bar, Messrs. Morley, Harkins, _et al._, were anxious to retain. This
desire of Mr. Toppleton's late associates was most natural, for such was
the tremendous force exerted by the name he bore, that plaintiffs when
they perceived it arrayed in opposition to their claims, not
infrequently withdrew their suits, or offered terms upon which any
defendant of sense might be induced to compromise. On the other hand,
when a defendant found himself confronted with the fact that Hopkins
Toppleton, Sen., had joined forces with the plaintiff, he usually either
settled the claim against him in full or placed himself beyond the
jurisdiction of the courts.

When Toppleton, Sen., died, it was very generally believed that the
firm, whose name has already been mentioned at some length, lost not
only its head, but also a very large proportion of its brains,--a
situation quite as logical as it was unfortunate for the gentlemen with
whom Mr. Toppleton had been associated. Nor was this feeling, that with
the departure of Toppleton, the illustrious, for other worlds the firm
was deprived of a most considerable portion of its claims to high
standing, confined to cavilling outsiders. No one recognized the unhappy
state of affairs at the busy office on Broadway more quickly than did
Messrs. Morley, Harkins, Perkins, Mawson, Bronson, Smithers, and Hicks
themselves, and at the first meeting of the firm, after the funeral of
their dead partner, these gentlemen unanimously resolved that something
must be done.

It was at this meeting that Mr. Hicks suggested that the only course
left for the bereaved firm to pursue, if it desired to remain an
aggressive force in its chosen profession, was to retain the name of
Toppleton at the mast-head, and, as Mr. Mawson put it, "to bluff it
out." Mr. Perkins agreed with Mr. Hicks, and suggested that the only
honest way to do this was to induce Mr. Toppleton's only son, known to
all--even to the clerks in the office--as Hoppy, to enter the firm as a
full partner.

"I do not think," Mr. Perkins said, "that it is quite proper for us to
assume a virtue that we do not possess, and while Hoppy--I should say
Hopkins--has never studied law, I think he could be induced to do so, in
which event he could be taken in here, and we should have a perfectly
equitable claim to all the business which the name of Toppleton would
certainly bring to us."

"I am afraid," Mr. Bronson put in at this point, "I am very much afraid
that such a course would require the entire reorganization of the firm's
machinery. It would never do for the member whose name stands at the
head of our partnership designation, to be on such terms of intimacy
with the office boys, for instance, as to permit of his being addressed
by them as Hoppy; nor would it conduce toward good discipline, I am
convinced, for the nominal head of the concern to be engaged in making
pools on baseball games with our book-keepers and clerks, which, during
his lamented father's life, I understand was one of the lad's most
cherished customs. Now, while I agree with my friend Perkins that it is
desirable that the firm should have an unassailable basis for its
retention of the name of Toppleton, I do not agree with him that young
Hopkins should be taken in here if we are to retain our present highly
efficient force of subordinates. They would be utterly demoralized in
less than a month."

"But what do you suggest as an alternative?" inquired Mr. Morley.

"I believe that we should make Hopkins a special partner in the firm,
and have him travel abroad for his health," returned Mr. Bronson after a
moment's reflection.

"I regret to say," objected Mr. Hicks, "that Hoppy's health is
distressingly good. Your point in regard to the probable demoralization
of our office force, however, is well taken. Hopkins must go abroad if
he becomes one of us; but I suggest that instead of sending him for his
health, we establish a London branch office, and put him in charge on a
salary of, say, 10,000 dollars. We have no business interests outside of
this country, so that such a course, in view of his absolute ignorance
of law, would be perfectly safe, and we could give Hoppy to understand
in the event of his acceptance of our proposition that he shall be free
to take a vacation whenever he pleases, for as long a period of time as
he pleases, and the oftener the better."

"That's the best plan, I think," said Mr. Mawson. "In fact, if Hoppy
declines that responsible office, I wouldn't mind taking it myself."

And so it happened. The proposition was made to Hopkins, and he accepted
it with alacrity. He did not care for the practice of the law, but he
had no objection to receiving an extra ten thousand dollars a year as a
silent partner in a flourishing concern with headquarters in London,
particularly when his sole duties were to remain away from the office on
a perpetual vacation.

"I was born with a love of rest," Hoppy once said in talking over his
prospects with his friends some time before the proposition of his
father's partners had been submitted to him. "Even as a baby I was fond
of it. I remember my mother saying that I slept for nearly the whole of
my first year of existence, and when I came to my school days my
reputation with my teachers was, that in the enjoyment of recess and in
assiduous devotion to all that pertained to a life of elegant leisure,
there was not a boy in school who could approach me."

The young man never railed at fate for compelling him to lead a life
which would have filled others of robuster ideas with ennui, but he did
on occasions find fault with the powers for having condemned him to
birth in a country like the United States, where the man of leisure is
regarded with less of reverence than of derision.

"It is a no harder fate for the soul of an artist to dwell in the body
of a pork-packer," he had said only the night before the plan outlined
by Mr. Hicks was brought to his attention, "than for a man of my restful
tendencies to be at home in a land where the hustler alone inspires
respect. What the fates should have done in my case was clearly to have
had me born a rich duke or a prince, whose chief duty it would be to
lead the fashionable world and to set styles of dress for others to
follow. I'd have made a magnificent member of the House of Lords, or
proprietor of a rich estate somewhere in England, with nothing to do but
to spend my income and open horse shows; but in New York there is no
leisure class of recognized standing, excepting, of course, the
messenger-boys and the plumbers, and even they do not command the
respect which foreign do-nothings inspire. It's hard luck. The only
redeeming feature of the case is that owing to a high tariff I can spend
my money with less effort here than I could abroad."

Then came the proposition from the firm, and in it Hoppy recognized the
ingredients of the ideal life--a life of rest in a country capable of
understanding the value to society of the drones, a life free from
responsibility, yet possessing a semblance of dignity bound to impress
those unacquainted with the real state of affairs. Added to this was the
encouragement which an extra ten thousand a year must invariably bring
to the man appointed to receive it.

"It's just what I needed," he said to Mr. Hicks, "to make my income
what it ought to be. Fifty thousand dollars is, of course, a handsome
return from investments, but it is an awkward sum to spend. It doesn't
divide up well. But sixty thousand a year is simply ideal. Twelve goes
into sixty five times, and none over--five thousand a month means
something, and doesn't complicate accounts. Besides, the increase will
pay the interest on a yacht nicely."

"You are a great boy, Hoppy," said Mr. Hicks, when the young man had
thus unbosomed himself, "but I doubt if you will ever be a great man."

"Oh, I don't know," said Hoppy; "there's no telling what may develop. Of
course, Mr. Hicks, I shall go into the study of the law very seriously;
I couldn't think of accepting your offer without making some effort to
show that I deserved it. I shall give up the reading of my irresponsible
days, and take to reading law. I shall stop my subscription to the
sporting papers, and take the _Daily Register_ and _Court Calendar_
instead, and if you think it would be worth while I might also subscribe
to the _Albany Law Journal_, with which interesting periodical I am
already tolerably familiar, having kept my father's files in order for
some years."

"No, Hoppy," said Mr. Hicks, with a smile, "I don't think you'd better
give up the sporting papers; 'all work and no play makes Jack a dull
boy.'"

"Perhaps you are right," said Hopkins, in reply to this. "But I _shall_
read Blackstone, and accumulate a library on legal subjects, Mr. Hicks.
In that I am firm. I am a good deal of a book-lover anyhow, and since
law is to be my profession I might as well suit my books to my needs.
I'll order a first edition of Blackstone at once."

"You'd better get the comic Blackstone," said Mr. Hicks, gravely. "You
will find it a very interesting book."

"Very well, Mr. Hicks," returned the amiable head-partner-elect of the
famous legal firm, "I'll make a note of that. I will also purchase the
'Newgate Calendar,' and any other books you may choose to
recommend,--and I tell you what, Mr. Hicks, when my collection gets
going it will be the talk of the town. I'll have 'em all in absolute
firsts, and as for the bindings, your old yellow-backed tomes at the
office will be cast utterly in the shade by my full crushed levant
morocco books in rich reds and blues. Just think of the hundred or more
volumes of New York reports in Russia leather, Mr. Hicks!"

"It takes my breath away, Hoppy," returned the lawyer. "Every one of the
volumes will be absolutely uncut, I suppose, eh?"

"Never you mind about that," retorted Hopkins; "you think I'm joking,
but you'll find your mistake some day. I'm serious in this business,
though I think I'll begin my labours by taking a winter at Nice."

"That is wise," said Mr. Hicks, approvingly; "and then you might put in
the summer in Norway, devoting the spring and autumn to rest and quiet."

"I'll think about that," Hopkins answered; "but the first step to take,
really, is to pack up my things here, and sail for London and secure an
office."

"A very proper sentiment, my dear boy," returned Mr. Hicks; "but let me
advise you, do not be rash about plunging into the professional vortex.
Remember that at present your knowledge of the law is limited entirely
to your theories as to what it ought to be, and law is seldom that; nor
must you forget that in asking you to represent us in London, it is not
our desire to inflict upon you any really active work. We simply desire
you to live in an atmosphere that, to one of your tastes, is necessarily
broadening, and if you find it advisable to pursue intellectual breadth
across the continent of Europe to the uttermost parts of the earth, you
will find that the firm stands ready to furnish you with material
assistance, and to remove all obstacles from your path."

"Thanks for your kindness, Mr. Hicks," said Hopkins. "I shall endeavour
to prove myself worthy of it."

"I have no doubt of it, my boy," rejoined Mr. Hicks, rising. "And, in
parting with you, let me impress upon you the importance, both to you
and to ourselves in the present stage of your legal development, of the
maxim, that to a young lawyer not sure of his law, and devoid of
experience, there is nothing quite so dangerous as a client. Avoid
clients, Hoppy, as you would dangerous explosives. Many a young lawyer
has seemed great until fate has thrown a client athwart his path."

With these words, designed quite as much for the protection of the firm,
as for the edification of that concern's new head, Mr. Hicks withdrew,
and Hopkins turned his attention to preparations for departure; paying
his bills, laying in a stock of cigars, and instructing his valet as to
the disposition of his lares and penates. Four weeks later he sailed for
London, arriving there in good shape early in June, ready for all the
delights of the season, then at its height.

It was not until Hopkins had been four days at sea, that the firm of
Toppleton, Morley, Harkins, Perkins, Mawson, Bronson, Smithers, and
Hicks learned that the new partner had presided at a Coney Island
banquet, given by himself to the office-boys, clerks, book-keepers, and
stenographers of the firm, on the Saturday half-holiday previous to his
departure. It is doubtful if this appalling fact would have come to
light even then, had not Mr. Mawson, in endeavouring to discharge one of
the office-boys for insubordination, been informed by the delinquent
that he defied him; the senior member of the firm, the departed Hoppy,
having promised to retain the youth in his employ at increased wages,
until he was old enough to go to London, and assist him in looking after
the interests of his clients abroad. An investigation, which followed,
showed that Hopkins had celebrated his departure in the manner
indicated, and also divulged the interesting fact that the running
expenses of the office, according to the new partner's promises, were
immediately to be increased at least twenty-five per cent. per annum in
salaries.




CHAPTER II.

MR. HOPKINS TOPPLETON LEASES AN OFFICE.


IT did not take Hopkins many days to discover that a life of elegant
leisure in London approximates labour of the hardest sort. Nor was it
entirely easy for him to spend his one thousand pounds a month, with
lodgings for his headquarters. This fact annoyed him considerably, for
he valued money only for what it could bring him, and yet how else to
live than in lodgings he could not decide. Hotel life he abhorred, not
only because he considered its excellence purely superficial, but also
because it brought him in contact with what he called his "flash-light
fellow countrymen, with Wagnerian voices and frontier manners"--by which
I presume he meant the diamond studded individuals who travel on Cook's
Tickets, and whose so-called Americanism is based on the notion that
Britons are still weeping over the events of '76, and who love to send
patriotic allusions to the star-spangled banner echoing down through
the corridors of the hotels, out and along the Thames Embankment, to
the very doors of parliament itself.

"Why don't you buy a house-boat?" asked one of his cronies, to whom he
had confided his belief that luxurious ease was hard on the
constitution. "Then you can run off up the Thames, and loaf away the
tedious hours of your leisure."

"That's an idea worth considering," he replied, "and perhaps I'll try it
on next summer. I do not feel this year, however, that I ought to desert
London, considering the responsibilities of my position."

"What are you talking about?" said the other with a laugh.
"Responsibilities! Why, man, you haven't been to your office since you
arrived."

"No," returned Hoppy, "I haven't. In fact I haven't got an office to 'be
to.' That's what bothers me so like thunder. I've looked at plenty of
offices advertised as for rent for legal firms, but I'll be hanged if I
can find anything suitable. Your barristers over here have not as good
accommodations as we give obsolete papers at home. Our pigeon-holes are
palatial in comparison with your office suites, and accustomed as I am
to breathing fresh air, I really can't stand the atmosphere I have been
compelled to take into my lungs in the rooms I have looked at."

"But, my dear fellow, what more than a pigeon-hole do you need?" asked
his friend. "You are not called upon to attend to any business here. A
post-office box would suffice for the receipt of communications from
America."

"That's all true enough," returned Hopkins, "but where am I to keep my
law library? And what am I to do in case I should have a client?"

"Keep your books in your lodgings, and don't count your clients before
they get into litigation," replied the other.

"My dear Tutterson," Hopkins said in answer to this, "you are the
queerest mixture of common sense and idiotcy I have ever encountered. My
library at home, indeed! Haven't you any better sense than to suggest my
carrying my profession into my home life? Do you suppose I want to be
reminded at every step I take that I am a lawyer? Must my business be
rammed down my throat at all hours? Am I never to have relaxation from
office cares? Indeed, I'll not have a suggestion of law within a mile of
my lodgings! I must have an office; but now that I think of it, not
having to go to the office from one year's end to another, it makes no
difference whether it consists of the ground floor of Buckingham Palace
or a rear cell three flights up, in Newgate Prison."

"Except," returned Tutterson, "that if you had the office at Newgate you
might do more business than if you shared Buckingham Palace with the
Royal family."

"Yes; and on the other hand, the society at the palace is probably more
desirable than that of Newgate; so each having equal advantages, I think
I'd better compromise and take an office out near the Tower," said
Hopkins. "The location is quite desirable from my point of view. It
would be so inaccessible that I should have a decent excuse for not
going there, and besides, I reduce my chances of being embarrassed by a
client to a minimum."

"That is where you are very much mistaken," said Tutterson. "If you hang
your shingle out by the Tower, you will be one lawyer among a hundred
Beef-Eaters, and therefore distinguished, and likely to be sought out by
clients. On the other hand, if you behave like a sensible man, and take
chambers in the Temple, you'll be an unknown attorney among a thousand
Q.C's. And as for the decent excuse for not attending to business, you
simply forget that you are no longer in America but in England. Here a
man needs an excuse for going to work. Trade is looked down upon. It is
the butterfly we esteem, not the grub. A man who _will_ work when he
doesn't need to work, is looked upon with distrust. Society doesn't
cultivate him, and the million regard him with suspicion,--and the
position of both is distinctly logical. He who serves is a servant, and
society looks upon him as such, and when he insists upon serving without
the necessity to serve, he diminishes by just so much the opportunities
of some poor devil to whom opportunity is bread and butter, which sets
the poor devil against him. You do not need an excuse for neglecting
business, Toppleton, and, by Jove, if it wasn't for your beastly
American ideas, you'd apologize to yourself for even thinking of such a
thing."

"Well, I fancy you are right," replied Toppleton. "To tell you the
truth, I never thought of it in that light before. There is value in a
leisure class, after all. It keeps the peach-blow humanity from
competing with the earthenware, to the disadvantage of the latter. I see
now why the lower and middle classes so dearly love the lords and dukes
and other noble born creatures Nature has set above them. It is the
generous self-denial of the aristocracy in the matter of work, and the
consequent diminution of competition, that is the basis of that love.
I'll do as you say, and see what I can do in the Temple. Even if a
client should happen to stray in at one of those rare moments when I am
on duty, I can assume a weary demeanour and tell him that I have already
more work on my hands than I can accomplish with proper deference to my
health, and request him to take his quarrel elsewhere."

So the question was settled. An office was taken in the Temple. Hopkins
bought himself a wig and a gown, purchased a dozen tin boxes, each
labelled with the hypothetical name of some supposititious client, had
the room luxuriously fitted up, arranged his law library, consisting of
the "Comic Blackstone," "Bench and Bar," by Sergeant Ballantyne, the
"Newgate Calendar," and an absolute first of "Parsons on Contracts," on
the mahogany shelves he had had constructed there; hung out a shingle
announcing himself and firm as having headquarters within, and, placing
beneath it a printed placard to the effect that he had gone out to
lunch, he turned the key in the door and departed with Tutterson for a
trip to the land of the Midnight Sun.

Now it so happened, that the agent having in charge the particular
section of the Temple in which Hopkins' new office was located, had
concealed from the young American the fact that for some twenty-five or
thirty years, the room which Toppleton had leased had remained
unoccupied--that is, it had never been occupied for any consecutive
period of time during that number of years. Tenants had come but had as
quickly gone. There was something about the room that no one seemed able
to cope with. Luxuriously furnished or bare, it made no difference in
the fortunes of Number 17, from the doors of which now projected the
sign of Toppleton, Morley, Harkins, Perkins, Mawson, Bronson, Smithers,
and Hicks. Just what the trouble was, the agent had not been able to
determine in a manner satisfactory to himself until about a year before
Hopkins happened in to negotiate with him for a four years' lease.
Departing tenants, when they had spoken to him at all on the subject,
had confined themselves to demands for a rebate on rents paid in
advance, on the rather untenable ground that the room was uncanny and
depressing.

"We can't stand it," they had said, earnestly. "There must be some awful
mystery connected with the room. There has been a murder, or a suicide,
or some equally dreadful crime committed within its walls at some time
or another."

This, of course, the agent always strenuously denied, and his books
substantiated his denial. The only possible crime divulged by the books,
was thirty-three years back when an occupant departed without paying his
rent, but that surely did not constitute the sort of crime that would
warrant the insinuation that the room was haunted.

"And as for your statement that the room makes you feel weird and
depressed," the agent had added with the suggestion of a sneer, "I am
sure there is nothing in the terms of the lease which binds me to keep
tenants in a natural and cheerful frame of mind. I can't help it, you
know, if you get the blues or eat yourselves into a state that makes
that room seem to you to be haunted."

"But," one expostulating tenant had observed, "but, my dear sir, I am
given to understand that the five tenants preceding my occupancy left
for precisely the same reason, that the office at times is suffocatingly
weird; and that undefined whispers are to be heard playing at puss in
the corner with heart-rending sighs at almost any hour of the day or
night throughout the year, cannot be denied."

"Well, all I've got to say about that," was the agent's invariable
reply, "is that _I_ never saw a sigh or heard a whisper of a
supernatural order in that room, and if you want to go to law with a
case based on a Welsh rarebit diet, just do it. If the courts decide
that I owe you money, and must forfeit my lease rights because you have
dyspepsia, I'll turn over the whole business to you and join the army."

Of course this independent attitude of the agent always settled the
question at once. His tenants, however insane they might appear to the
agent's eyes, were invariably sane enough not to carry the matter to the
courts, where it was hardly possible that a plaintiff could be relieved
of the conditions of his contract, because his office gave him a megrim,
super-induced by the visit of a disembodied sigh.

Judges are hard-headed, practical persons, who take no stock in spirits
not purely liquid, realizing which the tenants of Number 17, without
exception, wisely resolved to suffer in silence, invariably leaving the
room, however, in a state of disuse encouraging to cobwebs, which would
have delighted the soul of a connoisseur in wines.

"If I can't make the rent of the room, I can at least raise cobwebs for
innkeepers to use in connection with their wine cellars," said the agent
to himself with a sad chuckle, which showed that he was possessed of a
certain humorous philosophy which must have been extremely consoling to
him.

At the end of three years of abortive effort to keep the room rented,
impelled partly by curiosity to know if anything really was the matter
with the office, partly by a desire to relieve the building of the odium
under which the continued emptiness of one of its apartments had placed
it, the agent moved into Number 17 himself.

His tenancy lasted precisely one week, at the end of which time he moved
out again. He, too, had heard the undefined whispers and disembodied
sighs; he, too, had trembled with awe when the uncanny quality of the
atmosphere clogged up his lungs and set his heart beating at a galloping
pace; he, too, decided that so far as he was concerned life in that
office was intolerable, and he acted accordingly. He departed, and from
that moment No. 17 was entered on his books no longer as for rent as an
office, but was transferred to the list of rooms mentioned as desirable
for storage purposes.

To the agent's credit be it said that when Hopkins Toppleton came along
and desired to rent the apartment for office use his first impulse was
to make a clean breast of the matter, and to say to him that in his own
opinion and that of others the room was haunted and had been so for many
years; but when he reflected that his conscience, such as it was, along
with the rest of his being, was in the employ of the proprietors of the
building, he felt that it was his duty to hold his peace. Toppleton had
been informed that the room was useful chiefly for storage purposes, and
if he chose to use it as an office, it was his own affair. In addition
to this, the agent had a vague hope that Hopkins, being an American and
used to all sorts of horrible things in his native land--such as
boa-constrictors on the streets, buffaloes in the back yard, and Indians
swarming in the suburbs of the cities,--would be able to cope with the
invisible visitant, and ultimately either subdue or drive the
disembodied sigh into the spirit vale. In view of these facts,
therefore, it was not surprising that when Hopkins had finally signed a
four years' lease and had taken possession, the agent should give a sigh
of relief, and, on his return home, inform his wife that she might treat
herself to a new silk dress.

During the few weeks which elapsed between the signing of the lease and
Hopkins' ostensible departure on a three months' lunching tour, he was
watched with considerable interest by the agent, but, until the "Gone to
Lunch" placard was put up, the latter saw no sign that Hopkins had
discovered anything wrong with the office, and even then the agent
thought nothing about it until the placard began to accumulate dust.
Then he shook his head and silently congratulated himself that the rent
had been paid a year in advance; "for," he said, "if he hasn't gone to
New York to lunch, the chances are that that sigh has got to work again
and frightened him into an unceremonious departure." Neither of which
hypotheses was correct, for as we have already heard, Hopkins had
departed for Norway.

As for the sigh, the young lawyer had heard it but once. That was when
he was about leaving the room for his three months' tour, and he had
attributed it to the soughing of the wind in the trees outside of his
window, which was indeed an error, as he might have discovered at the
time had he taken the trouble to investigate, for there were no trees
outside of his window through whose branches a wind could have soughed
even if it had been disposed to do so.




CHAPTER III.

MR. HOPKINS TOPPLETON ENCOUNTERS A WEARY SPIRIT.


IT was well along in October when Hopkins returned to London, and he got
back to his office in the Temple none too soon. The agent had fully made
up his mind that he was gone for good, and was about taking steps to
remove his effects from Number 17, and gain an honest penny by
sub-letting that light and airy apartment for his own benefit, a vision
of profit which Toppleton redivivus effectually dispelled.

The return, for this reason, was of course a grave disappointment to Mr.
Stubbs, but he rose to the occasion when the long lost lessee appeared
on the scene, and welcomed him cordially.

"Good morning, sir," he said. "Glad to see you back. Didn't know what
had become of you or should have forwarded your mail. Have a pleasant
trip?"

"Very," said Toppleton, shortly.

"It seems to have agreed with you,--you've a finer colour than you had."

"Yes," replied Hopkins, drily. "That's natural. I've been to Norway. The
sun's been working day and night, and I'm tanned."

"I hope everything is--er--everything was all right with the room, sir?"
the agent then said somewhat anxiously.

"I found nothing wrong with it," said Hopkins; "did you suspect that
anything was wrong there?"

"Oh, no!--indeed not. Of course not," returned the agent with some
confusion. "I only asked--er--so that in case there was anything you
wanted, you know, it might be attended to at once. There's nothing wrong
with the room at all, sir. Nothing. Absolutely nothing."

"Well, that's good," said Toppleton, turning to his table. "I'm glad
there's nothing the matter. It will take a very small percentage of the
rental to remedy that. Good morning, Mr. Stubbs."

"Good morning, sir," said Mr. Stubbs, and then he departed.

"Now for the mail," said Hopkins, grasping his letter-opener, and
running it deftly through the flap of a communication from Mr. Morley,
written two months previously.

"Dear Hoppy," he read. "We have just been informed of your singular act
on the Saturday previous to your departure for London."

"Hm! what the deuce did I do then?" said Hopkins, stroking his moustache
thoughtfully. "Let me see. 'Singular act.' I've done quite a number of
singular things on Saturdays, but what--Oh, yes! Ha, ha! That Coney
Island dinner. Oh, bosh!--what nonsense! as if my giving the boys a
feast were going to hurt the prospects of a firm like ours. By George,
it'll work just the other way. It'll fill the force with an enthusiasm
for work which--"

Here Hopkins stopped for a moment to say, "Come in!" Somebody had
knocked, he thought. But the door remained closed.

"Come in!" he cried again.

Still there was no answer, and on walking to the door and opening it,
Toppleton discovered that his ears had deceived him. There was no one
there, nor was there any sign of life whatever in the hallway.

"I'm glad," he said, returning to his chair and taking up Mr. Morley's
letter once more. "It might have been a client, and to a man at the
head of a big firm who has never been admitted to practice in any court
or country, that would be an embarrassment to say the least. It's queer
though, about that knock. I certainly heard one. Maybe there is some
telepathic influence between Morley and me. He usually punctuates his
complaints with a whack on a table or back of a chair. That's what it
must have been; but let's see what else he has to say."

"Of course," he read, "if you desire to associate with those who are
socially and professionally your inferiors, we have nothing to say. That
is a matter entirely beyond our jurisdiction, but when you commit the
firm to outrageous expenditures simply to gratify your own love of
generosity, it is time to call a halt."

"What the devil is he talking about?" said Hopkins, putting the letter
down. "I paid for that dinner out of my own pocket, and never charged
the firm a cent, even though it does indirectly reap all the benefits.
I'll have to write Morley and call his attention to that fact. How
vulgar these disputes--"

At this point he was again interrupted by a sound which, in describing
it afterwards, he likened to a ton of aspirates sliding down a coal
chute.

"This room appears to be an asylum for strange noises," said he, looking
about him to discover, if possible, whence this second interruption
came. "I don't believe Morley feels badly enough about my behaviour for
one of his sighs to cross the ocean and greet my ears, but I'm hanged if
I know how else to account for it, unless there's a speaking tube with a
whistle in it somewhere hereabouts. I wonder if that's what Stubbs
meant!" he added, reflecting.

"Bah!" he said in answer to his own question, picking up Mr. Morley's
letter for a third time. "This is the nineteenth century. Weird sounds
are mortal-made these days, and I'm not afraid of them. If there were
anything supernatural about them, why didn't the air get blue, and
where's my cold chill and my hair standing erect? I fancy I'll retain my
composure until the symptoms are a little more strongly developed."

Here he returned to his reading.

"We desire to have you explain to us, at your earliest convenience," the
letter went on to say, "why you have so extravagantly raised the salary
of every man, woman and child in our employ, utterly regardless of
merit, and without consultation with those with whom you have been
associated, to such a figure that the firm has been compelled to reduce
its autumn dividend to meet the requirements of the pay roll. Your
probable answer will be, I presume,--knowing your extraordinary
resources in the matter of explanations--that you cannot consent to be a
mere figure-head, and that you considered it your duty to impress upon
our clerks the fact that you are not what they might suspect under the
circumstances, but a vital, moving force in the concern; but you may as
well spare yourself the trouble of making any such explanation, since it
will not be satisfactory either to myself or to the other members of the
firm, with the possible exception of our friend Mawson, who, with his
customary about-town manners, is disposed to make light of the matter.
We desire to have you distinctly understand that your duties are to be
confined entirely to the London office, and to add that were it not for
your esteemed father's sake we should at once cancel our agreement with
you. The name you bear, honoured as it is in our profession, is of great
value to us: but it is, after all, a luxury rather than a necessity, and
in these hard times we are strongly inclined to dispense with luxuries
whenever we find them too expensive for our pockets."

Hopkins paused in his reading and pursed his lips to give a long, low
whistle, a sound which was frozen _in transitu_, for the lips were no
sooner pursed than there came from a far corner the very sound that he
had intended to utter.

For the first time in his life Toppleton knew what fear was; for the
first time since he was a boy, when he wore it that way, did he become
conscious that his hair stood upon end. His blood seemed to congeal in
his veins, and his heart for a moment ceased to beat, and then, as if
desirous of making up for lost time, began to thump against his ribs at
lightning pace and with such force that Hopkins feared it might break
the crystal of the watch which he carried in the upper left-hand pocket
of his vest.

Mr. Morley's letter fluttered from his nerveless hand to the floor, and,
despite its severity, was forgotten before it touched the handsome rug
beneath Hopkins' table. The new sensation--the sensation of fear--had
taken possession of his whole being, and, for an instant, he was as one
paralyzed. Then, recovering his powers of motion, he whirled about in
his revolving chair and started to his feet as if he had been shot.

"This is unbearable!" he cried, glancing nervously about the room. "It's
bad enough to have an office-boy who whistles, but when you get the
whistle in the abstract without the advantage of the office-boy, it is
too much."

Then Hopkins rang the bell and summoned the janitor.

"Tell the agent I want to see him," he said when that worthy appeared,
and then, returning to his desk, he sat down and mechanically opened a
copy of the _Daily Register_ and tried to read it.

"It's no use," he cried in a moment, crumpling the paper into a ball and
throwing it across the room. "That vile whistle has regularly knocked me
out."

The paper ball reached the door just as the agent entered, and struck
him athwart the watch chain.

"Beg pardon," said Hopkins, "I didn't mean that for you. Everything here
seems to be bewitched this morning, that dull compilation of legal woe
included."

"It's of no consequence, sir, I assure you," returned the agent
uneasily.

"No, I don't think it amounts to a row of beans to a man who hates
trouble," said Hopkins, referring more to the journal than to the
untoward act of the paper ball. "But I say, Mr. Stubbs, I've been having
a devil of a time in this room this morning, and when I say devil I mean
devil."

Stubbs paled visibly. The moment he had feared had come.

"Wh--wh--what sus--seems to b--be the m--mum--matter, sir?" he
stammered.

"Nothing seems, something _is_ the matter," returned Hopkins. "I don't
wonder you stammer. You'd stammer worse if you had been here with me
three minutes ago. Stubbs, I believe this room is haunted!"

Mr. Stubbs's efforts at surprise at this point were painful to witness.

"Haunted, sir?" he said.

"Yes, haunted!" retorted Hopkins; "and by a confoundedly impertinent
something or other that not only sighs and knocks on the door but
whistles, Stubbs--actually whistles. Has this room a history?"

"Well, a sort of a one," returned Stubbs; "but I never heard any one
complain about it on the score of whistling, sir."

"Stubbs, I believe you are lying. Hasn't somebody killed an office-boy
in this apartment, for whistling?" queried Hopkins, gazing sternly at
the shuffling agent.

"I'll take an affidavit that nothing of the kind ever happened,"
returned the agent, gaining confidence.

"That won't be necessary," said Toppleton. "I am satisfied with your
assurance. But, Stubbs, to what do you attribute these beastly
disturbances? Ghosts?"

"Of course not, Mr. Toppleton," replied Mr. Stubbs. "I fancy you must
have heard some boy whistling in the hall."

"How about the knock and the sigh?" demanded the American.

"The knock is easily accounted for," returned the agent. "Somebody in
the room above you must have dropped something on the floor, while the
sigh was probably the wind blowing through the key-hole."

"Or a bit of fog coming down the chimney, eh, Stubbs?" put in Hopkins,
satirically.

"No, sir," replied poor Stubbs, growing red where he had been white;
"there is no fog to-day, sir."

"True, Stubbs; and you will likewise observe there is no wind to sough
through key-holes," retorted Hopkins, severely, rising and walking to
the window.

Stubbs stood motionless, without an answer. Toppleton had cornered him
in a flimsy pretext, and then came the climax to his horrible
experience.

From behind him in the corner whence had come the sigh and the whistle,
there now proceeded a smothered laugh--a sound which curdled his blood
and left him so limp that he staggered to the mantel and grasped it to
keep himself from falling to the floor.

Hopkins turned upon him, his face livid with anger, and the two men
gazed at each other in silence for a moment, the one endeavouring to
master his fear, the other to smother his wrath.

"Do you mean to insult me, Mr. Stubbs, by laughing in my face when I
send for you to request explanations as to the conduct--as to
the--er--the conduct of your room? It sounds ridiculous to say that, but
there is no other way to put it, for it _is_ the conduct of the room of
which I complain. What do you mean by your ill-timed levity?"

"I pass you my word, Mr. Toppleton, I will swear to you, sir, that
nothing was further from my thoughts than mirth. I agree with you that
it is no laughing matter for--"

"But I heard you laugh," said Toppleton, eyeing the agent, his anger now
not unmixed with awe. "You laughed as plainly as it is possible for any
one to laugh, except that you endeavoured to smother the sound."

"I did nothing of the sort, Mr. Toppleton," pleaded Stubbs, his hand
shaking and his eyes wandering fearsomely over toward the mysterious
corner where all was still and innocent-looking. "That laugh came from
other lips than mine--if, indeed, it came from lips at all, which I
doubt."

"You mean," cried Toppleton, grasping Stubbs by the arm with a grip that
made the agent wince, "you mean that this room is--"

"Khee-hee-hee-hee-hee!" came the derisive laugh from the corner,
followed by the mysterious whistle and heartrending sigh which Hopkins
had already so unpleasantly heard.

Toppleton was transfixed with terror, and the agent, with an ejaculation
of fear, ran from the room, and scurried down the stairs out into the
court as fast as his legs could carry him, where he fell prostrate in a
paroxysm of terror.

Deserted by the agent and shut up in the room with his unwelcome
visitor--for the agent had slammed the door behind him with such force
that the catch had slipped and loosened the bolt, so that Toppleton was
to all intents and purposes a prisoner--Hopkins exerted what little
nerve force he had left, and pulled himself together again as best he
could. He staggered to his table, and taking a small bottle of whiskey
from the cupboard at its side, poured at least one half of its fiery
contents down into his throat.

"_Similia similibus_," said he softly to himself. "If I have to fight
spirits, I shall use spirits." Then facing about, he gazed into the
corner unflinchingly for a moment, following up his glance with one of
the hand fire grenades that hung in a wire basket on the wall, which he
hurled with all his force into the offending void. To this ebullition of
heroic indignation, the only reply was a repetition of the sounds whose
origin was so mysterious, but this time they proceeded directly from
Toppleton's chair which stood at his side.

Another grenade, smashed into the maroon leather seat of the chair, was
Hopkins' rejoinder, whereupon he was infuriated to hear the smothered
laugh emanate from the depths of a treasured bit of cloisonné standing
upon the mantel, within which it had been Hopkins' custom, in his
apartments at home, to keep the faded leaves of the roses given to him
by his friends of the fairer sex--a custom which, despite the volumes of
tobacco smoke poured into the room by Hopkins and his companions night
and day, kept the atmosphere thereof as sweet as a garden.

"You are a bright spirit," said Hopkins with a forced laugh. "You know
mighty well that you are safe from violence there; but if you'll get out
of that and give me one fair shot at you over on the washstand, you'll
never haunt again."

"At last!" came the smothered voice, this time from the top of the jar.
"At last, after years of weary waiting and watching, I may speak without
breaking my vow."

"Then for heaven's sake," cried Hopkins, sinking back into his chair and
staring blankly at the jar, "for heaven's sake speak and explain
yourself, if you do not wish to drive me to the insane asylum. Who in
the name of my honoured partners are you?"

There was a moment's pause, and then the answer came,--

"I am a weary spirit--a spirit in exile--harmless and unhappy, whose
unhappiness you may be able to relieve."

"I?" cried Hopkins, wildly.

"Yes, you. I am come to intrust my affairs to your hands."

"You are--"

"A client," returned the spirit.

Hopkins gasped twice, closed his eyes, clutched wildly at his heart, and
slid down to the floor an inert mass.

He had fainted.




CHAPTER IV.

THE WEARY SPIRIT GIVES SOME ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF.


HOW long Hopkins would have remained in an unconscious state had not a
cold perspiration sprung forth from his forehead, and, trickling over
his temples, brought him to his senses, I cannot say. Suffice it to
relate that his stupor lasted hardly more than a minute. When he opened
his eyes and gazed over toward the haunted vase, he saw there the same
depressing nothingness accompanied by the same soul-chilling sighs that
had so discomfited him. To the ear there was something there, a
something quite as perceptible to the auricular sense as if it were a
living, tangible creature, but as imperceptible to the eye as that which
has never existed. The presence, or whatever else it was that had
entered into Toppleton's life so unceremoniously, was apparently much
affected by the searching gaze which its victim directed toward it.

"Don't look at me that way, I beg of you, Mr. Toppleton," said the
spirit after it had sighed a half dozen times and given an occasional
nervous whistle. "I don't deserve all that your glance implies, and if
you could only understand me, I think you would sympathize with me in my
trials."

"I? I sympathize with you? Well, I like that," cried Toppleton, raising
himself on his elbow and staring blankly at the vase. "It appears to me
that I am the object of sympathy this time. What the deuce are you,
anyhow? How am I to understand you, when you sit around like a maudlin
void lost in a vacuum? Are you an apparition or what?"

"I am neither an apparition nor a what," returned the spirit. "I
couldn't be an apparition without appearing. I suppose you might call me
a limited perception; that is, I can be perceived but not seen, although
I am human."

"You must be a sort of cross between a rumour and a small boy, I
suppose; is that it?" queried Toppleton, with a touch of sarcasm in his
tone.

"If you mean that I am half-way between things which should be seen and
not heard, and other things which should be heard and not seen, I fancy
your surmise approximates correctness. For my part, a love of
conciseness leads me to set myself down as a Presence," was the
spirit's answer.

"I'll give you a liberal reward," retorted Toppleton, eagerly, "if
you'll place yourself in the category of an Absence as regards me and my
office here; for, to tell you the truth, I am addicted more or less to
heart disease, and I can't say I care to risk an association with a
vocally inclined zero, such as you seem to be. What's your price?"

"You wrong me, Toppleton," returned the Presence, indignantly, floating
from the edge of the vase over to the large rocking chair in the corner
by the window, which began at once to sway to and fro, to the
undisguised wonderment of its owner. "I am not a blackmailer, as you
might see at once if you could look into my face."

"Where do you keep your face?" asked Hopkins, sitting up and embracing
his knees. "If you have brought it along with you for heaven's sake trot
it out. I can't ruin my eyes on you as you are now. Have you no office
hours, say from ten to two, when you may be seen by those desirous of
feasting their eyes upon your tangibility?"

"I am afraid you are joking, Hopkins," said the spirit, growing
familiar. "If you are, I beg that you will stop. What is a good joke to
some eyes is a very serious matter to others."

"That, my dear Presence," returned Toppleton, "is a very true
observation, as is borne out by the large percentage of serious matter
that appears in comic journals."

"Please do not be flippant," said the voice from the rocking-chair,
sadly. "I have come to you as a suppliant for assistance. The fact that
I have come without my body is against me, I know, but that is a
circumstance over which I have absolutely no control. My body has been
stolen from me, and I am at present a shapeless wanderer with nowhere to
lay my head, and no head to lay there, if perchance the world held some
corner that I might call my own."

"I can't see what you have to complain about on that score," said
Toppleton, rising from the floor and seizing a large magnifying glass
from his table and gazing searchingly through it into the chair which
still rocked violently. "An individual like yourself, if you are an
individual, ought to be able to find comfort anywhere. The avidity with
which you have seized upon that chair, and the extraordinary vitality
you seem to have imparted to its rockers, indicate to my mind that the
world has about everything for you that any reasonable being can
desire. If you can percolate into my apartment and make use of the
luxuries I had fondly hoped were exclusively mine, I can't see what is
to prevent your settling down at Windsor Castle if you will. Aren't
there any comfortable chairs and beds there?"

"I don't know whether there are or not," replied the Presence. "I never
went there, and being a loyal British Presence, I should hesitate very
strongly before I would discommode the Royal family."

"It might be awkward, I suppose," returned Toppleton with a laugh, "if
you should happen to fall asleep in the Prince of Wales' favourite
arm-chair, and he should happen to come in and sit on you, for I presume
you are no more visible to Royalty than you are to Republican simplicity
as embodied in myself. Still, as a loyal British subject, I should think
you'd rather be sat on by the Prince than by a common mortal."

As Hopkins spoke these words the chair stopped rocking, and if its
attitude meant anything, its invisible occupant was leaning forward and
staring with pained astonishment at the young lawyer, who was leaning
gracefully against the mantelpiece. Then on a sudden the chair's
attitude was relaxed and it rocked slowly backward again, resuming its
former pace. A few minutes passed without a word being spoken, at the
end of which time the spirit sighed deeply.

"Is there anything in this world," it asked, "is there anything too
sacred for you Americans to joke about? Have you no ideals, no--"

"Plenty of ideals but no special idols," returned Hopkins, perceiving
the spirit's drift. "But of course, if I hurt your feelings by joking
about the Prince, I apologize. Though unasked, you are still my guest,
and I should be very sorry to seem lacking in courtesy. But tell me
about this body of yours. How did you come to lose it, and is it still
living?"

"Yes, it is still living," replied the spirit. "Living a life of
honoured ease."

"But how the deuce did you come to lose it? that's what I can't
understand. I have heard of men losing pretty nearly everything but
their bodies."

"As I have already told you," said the spirit, wearily, "it was stolen
from me."

"And have you no clue to the thieves? Do you know where it is?"

"Yes, I know where it is. In fact I saw it only last week," replied the
spirit with a sob, "and it's getting old, Toppleton, very old. When it
was taken away from me it was erect of stature, broad-shouldered,
muscular and full of health. To-day it is round-shouldered, flabby and
generally consumptive-looking. When I occupied it, the face was
clean-shaven and ruddy. The hair was of a rich auburn, the hands milk
white. The carriage was graceful, and about my lips there played a smile
that fascinated. The blue eyes sparkled, the teeth shone out between my
lips when I smiled, like a strip of chased silver in the sunlight; I
tell you, Toppleton, when I had that body it had some style about it;
but now--it breaks my heart to think of it now!"

"It hasn't lost its good looks altogether, has it?" queried Hopkins, his
voice slightly tremulous with the sympathy he was beginning to feel for
this disembodied entity before him.

"It has," sobbed the spirit; "and I'm not surprised that it has,
considering the life it has led since I lost it. The auburn hair that
used to be my mother's pride, and my schoolmates' source of wit, has
gradually dropped away and left a hairless scalp of an insignificant
pinkish hue which would disgrace a shrimp. My once happy smile has
subsided into something like a toothless sneer; for my dazzling teeth
are no more. The blue eyes are expressionless, the elastic step is
halting, and, what is worse, the present occupant of my physical self
has grown a beard that makes me look like a pirate."

"I wonder you recognized yourself," said Hopkins.

"It was strange; but I did recognize myself by my ring which I still
wear," returned the spirit. "But, Toppleton," it added, "you have no
notion how terrible it is for a man to see himself growing old and
breaking away from all the habits and principles of youth, powerless to
interfere. For instance, my body was temperate when I was in it. I never
drank more than one glass of whiskey in one day. Now it is brandy and
water all day long, and it galls me, like the merry hereafter, with my
temperance scruples, to see myself given over to intemperate drams. _I_
never used profane language. Last Friday I heard my own lips condemn a
poor unoffending fly to everlasting punishment. But I want to tell you
how this outrageous thing came to pass. I want to tell you how it was
that in the very bud of my existence I was robbed of a suitable case in
which to go through life, and I want you, with your extraordinary
knowledge of the law, as I understand it to be, to devise some scheme
for my relief. If you don't, nobody will, and before many years it will
be too late. The body is growing weaker every day. I can see that, and I
want to get it back again before it becomes absolutely valueless. I
believe that under my care, restored to its original owner, it can be
fixed up and made quite respectable for its declining years. Of course
the teeth and the hair are gone for ever, but I think I can furbish up
the smile, the eye and the hands. I know that I can restore my former
good habits."

"I'm hanged if I see how I can help you," rejoined Hopkins. "Do you mean
to say that the present occupant of your personality is the creature who
robbed you of it?"

"Precisely," said the spirit. "He's the very same person, and, stars
above us, how he has abused the premises! He has made my name famous--"

"You don't mean to say that he took your name too?" put in Hopkins
incredulously.

"I mean just that," retorted the spirit. "He stole my name, my body, my
prospects, my clothing--every blessed thing I had except my
consciousness, and he thrust that out into a cold, unsympathetic world,
to float around in invisible nebulousness for thirty long years. Oh, it
is an awful tale of villainy, Toppleton! Awful!"

"You say he has made your name famous," said Toppleton. "You give him
credit for that, don't you?"

"I would if the very fame accorded my name did not tend to make me
infamous in the eyes of those I hold most dear; and the beastly part of
it is that I can't explain the situation to them."

"Why not?" asked Hopkins. "If you can lay all this misery bare to me,
why can't you lay it before those for whose good will and admiration you
are lamenting?"

"Because, Hopkins, they never address me, and it is my hard fate not to
be able to open a conversation," returned the spirit. "If you will
remember, it was not until you asked me who the devil I was, or some
equally choice question of like import, that I began to hold converse
with you; you are the only man with whom I have talked for thirty years,
Hopkins, because you are the only person who has taken the initiative."

"Well, you goaded me into it," returned Hopkins. "So I can't see why you
can't goad your friends of longer standing into it."

"The explanation is simple," replied the spirit. "My friends haven't had
the courage to withstand the terrors of the situation. The minute I have
whistled, sighed or laughed, they have made a bee line for the door, and
raised such a hullabaloo about the 'supernatural visitation,' as they
termed my efforts, that I couldn't do a thing with them. They've
everyone of them, from my respected mother down, avoided me, even as
that man Stubbs has avoided me. I believe you too would have fled if the
door hadn't locked automatically, and so forced you to remain here."

"If I could have avoided this interview I should most certainly have
done so," said Toppleton, candidly. "You can probably guess yourself how
very unpleasant it is to be disturbed in your work by a whistle that
emanates from some unseen lips, and to have your room taken possession
of by an invisible being with a grievance."

"Yes, Hopkins. I've had almost the same experience myself," replied the
spirit; "and to be as candid with you as you have been with me, I will
say that it was just that experience, and nothing else, that is
responsible for my present difficulties."

"That's encouraging for me," said Hopkins, nervously. "But tell me how
have you become infamously famous?"

"The bandit who now occupies my being has violated every principle of
religion and politics that he found in me when he took possession,"
returned the spirit, leaving the rocking-chair and settling down on the
mantelpiece, in front of the clock. "Where I was a pronounced Tory he
has made me vote with the Liberals. Notwithstanding the fact that I was
brought up in the Church of England, he joined first the dissenters and
is now a thorough agnostic, and signs my name to the most outrageous
views on social and moral subjects you ever heard advanced. My family
have cut loose from me as I am represented by him, and the dearest
friend of my youth never mentions my name save in terms of severest
reprehension. Would you like that, Hopkins Toppleton?"

"I'd be precious far from liking it," Hopkins answered. "It seems to me
I'd commit suicide under such circumstances. Have you thought of that?"

"Often," replied the spirit; "but the question has always been, how?"

"Take poison! Shoot yourself! Drown yourself!"

"I can't take poison. That fiend who robbed me has my stomach, so what
could I put the poison into?" retorted the spirit. "Shoot myself? How? I
haven't a pistol. If I had a pistol I couldn't fire it, because I've
nothing to pull the trigger with. If I had something to pull the trigger
with, what should I fire at? I have no brains to blow out, no heart to
shoot at. I'd simply fire into air."

"How about the third method?" queried Toppleton.

"Drowning?" asked the unhappy Presence. "That wouldn't work. I've
nothing to drown. If I could get under water, I'd bubble right up again,
so you see it's useless. Besides, it's only the body that dies, not the
spirit. You see the shape I'm left in."

"No," returned Hopkins, "I perceive the lack of shape you are left in,
and I must confess you are in the hardest luck of any person I ever
knew; but really, my dear sir, I don't see how I can render you any
assistance, so we might as well consider the interview at an end. Now
that I am better acquainted with you I will say, however, that if it
gives you any pleasure to loll around here or to sleep up there in my
cloisonné jar with the rose leaves, you are welcome to do so."

"If you would only hear my story, Hopkins," said the spirit,
beseechingly, "you would be so wrought up by its horrible details that
you would devise some plan for my relief. You would be less than a man
if you did not, and I am told that you Americans are great fighters.
Take this case for me, won't you?"

Hopkins hesitated. He was strongly inclined to yield, the cause was so
extraordinary, and yet he could not in a moment overcome his
strongly-cultivated repugnance to burdening himself with a client. Then
he was conscientious, too. He did not wish to identify the famous house
of Toppleton, Morley, Harkins, Perkins, Mawson, Bronson, Smithers and
Hicks with a case in which the possibilities of success seemed so
remote. On the other hand he could not but reflect that, aside from the
purely humane aspect of the matter, a successful issue would redound to
the everlasting glory of himself and his partners over the sea--that is,
it would if anybody could be made to believe in the existence of such a
case. He realized that the emergency was one which must be met by
himself alone, because he was thoroughly convinced that the hard-headed
practical men of affairs whom he represented would scarcely credit his
account of the occurrences of the last hour, and would set him down
either as having been under the influence of drink or as having lost his
senses. He would not have believed the story himself if some one else
had told it to him, and he could not expect his partners in New York to
be any more credulous than he would have been.

His hesitation was short-lived, however, for in a moment it was
dispelled by a sigh from his unseen guest. It was the most heartrending
sigh he had ever heard, and it overcame his scruples.

"By George!" he said, "I will listen to your story, and I'll help you
if I can, only you will unstring my nerves unless you get yourself a
shape of some kind or other. It makes my blood run cold to sit here and
bandy words with an absolute nonentity."

"I don't know where I can get a shape," returned the spirit.

"What did the thief who took your shape do with his old one?" asked
Hopkins.

"He'd buried it before I met him," returned the spirit.

"Buried it? Oh, Heavens!" cried Hopkins, seizing his hat. "Let's get out
of this and take a little fresh air; if we don't, I'll go mad. Come," he
added, addressing the spirit, "we'll run over to the Lowther Arcade and
buy a form. If we can't find anything better we'll get a wooden Indian
or a French doll, or anything having human semblance so that you can
climb into it and lessen the infernal uncanniness of your
disembodiment."

Hopkins rang the janitor's bell again, and when that worthy appeared he
had him unfasten the door from the outside; then he and the spirit
started out in search of an embodiment for the exiled soul.

"Hi thinks as 'ow 'e must be craizy," said the janitor, as Toppleton
disappeared around the corner in animated conversation with his
invisible client. "E's' talkin' away like hall possessed, hand nobody as
hi can see within hearshot. These Hamericans is nothink much has far as
'ead goes."

As for Toppleton and the Presence, they found in the Lowther Arcade just
what they wanted--an Aunt Sallie with a hollow head, into which the
spirit was able to enter, and from which it told its tale of woe,
sitting, bodily and visibly, in the rocking-chair, before the eyes of
Hopkins Toppleton, the words falling fluently from the open lips of the
dusky incubus the spirit had put on.

"It was odd, but not too infernally weird," said Hopkins afterwards,
"and I was able to listen without losing my equanimity, to one of the
meanest tales of robbery I ever heard."




CHAPTER V.

HOPKINS BECOMES BETTER ACQUAINTED WITH THE WEARY SPIRIT.


"I DO not know," said the weary spirit, as he entered the head of the
Aunt Sallie and endeavoured to make himself comfortable therein, "I do
not know whether I can do justice to my story in these limited
headquarters or not, but I can try. It isn't a good fit, this body
isn't, and I cannot help being conscious that to your eyes I must appear
as a blackamoor, which, to an English spirit of cultivation and
refinement such as I am, is more or less discomfiting."

"I shouldn't mind if I were you," returned Hopkins. "It's very becoming
to you; much more so, indeed, than that airy nothingness you had on when
I first perceived you, and while your tale may be more or less affected
by your consciousness of the strange, ready-made physiognomy you have
assumed, I, nevertheless, can grasp it better than I might if you
persisted in sounding off your woes from an empty rocking-chair, or from
the edge of my cloisonné rose jar."

"Oh, I don't blame you, Toppleton," returned the spirit. "I am, on the
contrary, very grateful to you for what you have done for me. I shall
always appreciate your generosity, for instance, in buying me this shape
in order to give me at least a semblance of individuality, and I assure
you that if I can ever get back into my real body, I will work it to the
verge of nervous prostration to serve you, should you stand in need of
assistance in any way."

Hopkins' scrutiny of the Aunt Sallie, as these words issued from the
round aperture in the red lips made originally to hold the pipe stem,
but now used as a tubal exit for the tale of woe, was so searching that
anything less stolid than the wooden head would have flinched. The Aunt
Sallie stood it, however, without showing a trace of emotion, gazing
steadfastly with her bright blue eyes out of the window, her eyelids
more fixed than the stars themselves, since no sign of a wink or a
twinkle did they give.

"I wish," said Toppleton, experiencing a slight return of his awed
chilliness as he observed the unyielding fixity of Sallie's expression,
"in fact, I earnestly wish we could have secured a ventriloquist's
marionette instead of that thing you've got on. It would really be a
blessing to me if you could wink your eyes, or wag your ears, or change
your expression in some way or other."

"I don't see how it can be done," returned the spirit from behind
Toppleton's back. "I cannot exercise any control over these wooden
features."

Hopkins jumped two or three feet across the room, the unexpected
locality of the voice gave him such a shock, and the pulsation of his
heart leaped madly from the normal to the triply abnormal.

"Wh--whuh--what the devil did you do tha--that for?" he cried, as soon
as he was calm enough to speak. "Do y--you want to give me heart
failure?"

"Not I!" replied the spirit, once more returning to the Sallie. "That
would be a very unbusiness-like proceeding on my part at a time like
this, when, after thirty years of misery, I find at last one who is
willing to champion my cause. I only wanted to see how my second self
looked in this chair. To my eyes I appear rather plain and
dusky-looking, but what's the odds? The figure will serve its purpose,
and after all that's what we want. I'm sorry to have frightened you,
Toppleton, honestly sorry."

"Oh, never mind," rejoined Toppleton, graciously. "Only don't do it
again. Let's have the tale now."

"Very well," said the spirit. "If you will kindly shove me further back
into the chair, and arrange my overskirt for me, I'll begin--that's
another uncomfortable thing about my situation at present. It's somewhat
trying to a spirit of masculine habits to find himself arrayed in a
shape wearing the habiliments of the other sex."

Hopkins did as he was requested, and, throwing himself down on his
lounge, lit his pipe, and announced himself as ready to listen.

"I think I'd like a pipe myself," said the Sallie. "I've got a fine
place for one, I see."

"How can you talk if you stop your mouth up with a pipe?" asked Hopkins.

"Through my nose," replied the spirit. "Or there are holes in the ears,
I can talk through them quite as well."

"Well, I guess not," returned Hopkins. "I have had enough of your weird
vocal exercises to-day without having you talk with your ears, but if
you'll smoke with one or both of them, you're welcome to do it."

"Very well," replied the spirit. "I fancy you're right, and inasmuch as
I haven't had a pipe for thirty years, I'll let you fill up two for me,
and I'll try 'em both."

Accordingly Hopkins filled two of the clay pipes, three dozen of which
had come with the Aunt Sallie, and lighting them for the spirit, placed
them in the ears of his vis-à-vis as requested.

"Ah," said the spirit as he began to puff, "this is what I call
comfort." And then he began his story.

"I was born," he said, breathing forth a cloud of smoke from his right
ear, "sixty years ago in a small house within a stone's throw of what is
now the band stand in the park at Buxton."

"You must have had human catapults in those days," interrupted
Toppleton, for as he remembered the band stand at Buxton, it was
situated at some considerable distance from anything which in any degree
represented a habitation in which one could begin life comfortably.

"I don't know about that. I am not telling you a sporting tale. I am
simply narrating the events of my career, such as they are," returned
the spirit, "and my father has assured me that the house in which I
first saw light was, as I have said, within a stone's throw of what is
now the band stand in the Buxton Park. The band stand may have been
nearer the house in the old days than it is now,--that is an
insignificant sort of a detail anyhow, and if you'd prefer it I will put
it in this way: I was born at Buxton sixty years ago in a small house,
no longer standing, from whose windows the band stand in the park might
have been seen if there had been one there. How is that?"

"Perfectly satisfactory," replied Hopkins. "A statement of that kind
would be accepted in any court in the land as veracious on the face of
it, whereas we might be called upon to prove that other tale, which
between you and me had about it a distinctly Munchausenesque flavour."

The spirit was evidently much impressed with this reasoning, for he
forgot himself for a moment, and inhaled some of the smoke, so that it
came out between his lips instead of from his ears as before.

"I am glad to see you take such interest in the matter," he said after a
moment's reflection. "We must indeed have an absolutely irrefragable
story if we are to take it to court. I had not thought of that. But to
resume. My parents were like most others of their class, poor but
honest. My mother was a poetess with an annuity. My father was a
non-resistant, a sort of forerunner of Tolstoï, with none of the
latter's energy. He was content to live along on my mother's annuity,
leaving her for her own needs an undivided interest in the earnings of
her pen."

"He was a gentleman of leisure, then," returned Hopkins, "with
pronounced leanings towards the sedentary school of philosophy."

"That's it," replied the spirit. "That was my father in a nut-shell. He
took things as they came--indeed that was his chief fault. As mother
used to say, he not only took things as they came, but took all there
was to take, so that there was never anything left for the rest of us.
His non-resistant tendencies were almost a curse to the family. Why,
he'd even listen to mother's poetry and not complain. If there were
weeds in the garden, he would submit tamely, rather than take a hoe and
eradicate them. He used to sigh once in awhile and condemn my mother's
parents for leaving her so little that she could not afford to hire a
man to keep our place in order, but further than this he did not murmur.
My mother, on the other hand, was energetic in her special line. I've
known that woman to turn out fifteen poems in a morning, and, at one
time, I think it was the day of Victoria's coronation, she wrote an
elegy on William the Fourth of sixty-eight stanzas, and a coronation
ode that reached from one end of the parlour to the other,--doing it all
between luncheon and dinner. Dinner was four hours late to be sure, but
even that does not affect the wonderful quality of the achievement."

"Didn't your father resist that?" queried Toppleton, sympathetically.

"No," replied the spirit, "never uttered a complaint."

"He must have been an extraordinary man," observed Toppleton, shaking
his head in wonder.

"He was," assented the spirit. "Father was a genius in his way; but he
was born tired, and he never seemed able to outgrow it."

Here the spirit requested Toppleton's permission to leave the Aunt
Sallie for a moment. The head was getting too full of smoke for comfort.

"I'll just sit over here on the waste basket until the smoke has a
chance to get out," he said. "If I don't, it will be the ruin of me."

"All right," returned Toppleton. "I suppose when a man is reduced to
nothing but a voice, it is rather destructive to his health to get
diluted with tobacco smoke. But, I say, that was a pretty tough
condition of affairs in your house I should say. Poetic mother,
do-nothing father, small income and a baby. How did you manage to
live?"

"Oh, we lived well enough," replied the spirit. "The income was
large enough to pay the rent and keep father from hunger and
thirst--particularly the latter. Mother, being a poet, didn't eat
anything to speak of, and I fed on cow's milk. We had a cow chiefly
because her appetite kept the grass cut, and when I came along she
served an additional useful purpose. In the matter of clothing we did
first rate. Mother's trousseau lasted as long as she did, and father
never needed anything more than the suit he was married in. Inheriting
my mother's poetic traits, and my father's tendency to let things come
as they might and go as they would, it is hardly strange that as I grew
older I became addicted to habits of indecision; that I lacked courage
when a slight display of that quality meant success; that I was
invariably found wanting in the little crises which make up existence in
this sphere; that I always let slip the opportunities which were mine,
and that at those tides of my own affairs which taken at the flood would
have led on to fortune, I was always high and dry somewhere out of
reach, and that, in consequence, all the voyage of my life has been
bound in shallows and in miseries, as my mother would have said."

"Your mother must have been a diligent student of Shakespeare,"
Toppleton retorted, resenting the spirit's appropriation to his mother
of the great singer's words, and also taking offence at the implied
reflection upon his own reading.

"Yes, she was," replied the spirit unabashed. "In fact, my mother was so
saturated--she was more than imbued--with the spirit of Shakespeare,
that she was frequently unable to distinguish her own poems from his, a
condition of affairs which was the cause, at one time, of her being
charged with plagiarism, when she was in reality guilty of nothing worse
than unconscious cerebration."

"That is an unfortunate disease when it develops into verbatim
appropriation," said Toppleton, drily.

"Precisely my father's words," returned the spirit. "But the effect of
such parental causes, as I have already said," continued the exiled
soul, "was a pusillanimous offspring, which for the offspring in
question, myself, was extremely disastrous. The poet in me was just
sufficiently well developed to give me a malarious idea of life. In
spite of my sex I was a poetess rather than a poet. I could begin an
epic or a triolet without any trouble; but I never knew when to stop, a
failing not necessarily fatal to an epic, but death to a triolet. The
true climaxes of my lucubrations were generally avoided, and miserably
inadequate compromises adopted in their stead. My muse was a snivelling,
weak-kneed sort of creature, who, had she been of this earth, would have
belonged to the ranks of those who are addicted to smelling-salts,
influenza and imaginary troubles, and not the strong, picturesque,
helpful female, calculated to goad a man on to immortality. I generally
knew what was the right thing to do, but never had the courage to do it.
That was my peculiarity, and it has brought me to this--to the level of
a soul with no habitation save the effigy of a negress, provided for me
by a charitably disposed chance acquaintance."

"You do not appear to have had a single redeeming feature," said
Toppleton, some disgust manifested on his countenance, for to tell the
truth he was thoroughly disappointed to learn that the spirit's moral
cowardice had brought his trouble upon him.

"Oh, yes, I had," replied the spirit hastily, as if anxious to
rehabilitate himself in his host's eyes. "I was strong in one
particular. In matters pertaining to religion I was unusually strong. My
very meekness rendered me so."

"Your kind of meekness isn't the kind that inherits the earth, though,"
retorted Toppleton. "Meekness that means the abandonment of right for
the sake of peace is a crime. Meekness that subverts self-respect is an
offence against society. Meekness which is synonymous with pusillanimity
is not the meekness which develops into true religious feeling."

"No; that is very true," said the spirit. "I do not deny one word of
what you say; but I, nevertheless, was an extremely religious boy, nor
did I change when I entered upon man's estate; and it is that strong
religious fervour with which my spirit is still imbued that has made my
cup so much the more bitter, since, as I have hinted, he who robbed me
of my body has written pamphlets of the most shocking sort over my name,
denouncing the Church and attempting to upset the whole fabric of
Christianity."

"I am anxious to get to the details of the robbery," said Toppleton,
with a smile of sympathy; "pass over your extreme youth and come to
that."

"I will do so," replied the spirit, returning to the figure Toppleton
had provided for him, the smoke having by this time evacuated his new
habitation. "I will omit the details of my life up to the time when I
became a lawyer and--"

"You don't mean to say you _ever_ became a lawyer?" interrupted Hopkins,
incredulously.

"Why, certainly," replied the spirit; "I became a lawyer, and at the
time I lost my body I was getting to be considered a famous one."

"How on earth, with your meekness, did you ever have the courage to take
up a profession that requires nerve and an aggressive nature if success
is to be sought after?" asked the American.

"It was that same fatal inability to make up my mind to do what my
conscience prompted. It was another one of my compromises," returned the
spirit, sadly. "I couldn't make up my mind between the pulpit and
literature, so I compromised on the law, mastered it to a sufficient
extent to be admitted to practice, and opened an office--the same room,
by the way, as that in which you and I are seated at this moment."

"Do you remember any of your law now?" Toppleton asked uneasily, for he
was afraid the spirit might discover how ignorant he was on the subject.

"Not a line of it," returned the spirit. "It has gone from me as
completely as my name, my body, my auburn hair and my teeth. But I _was_
a lawyer, and by slow degrees I built up a fair practice. People seemed
to recognize how strong I was in matters of compromise, and cases that
were not considered strong enough to take into court were brought to me
in order that I might suggest methods of adjustment satisfactory to both
parties. For three years I did a thriving business here, and for one
whose knowledge of the law was limited I got along very well. I was one
of the few barristers in London who had become well-known to litigants
without ever having appeared in court, and I was very well satisfied
with my prospects.

"Everything went smoothly with me until a few weeks after I had passed
my thirtieth birthday, when a man came into my office and retained me in
an inheritance case, in which the amount involved was thirty thousand
pounds. He had been made defendant in a suit brought against him by his
own brother for the recovery of that sum. It was a very complicated
case, but the brother really had no valid claim to the money. The father
of the two men, ten minutes before his death, had told my client in
confidence that it was his desire that he should inherit sixty thousand
pounds more than the other brother, telling him, however, that he must
get it for himself, since the written will of the dying man provided
that the two sons should share and share alike. In spasmodic gasps the
old man added that he would find the money concealed in a secret drawer
in an old desk up in the attic, in sixty one-thousand pound notes. My
client, realizing that his father could not last many minutes longer,
and feeling that his dying wishes should not be thwarted, rushed from
the room to the attic, and after rummaging about for nine minutes, found
the drawer and touched the secret spring. Unfortunately the day was a
very damp one, and the drawer stuck, so that it was fully eleven minutes
before the money was really in my client's hands. He shoved it into his
pocket and went downstairs again, where he learned that his father had
expired one minute before, or just ten minutes after he had left him.

"The other son not long after discovered what had been done, and after
listening to my client's story, decided to contest his title to his
share of the sixty thousand pounds, alleging that the money not having
passed into my client's hands until after the testator's death, belonged
to the estate, and could only be diverted therefrom upon the production
of an instrument in writing over the deceased man's signature, duly
witnessed. You see," added the spirit, "that was a very fine point."

"Yes, indeed!" said Toppleton; "it's the kind of a point that I hope
and pray may never puncture my professional epidermis, for I'll be
hanged if I'd know what to advise. What did you do?"

"Ah!" sighed the spirit, "there's where the trouble came in. I studied
that case diligently. I consulted every law book I could find. Every
leading case on inheritance matters I read, marked, learned and inwardly
digested, and I made up my mind that if we could prove that my client's
watch was fast upon that occasion, and that the money was in his hands
one minute before his father's death instead of one minute after it, the
plaintiff would not have a leg to stand on. Then it occurred to me 'this
means trouble.' It means a long and tedious litigation. It means defeat,
appeal, victory, appeal, defeat, appeal, on, on through all the courts
in Great Britain, and finally the House of Lords, the result being the
loss to my client of every penny of the amount involved, even though he
should ultimately win the suit, and the loss to me of sleep, the
development of nerves and a career of unrelieved anxiety. Compromise was
the proper course to be recommended."

"A proper conclusion, I should say," said Toppleton.

"I think so, too," replied the spirit, "and if I had only remained true
to my instincts my client would have compromised, and I should have
been spared all that followed. It would have been better for all
concerned, for I should have been in possession of myself to-day, and my
client by compromising would in the end have lost no more than he had to
pay me for my services--fifteen thousand pounds."

"Phe--e--ew!" whistled Hopkins. "That was a swindle!"

"Yes, but I wasn't party to it, as you will shortly see. When I made up
my mind that compromise was the best settlement of the case, all things
considered, I sat down right here by this window to write to Mr. Baskins
to that effect. It was a beastly night out. The wind shrieked through
the court there, and it was cold enough to freeze the marrow in a
grilled bone. I was just about to sign my communication to Mr. Baskins,
when I heard a knock at the door.

"'Come in,' I said.

"And then, Mr. Toppleton, as sure as I am sitting here in this Aunt
Sallie talking to you, the door opened and then slowly closed, a light
step was perceptible to the ear, moving across the carpet, and in a
moment a rocking-chair owned by me began to sway to and fro, just as
this one sways when I or you are sitting in it, but to my eyes there was
absolutely nothing visible that had not always been in the room."

Hopkins began to feel chilly again.

"You mean to say that to all intents and purposes, an invisible being
like yourself called on you as you have called on me?" he said in a
minute, his breath coming in short, quick gasps.

"Precisely," returned the incumbent of the Aunt Sallie. "I was visited,
even as you have been visited, by an invisible being, only my visitor
did not remain invisible, for as I sprang to my feet, my whole being
palpitant with terror, the lamp on my table sputtered and went out; and
then I saw, sitting luminous in the dark, gazing at me with large,
gaping, unfathomably deep green eyes, a creature having the semblance of
a man, but of a man no longer of this earth."




CHAPTER VI.

THE SPIRIT UNFOLDS A HORRID TALE.


"IF ever a man had a right to swoon away, Hopkins," continued the
spirit, his voice dropping to a whisper, "I was that man, and I presume
I should have done so but for the everlasting spirit of compromise in my
breast. The proper thing to do under the circumstances was manifestly to
flop down on the carpet insensate, just as you did when I announced
myself to you; and I assure you I had greater reason for so doing than
you had, for my visitor had absolutely no limitations whatsoever in the
line of the horrible. He was an affront to every sense, and not, like
myself, trying only to the ear. To the sense of sight was he most
horrible, and I would have given anything I possessed to be able to
remove my eyes from his dreadful personality, with the long bony claws
where you and I have fingers; with tight-drawn cheeks so transparent
that through them could be seen his hideous jaws; with eyes which stared
even when the lids closed over them; and, worst of all, his throbbing
brain was visible as it worked inside his skull; and so bloodless of
aspect was he withal, that the mind instinctively likened him to a
fasting vampire."

"Excuse me!" groaned Hopkins, throwing himself down on the couch and
burying his face in the pillow. "This is awful. I've crossed the ocean
eight times, Sallie, and until now I have never known sea-sickness, but
this--this vampire of yours is mightier than Neptune; just hand me the
whiskey."

"I'm sorry it affects you that way, Hopkins," said the spirit, "and I'd
gladly give you the whiskey if I could, but you know how circumscribed
my abilities are. I haven't any hand to hand it with."

"Never mind," said Hopkins, the colour returning to his cheeks, "I feel
better now. It was only a sudden turn I had; only, my friend, go slow on
the horrible, will you?"

"I wish I could," replied the spirit sadly, "but the cause of truth
requires that I tell you precisely what happened, omitting no single
detail of the sickening totality. Perhaps, before I proceed, you had
better take a dozen grains of quinine, and have the whiskey within
reach."

"That is a good suggestion," said Hopkins, rising and gulping down the
pills, and grasping the neck of the square-cut bottle containing the
treasured fluid, with his trembling hand. "Go ahead," he said, as he
resumed his recumbent position on the couch.

"To the olfactories," resumed the spirit, "the visitant was stifling. A
gross of sulphur matches let off all at once would be a weak imitation
of the atmospheric condition of this room after he had been here two
minutes, and yet I did not dare to turn from him to open the window. My
only weapon of defence was my eye, under the tense gaze of which he
seemed uneasy, and I was fearful of what might happen were I to permit
it to waver for one instant. His colour was simply deadly. I should
describe it best, perhaps, as of a pallid green in which there was a
suggestion of yellow that heightened the general effect to the point
where it became ghastly."

Here Hopkins' eyelids fluttered, and the bottle was raised to his lips.
When the draught had been taken the bottle dropped from his nerveless
fingers to the floor, and shivered into countless slivers of brown
crystal.

"Jove!" ejaculated the spirit. "That was very unfortunate, Hop--"

"No matter," interrupted Hopkins, "it was empty. Go on. Did this private
view you and the Nile-green apparition were having of each other last
for ever?"

"No," returned the spirit, "it did not. It probably lasted less than a
minute, although it seemed a century. I tried half a dozen times to
speak, but my words were frozen on my lips."

"Why didn't you break them off and throw them at him?" suggested
Toppleton, hysterical to the point of flippancy.

"Because I did not possess the genius of the Yankee who is inventive
where the Briton is only enduring," retorted the spirit, somewhat
disgusted at Toppleton's airy treatment of his awful situation. "Finally
my visitor spoke, and for an instant I wished he hadn't, his voice was
so abominably harsh, so jangling to every nerve in my body, however
callous."

"'You don't appear to be glad to see me,' he said.

"'Well, to tell you the truth,' I replied, 'I am not. I am not a
collector of optical delusions, nor am I a lover of the horrible and
mysterious.'

"'But I am your friend,' remonstrated my visitor.

"'I should dislike to be judged by my friends, if that is so,' I
returned, throwing as much withering contempt into my glance as I
possibly could. 'I think,' I resumed, 'if I were to be seen walking down
Piccadilly with you, I should be cut by every self-respecting
acquaintance I have.'

"'You are an ungrateful wretch,' said the intruder. 'Here I have
travelled myriads of miles to help you, and the minute I put in an
appearance you cast worse slurs upon me than you would if I were your
worst enemy.'

"'I do not wish to be ungrateful,' I answered coolly, 'but you must
admit that it is difficult for a purely mortal being like myself to
receive a supernatural being like yourself with any degree of
cordiality.'

"'Granted,' returned the spectre with a grin, which was more terrifying
to me than anything I had yet seen, 'but when I tell you that I have
come to befriend you--'

"'I don't call it friendly to scare a man to death; I don't call it
friendly to steal invisibly into a man's office and choke him nearly to
suffocation. It seems to me you might use some other style of cologne to
advantage when you go calling on your friends, and if I had cheeks
through which my whole molar system was visible to the outside world,
I'd grow whiskers.'"

"My admiration for you has increased eighty-seven per cent.," put in
Toppleton, "that is, it has if all you say you said to the spook is
true."

"I'd swear to it," returned the spirit, the tone of his voice showing
the gratification he felt at Toppleton's words. "I talked up to him all
the time, though I was quaking inwardly from the start. He noticed it
too, for he said practically what you have just remarked.

"'You command my highest admiration,' were his words. 'If you were as
spunky as this all the time, you would not need my assistance, but you
are not, and so I have come. _You must not compromise that case._'

"Here the deadly green thing rose from the chair and approached me,"
continued the spirit, "and as he approached my terror increased, so it
is no wonder that, when he got so near that I could feel his wretched
soul-chilling breath upon my cheek, his luminous body towering above me
as a giant towers over a dwarf, and repeated the words, '_you must not
compromise that case_,' I should shrink back into a heap at the side of
my desk, and reply, 'Certainly _not_.'"

"'You have a splendid fighting chance,' he added, 'but it will be a
bitter fight,--a fight, the winning of which will make you famous, but
which you, by yourself, with all the law in Christendom on your side,
could no more win than you could batter down the Tower of London with
balls of putty.'

"'Then,' said I, 'I _must_ compromise.'

"'No,' returned my visitor, 'for I am here to win the case for you.'

"'You will never be retained,' I retorted. 'You are a degree too foggy
to be acceptable either to my client or to myself.'

"'I do not ask to be retained; but you must provide me with the means to
appear in court. _You must leave your body and let me put it on._'"

"That must have been a staggerer," said Hopkins. "Were you fool enough
to give it to him without getting a receipt?"

"I was not fool enough to yield without persuasion," rejoined the spirit
sadly, "but when he brought all the infernal power at his command into
play to lure me on, I weakened, and when I weaken I am done for.
Toppleton, that messenger of Satan promised me everything that was dear
to my soul. The temptation of Faust was nowhere alongside of that which
was placed before me as mine if I but chose to take it, and no price was
asked save that one little privilege of being permitted to do the
things which should make me rich, powerful and happy in the guise which
I was to put off that the apparition might put it on. From my boyhood
days I had wished to be rich and powerful, and from the hour in which I
reached man's estate had I been in love, but hopelessly, since she I
loved was ambitious, and would not consent to be mine until I had made
my mark.

"'Alone,' said my visitor, 'you will never make your name illustrious.
With my help you may--and consider what it means. Refuse my offer, and
you will lead the dull, monotonous life of him who knows no success, to
whose ears the plaudits of the world shall never come; you will live
alone and uncared for, for she whom you love cannot become the wife of a
failure. Accept my offer, and in a month you are famous, in a year you
are rich, in an instant you are happy, for the heart you yearn toward
will beat responsive to your own.'

"'But your motive!' I cried. 'Why should you do all this for me who know
you not, and without a price?'

"'My reason,' returned that perjured instrument of malign fate, 'is my
weakness. I love the world. I love the sensation of living. I love to
hear the praises of man ringing in my ears. I am a lover of earth and
earthly ways, with no hope of tasting the joys of earth save in your
acquiescence. I am the soul of one departed. I have put off against my
will the mortal habitation in which I dwelt for many happy years. I have
solved the rebus of existence and have put on omniscience. All things I
can accomplish once I have the means. I ask you for them, with little
hope that you will grant my request, however, because you are the
embodiment of all that is uncertain. Had you lived among the Olympian
gods, they would have made you the Deity of Indecision; but before
refusing my offer remember this, you have now the grand opportunity of
life, such an opportunity as has never been offered to any mortal being
since the time of Shakespeare--'

"'Did Shakespeare have this opportunity?' I asked eagerly.

"'My son,' returned the apparition, with a meaning look, 'do not seek to
know too much about the mystery of William Shakespeare. You know whence
he sprang, how he lived and what he achieved; let my unguarded words of
a moment since be the seed of suggestion which planted in the soil of
your brain may sprout and blossom forth into the flowers of certain
knowledge. It is not for me to let a mortal like you into the confidence
of the Fates; suffice it that _I_ offer you immortality and present
happiness. Think it over: I will return to-morrow.'

"Before I could reply," continued the spirit, "he had vanished. The
light of my lamp returned of its own volition, and but for the odour of
sulphur which still clung to the hangings of the room I should have
supposed that I had been dreaming.

"Utterly wearied by the excitement of my strange experience, I threw
myself down upon my couch, and fell into a deep sleep from which I did
not awake for sixteen hours, in consequence of which a whole day was
practically gone out of my life.

"Darkness was closing in upon me as I opened my eyes, and as it grew
more dense I could see taking shape in the chair by my table my visitor
of the night before, more pallid and sulphurous than ever.

"'Well?' he said, as I opened my eyes.

"'No!' I answered shortly, 'I am not well. I might be much better if
you'd confine yourself to the cemetery to which you belong.'

"'Reparteedious as ever!' he retorted.

"'I don't know the word,' I replied; 'it belongs to neither a dead nor a
live language.'

"'But it's a good word, nevertheless,' observed the ghost quietly,' and
I advise you to think of it whenever you are inclined to indulge in
stupid repartee. It may help you in your career,--but I have come for an
answer to my proposition.'"

"He was right about reparteedious," said Hopkins, interrupting the
spirit's story; "that's a good word, and unless you have it copyrighted
I think I'll open the doors of my vocabulary and admit it to the charmed
circle of my verbiage."

"No, I have no copyright on it," replied the spirit, gazing at Hopkins
with as sad an expression as could possibly be assumed, considering the
imperturbability of Aunt Sallie's countenance. "You may have it for your
vocabulary, Hopkins, but if you will take a little well-meant advice you
had better be very careful about your word collection. Your frequent and
flippant interruptions of my sad story lead me to fear that you are
overworking your vocabulary, which is a very dangerous thing for a young
man of your age and intelligence to do.

"But to resume my tale," continued the spirit, after waiting a moment
for Hopkins to reply to his suggestion, which Hopkins seemed not to
hear, so busy was he looking for his memorandum book on his table,--a
table so littered up with papers and silver paraphernalia for writing
that no portion of its polished surface was visible. "I told my
unwelcome guest that I had no answer to give him; that, as I was not a
believer in the supernatural, I did not intend to waste my time in
parleying with a figment of my brain.

"'You are cautious enough to have been a policeman,' he said in response
to this. 'But caution in this instance is a vice.'

"'Caution is not a vice when a spirit of your evil aspect enters one's
office in the dead of night, and asks for the loan of one's body,' I
answered. 'I should be more justified in lending my diamond-stud to a
sneak thief to wear to a lawn-tennis party at the Duke of Devonshire's,
than in acquiescing in your scheme.'

"'Then you do not care to become a great man, to assure yourself of a
fortune beyond your wildest dreams, to put yourself in such a position
that she whom you love will be unable to resist your proposal of
marriage?'

"'I am not untruthful enough to make any such pretence as that,' I
answered. 'I do want to be everything you say, to have everything that
you promise, but if I know the young woman upon whom my affections are
lavishing themselves, she would object strenuously to my making a
bargain with a transparent offshoot of the infernal regions like
yourself. How do I know that, after I am married and have settled down
to a life of honourable ease, you will not come along and insist upon an
invitation to dinner; or obtrude yourself into the home circle at times
when it will be extremely inconvenient to receive you? What guarantee
have I that, when I have suddenly developed from my present obscurity
into the promised distinction, you will not appear to some of my rivals
and let them into the secret of my success; and, more important still,
how do I know that after Miss Hicksworthy-Johnstone has become my wife
you will not go to her and destroy my happiness by revealing to her the
true state of affairs?'

"'I can only give you my word that I will be faithful,' returned my
visitor.

"'Well, if your word is no better than reparteedious, it is not the kind
of word upon which I should place any reliance whatsoever,' I retorted;
'so you may as well take yourself off; I am not lending myself these
days.'"

"That was very well said," observed Toppleton, "only I wish you had had
witnesses. Your sudden development of back-bone under the circumstance
was so extraordinarily extraordinary that it is almost beyond credence.
Did the fiend depart as you spoke those words?"

"No," returned the exiled spirit, "he did not. He began operations,
deceiving me grossly. He rose from the rocking-chair and said he fancied
it was time for him to be off. When he got to the door he turned and
kissed his right collection of claws to me, and asked if there was any
place in the neighbourhood where he could get a drink. Well, of course,
unpleasant as he was to look at, he had injured me in no respect, and
save for my instinctive suspicions I had no real reason for believing
that he was actuated by any but the best of motives. So I replied that
the best place I knew of for him to get a drink was right here in this
room, and that if he would wait a second I would join him in a glass. He
hesitated an instant, and then said that seeing it was I who asked him,
he thought he would; so I got out my little stone jug and poured out two
rather stiff doses of brandy. Now it had been my habit to take my liquid
refreshment undiluted, and taking my glass in hand I held it aloft and
observed, 'Here's to you.'

"My visitor placed his claws on my arm.

"'You do not mean to say,' he said, 'that you take this fiery stuff
without water?'

"'That is my custom,' I answered. 'I think it a positive wrong to spoil
good brandy with the rather inferior brand of water we get here in
London, nor do I deem it proper to take so pure a fluid as water and
destroy its innocence by introducing this liquid into it.'

"'As you please,' was my visitor's response. 'I was foolish enough to do
that myself when I was fortunate enough to have a physique. In fact it
was just that thing that finally laid me by the heels. But let me have a
little water with mine please.'

"I laid my glass down beside his on the table, and, taking the pitcher,
left the room for an instant to fill it at the water-cooler."

"That was a fine thing to do," said Toppleton. "Your idiocy cropped out
then in great shape. How did you know he wouldn't rob you?"

"I wish he had robbed me and gone about his business," returned the
spirit. "If that was all he did, I'd have been all right to this day. I
was gone about two minutes, and when I returned he was standing by the
window, whistling the most obnoxious tune I ever heard. What it was I
don't know, but it gave me a chill. As I entered the room he stopped
whistling and turned to greet me, took the pitcher from my hand, filled
his glass to the brim with water and quaffed its contents. I drank my
dose raw. As the brandy coursed down my throat into my stomach I fairly
groaned with pain, it burned me so.

"'What the devil have you been doing with that brandy?' I cried, turning
upon my visitor.

"'Swallowing it; why?' he asked innocently. 'You meant that I should
drink it, didn't you?'

"'You can't put me off that way,' I groaned in my agony; for if I had
swallowed a hot coal I could not have suffered more, that infernal stuff
scorched me so. 'You have drugged my brandy.'

"'Have I?' he asked, with a menacing gesture and a frown that wrinkled
up his hideous forehead, until his brains, still visible through the
transparent flesh and bone, were reduced to a spongy mass no bigger than
a walnut--"

"He was concentrating his mind, I suppose?" suggested Hopkins.

"It looked that way," said the spirit, "and it was an awful sight.

"'Have I?' he repeated, and then he added, 'well, if I have, it is only
to save you from yourself, for by this means alone can you ever fulfil
your destiny.'

"As these words issued forth from his white lips, I became unconscious.
How long I remained so, I do not know; but when I came to once more, I
was as I am now--a spirit having no visible shape; while seated in my
chair, writing with my pen and in perfect imitation of my chirography, I
saw what had been my body now occupied by another."




CHAPTER VII.

A CHAPTER OF PROFIT AND LOSS.


SO overcome was the occupant of the Aunt Sallie at this point of his
story, that he requested Hopkins' permission to leave his quarters that
he might sit on the floor near the slivers of the shattered whiskey
bottle. He needed stimulant. Hopkins readily granted the request, for he
felt as if he would not mind having a little stimulant for himself, but
as the last drop available for his purposes had been put to the use for
which it was intended, he had to deny himself the comfort he would have
derived from it. The fact that this horrid event, the harrowing details
of which he had just listened to, had occurred right there in his own
apartments served to make him doubly depressed, for it certainly
indicated that the room, despite its cheerful situation, had been the
dwelling-place of a supernatural being, and the present lessee was
fearful lest that being should appear on the scene once more to
practise some of his infernal tricks upon him.

"You mean to say that when you recovered your senses, you had been
deprived of your body?" said Hopkins at last, breaking the silence more
for the sake of calming his agitated mind than because he had anything
to say.

"Yes," replied the spirit. "I lay there on the sofa an intellectual
abstract whose concrete had been amputated and invested by a being who
had already lived four-score of years in one body, and who, having worn
that out, was now on the look-out for a second. The sensation was
dreadful, and when I attempted to do what theretofore I had always done
in moments of extreme agitation--to pull fiercely at my moustache--I was
simply appalled to realize that the power to raise my hand to do this
had passed, along with the moustache itself, into the control of that
other being. Then an access of rage surged over me, and I attempted to
stamp my foot and shriek. The shriek was a success, but my foot like my
arm was beyond my control.

"As the shriek died away I observed my head slowly turning from the
paper before it on the table, my right hand relaxed its grasp on the
pen, and my own eyes were turned upon me, and I was simply maddened to
see the left eye wink mischievously at me, while my mouth broadened into
a smile at my own misfortunes.

"'Hello,' I said to myself--that is you know the other being in myself
said this to me outside of myself. 'You've come to, at last, eh? I
thought you were going to remain in a comatose state for ever.'

"'See here, my friend,' I said, trying to be calm. 'This is a very
clever trick you've put upon me, but from my point of view it is most
uncomfortable, and I'd just as lief have you evacuate the premises, and
permit me once more to assume my normal condition.'

"'Not until I have accomplished what I set out to accomplish,' was the
answer that fell from my own lips, which again indulged in an
impertinent smile at my expense. 'You don't suppose that I have put in
three weeks of time and energy to make you famous with the intention of
withdrawing on the eve of success, do you?'

"'I don't know what you mean,' I replied, 'I don't understand the
allusion, nor can I see why you permit me to be insulted by my own
lips.'

"Here," said the spirit, "my face became clouded and my smile vanished.

"'Ungrateful wretch that you are!' said he who had rifled me of myself.
'Are you not aware that three weeks have elapsed since you and your
body parted company? Are you not aware that in that time I have forced
the fight between the brothers Baskins to a point that has made that
case the talk of London, and you, the hero of the hour in legal circles?
Do you not understand that to-morrow you are to appear in court to sum
up for your side, and that the London _Times_ itself is to have five
stenographers in court to take down every word that is uttered by him
they call a second Burke, because of his eloquence, by him they call a
second Sheridan, because of his wit, by him they call the newly
discovered leader of the English bar, because of the aggressive and
powerful manner in which this now celebrated will case has been
conducted? And finally, are you not aware that it is you who gain the
credit due to me, since it is I who have merged my personality into
yours, while you have only to remain quiescent and accord to me the
undisturbed occupation of your physical self for a few days more?'

"'I know none of these things,' I answered. 'I know that possibly an
hour ago you robbed me of my senses by your infernal machinations, and
that when they are restored to me I find myself disembodied, nameless,
invisible.'

"'Do you know the date upon which I visited you first?' asked my
tormentor.

"'Yes, it was November eighth. You returned on the night of November
ninth--that is you returned early this evening.'

"'Perhaps this will convince you of the lapse of time, then,' retorted
the occupant of my chair, tossing me a copy of the _Times_, 'and these
will prove the rest,' he added, throwing several other newspapers at the
place where my feet would have been had he not deprived me of them.

"I looked the papers over. The _Times_ was dated November twenty-ninth
and contained, as did also the others, a long account of the trial of
the case of Baskins _v._ Baskins, in which I seemed to have figured
prominently, concluding with a biographical sketch of myself coupled
with the announcement that my former neighbours at Buxton were thinking
of calling upon me to stand for Parliament. The tenour of everything in
the papers was complimentary in the highest degree. It seemed that I had
fairly routed my client's adversaries by nothing else than the
aggressive manner of my fighting; that the case was practically won,
though it still remained for me to sum up on the morrow, and that all
London was expected to swarm into the court room to listen to my
marvellous eloquence. I read and was stunned. My position was more
unhappy than ever, for here was a greatness builded up for me, that was
utterly beyond my ability once returned to my corse of clay to sustain,
and before me was placed the horrible alternative of perpetual exile or
stultification."

"Lovely prospect," murmured Hopkins.

"As I read on," continued the spirit, "I felt the burning gaze of my
visitor upon me, though he could not see me. In my body or out of it, he
still possessed that fearful power of mental concentration which when
exerted upon another through the medium of the eye was withering to the
soul. So nervous did I become, that noiseless as a sun-mote I moved
across to the other side of the room, and yet his gaze followed me as if
instinctively aware of my slightest move. For a time not a word was
spoken by either of us. I was so overcome at the sudden revelation of my
fame, that I knew not what to say. The words of blame that entered into
my consciousness--for that was all that was left of me--to say, I could
not utter, because however badly I had been treated by this fearful
creature in the beginning, it could not be denied that he had exerted
his powers entirely for my benefit. On the other hand, I found it
impossible to thank him for what he had done, since I was unable to
dismiss the sense of indignation I felt at the summary and tricky manner
in which he had robbed me of my individuality. As for the other, he
seemed to be thinking deeply, which contributed to my alarm, for I knew
not what it was he was revolving in his mind, and I feared some
additional exercise of his supernatural power to my further
discomfiture. Finally he spoke.

"'I am very deeply disappointed in you,' he said. 'I at least supposed
you to be a person of gratitude. I deemed your nature to be sufficiently
refined and sensible to favours to evince some little appreciation of
what has been done for you, but I must say that the veriest clod of a
peasant would be hardly less stolid in the face of generous effort in
his behalf than you have been toward me. A more unresponsive soul than
yours can hardly have lived.'

"'Can you blame me for not being effusively grateful to you for having
cut me out of three weeks of existence?' I asked.

"'I can and I do,' he replied. 'You have not been incommoded. Upon your
own confession you have not even been conscious during the period that
you lacked anatomy. On the other hand, consider what I have gone
through! I have suffered more in the past fortnight than I did in my
whole previous life. In making the substitution of my inner self for
yours in your body, I failed to remember how much greater than the
mortal mind is the mind which has put on omniscience, and I have found
the head in which your intellect lived at ease, so contracted, so narrow
for the accommodation of mine, that the work I have undertaken in your
interest has been one prolonged bit of unremitting agony. If you have
ever tried to wear a shoe fifteen sizes too small for you, you will have
a faint glimmering of the pain I have suffered in trying to encase a
number thirty mind in a seven and a quarter head. It has been almost
impossible for me to get some of my great thoughts into this thick
cranium of yours in their entirety,--indeed if thoughts were visible,
your client might have seen them sticking out of these ears, or hovering
above this lovely halo of auburn hair you wear, waiting for admission to
an already overcrowded skull.'

"As he spoke these words," said the spirit, with a chuckle, "I would
have given ten pounds to have had something to smile with. I never
thought one could miss his lips so much as when I tried to grin and
found I had not the wherewithal. Despite the insulting comment of my
visitor upon the quality of my own mind, it really filled what there
was left of me with pleasure to hear that, even though I had departed
from it, my body through its limitations had been able to resent the
intrusion of this alien spirit so effectually.

"'In addition to the bad fit mentally,' continued the usurper of my
anatomy, 'I have had to cope with your dyspepsia, which I did not know
you had, and various other physical troubles such as rheumatism and
toothache. It appears to me that even if I had not made you famous, the
mere fact that I have relieved you of your toothache and rheumatism for
three weeks should entitle me to your gratitude. However, I am willing
to withdraw in your favour immediately if you insist. Of course you will
have to sum up that case to-morrow, and I sincerely hope that you will
do it in a manner creditable to your new self, that is to yourself as I
have made you.'

"Of course you see, Hopkins," said the spirit, pausing in his story for
a moment, "what a dreadful position that left me in. I was absolutely in
the dark as to what had been done in the case. I did not know what line
of argument had been pursued--I was even unacquainted with the name of
the presiding justice at the trial, and as for the testimony elicited
during the three weeks of my own personal desuetude, I had not read one
word of it. To attempt to sum up the case under the circumstances meant
ruin--it meant the final sacrifice of all my hopes; disgrace was
imminent.

"'I cannot sum up the case,' I answered in a moment. 'I have not
mastered the details, nor is there time for me to do so before the court
opens.'

"'I am aware of that fact,' retorted the other. 'But that is nothing to
me. I am not at all interested in upholding the undeserved fame of an
ingrate. It's nothing to me if disgrace stares you in the face. My name
is safe; graven upon a white marble stone in a country cemetery, it is
beyond the reach of dishonour, and is endorsed in deep-cut letters with
an epitaph extolling the virtues of him who bore it. This is your affair
entirely; I wash my hands of it. Come, prepare for your return.'

"Now I submit to you, Hopkins, that, considering the situation, I was
justified in changing my tone toward him. Put yourself in my place for a
moment," said the spirit.

"I'd rather not," returned Hopkins with a shudder.

"Oh, I don't mean for you to exchange places with me. I just want you to
try to imagine what you would have done under the circumstances. You
would have besought him even as I did to crown his work with final
success, and not leave matters in so unsatisfactory a condition; to
spare you the dishonour of a public failure, wouldn't you?"

"Yes, either that or suicide would have been my course," returned
Hopkins. "I think I'd have fled to some apothecary's and concealed
myself in a chloroform bottle until my consciousness evaporated if I'd
been you. You must have known that this thing could not keep up for
ever, unless you would consent to remain disembodied all your days."

"That was just the most horrible thing about it," said the spirit. "When
I realized what it all meant, I was nearly distracted; but believing
suicide to be a crime, and knowing, as I have already told you, that the
mind is indestructible, I could not do as you suggested. I might have
lulled myself into a state of perpetual unconsciousness, but I did not
care to do that, for the reason that, despite the harrowing features of
my situation, I was morbidly interested to see how it would all come
out. At any rate, I succumbed to my fears, and begged him not to think
of departing from my mortal habitation and leaving me in the lurch.

"'Now,' he replied, his face, or rather my face, wreathing with smiles,
'now you are talking sense. I thought you would come to it. It would be
the height of folly for you to ruin yourself simply to gratify your love
of retaining your form. I promise you that to-morrow night, after the
great speech has been made in court--a speech which will ring out
through the whole country, that will echo from the hills of Scotland
across the Atlantic Ocean to the Rocky Mountains, to re-echo thence to
the Himalayas, and so on until your fame has encircled the earth--I
promise you that then I will depart hence and trouble you no more,
except it be your desire that I return.'"

"That was a fair proposition--he wasn't such a mean fiend after all,"
said Hopkins.

"At that moment I thought he was rather a square fiend," returned the
spirit sadly; "but he developed as time went on."

"And the speech next day? How was that? Did he keep his word?" Hopkins
asked.

"Indeed he did," said the spirit with enthusiasm, "and it was simply
marvellous. That night, after we had had the conversation I have just
told you of, that fellow worked like a slave getting up his points,
consulting the records, classifying the testimony and making notes for
his great oratorical effort. Hardly a poet in the history of literature
was there who did not contribute some little line or two to make the
speech more interesting, or to emphasize some point in a manner certain
to appeal to a polished mind or overawe an uncultivated one. Greek and
Latin authors were levied upon for tribute. Parallels in ancient and
modern history utterly unknown to me were instituted for the elucidation
of the arguments advanced--in short, a more polished bit of oratory than
that prepared for my tongue to utter never fell from mortal lips before,
and as for the peroration--well, it would require the consummate art of
the fiend himself adequately to describe it. It was simply dazzling.

"'There is only one drawback, one thing I fear for to-morrow,' said the
fiend, as he finished his preparations, 'and that is that these
miserable mortal lungs of yours will not be able to do justice to that
speech, and some of these quotations rasp on your unpractised tongue, so
that I fear their effect may be weakened. However, I'll do the best I
can with poor tools; but one thing is certain, you must make a sacrifice
to me who have sacrificed time and comfort to you.'

"'What is that?' I asked.

"'I cannot properly accent my words with your teeth in their present
condition. For instance these words here: _And, gentlemen of the jury,
what have we to say of the plaintiff in this action, the brother of the
defendant and the firstborn son of the decedent whose desires he now
seeks to have over-ridden by the laws of this land, what have we to say
of him? What palliation can he offer for his unfraternal conduct in thus
dragging his own brother into the courts of this land in a mad effort to
recover the paltry sum of thirty thousand pounds? History affords no
parallel, gentlemen of the jury, to this cause of son living arrayed
against his parent gone before, of brother fighting brother for a
miserable pittance_, and so on. Don't you see that to be spoken
impressively these words demand a certain venomous hiss? I want to
electrify the jury by that hiss, but I can't do it unless I have out two
of your back teeth and this front one.'

"Here he tapped the left of my two front teeth--pearls they were,
Hopkins, pearls beyond price. Of course I objected.

"'I can't let you do that,' I said, 'it'll ruin my personal appearance.'

"'Bah, man!' he said. 'What is personal appearance to pre-eminent
success? What are looks compared to immortality? I must again take
advantage of your helplessness and rescue you from the effects of your
own indecision. I have arranged to have a dentist here to-morrow morning
at eight. In five minutes he will have the teeth out, and by noon your
seething voice will have turned twelve good men and true into a mass of
goose flesh that will be utterly unable to resist you.'"

Hopkins was heartless enough to laugh at this unexpected development.

"I wish I could appreciate the joke, Hopkins," said the spirit
indignantly. "What is fun for you was tragedy for me. I had always
prided myself on the vigour of my voice. There was nothing weak or
affected about it, nor would I, had I been in control of my being, have
permitted such vandalism as was perpetrated by that dentist the next
morning, just for the sake of making a _coup_ with the jury. I can't
deny, however, that when the speech was delivered the general effect was
heightened by the sibilant tone in which the words were spoken. To me
the dreadful spirit within my body was apparent from introduction to
peroration. The deadly greenness of the fiend shone out through every
vein in my body. My eyes, once a beautiful blue, became like the eyes of
an adder, and my cheeks took on a pallor that was horrible to look upon,
and yet which so fascinated all beholders that they could not take their
eyes away from it. The jurors sat petrified, terror depicted on every
line of their faces; the judge himself, a florid, phlegmatic person
ordinarily, was pale as a sheet and uneasy as an exposed nerve, and when
my poor innocent finger, once so prettily pink of hue, was pointed,
absolutely livid with the scorn that that creature alone could throw
into it, at the terror-stricken plaintiff, he actually fell backward
into convulsions, and was carried shrieking profanely from the
court-room.

"As for me, I sat cowering directly behind the jury-box fearful for the
future, fearful for the effect upon my poor body of the terrible strain
that was put upon it, and wondering what I could possibly do upon
resuming my normal condition to maintain the reputation which that
morning's achievement had brought to me. So absorbed was I in these
reflections that the judge's faltering charge at the conclusion of the
proceedings fell upon my consciousness unheard, save as the monotonous
roar of the vehicles in the street outside was heard; but the verdict of
the jury, rendered without leaving the box, in favour of my client did
reach my ears, and almost simultaneously came the announcement that
there would be no appeal, since the plaintiff in the cause had been
frightened into imbecility by the fearful indictment of his character in
the summing-up of the counsel for the defendant."




CHAPTER VIII.

FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN THE MAKING OF A NAME.


"YOU must have felt like a vest-pocket Byron, to wake up and find
yourself famous that way," said Toppleton; "or, perhaps you found
yourself _in_famous, eh? I don't know how it is here in England, but in
America a lawyer who'd browbeat a poor innocent litigant into a state
bordering upon lunacy, would be requested to move out of town."

"It all depends," returned the spirit. "If my substituted self had
limited his brow-beating to the plaintiff, it might have made the
reputation which I found awaiting me upon my return to my remains, one
of infamy, but that was by no means the case. The judge himself
succumbed to nervous prostration a week later, the jurors vanished like
a pack of frightened hares immediately they were discharged, and even my
client shook like a leaf when he felt my eyes resting upon him. As for
my own proper self, I was the worst scared man of the lot; so, you see,
it was a sort of universal awe that was inspired by the demeanour of my
body that day, and one which commanded rather than invited respect."

"Did you find your head a little stretched when you got back into
yourself again, or did he break his word and refuse to let you back?"
queried Toppleton.

"Oh, he kept his word that time," replied the spirit. "After the trial
was over he took a cab and drove rapidly out to Regent's Park and back,
returning to my chambers about six o'clock. I was there waiting for him,
ready to enter upon my usual anatomical ways once more. My client was
also there, though, of course, unaware that I was present in spirit. I
was very much amused to see how utterly unnerved poor Baskins was by the
strange events of the day. Several times he muttered to himself remarks
like, '_I didn't know he had it in him_,' and '_If I'd thought he was
that kind of a man I'd have kept blessed clear of him. I wonder what
he'll charge._' And then every time there was a step or noise of any
kind out in the corridor, he would straighten up nervously and stare at
the door in a tense sort of fashion which showed that he dreaded meeting
me. Once he put his hand in his pocket and pulled out a big duelling
pistol which I was alarmed to note was loaded to the muzzle. It was
evident that the awe which my new self had inspired in him amounted to
positive fear.

"That duelling pistol put an end to my enjoyment of the situation,"
continued the spirit. "I was afraid he might be goaded into discharging
a load of cold lead into my body. Of course, I didn't care to have that
happen, and under the agitation of the moment I uttered an ejaculation
of consternation. I never saw in all my experience a man so thoroughly
frightened as Baskins was when the sound for which he could not account
greeted his ear. He went on his knees and shook like a leaf, clasping
his hands, as if in prayer, before his face, which turned a blue white.
The pistol fell from his hands to the floor, and, as it did so, the door
opened, and I saw myself standing on the sill, haggard of face, but not
worn of spirit, for the supernatural brilliance of my eye as it caught
sight of the pistol and realized at a flash just what the situation was,
showed that the soul within was still unwearied by its effort.

"Then," added the spirit, his voice husky with the remembrance of his
dishonour, "came an interview that makes me blush, even though I have no
cheek on which to display that manifestation of shame. My body sprang
forward as the pistol met my eye, and, snatching the weapon from the
floor, flung it out through the window into the court, where it
exploded, the jar of contact with the stone walk being sufficient to
discharge it. As the sharp report of the pistol echoed through the court
my client threw himself flat on his face, and prostrate there at my feet
began to utter a string of incoherent lamentations and despairing
requests for mercy at my hands which were painful to hear, and I judged
from what meaning I could patch together from his jumble of words, that
he deemed me an emissary of Satan,--and I think he was right.

"'What does this mean?' queried the fiend within me. 'Murder or suicide?
If you contemplated suicide, I forgive you; if murder--'

"'I was afraid,' gasped my unhappy client. 'Your power was so terrible;
the effect of your words so awful, that I--'

"'Ah!' interrupted the fiend. 'I see. It was murder you were prepared to
do in case we should not agree, and the power of my eye should chance to
be exerted to win you from your determination whatever it may have
been.'

"'No--not that--not that!' shrieked my client. 'It was but the natural
instinct of self-preservation that led me to--'

"'You weaken your cause by your loquacity, my friend,' said the fiend.
'You suspected me of contemplating some dishonourable or cowardly act,
and for that reason you entered the office of him who has saved your
good name and your purse alike from them who would have robbed you of
both, having so little sense of gratitude that you bring with you an
instrument of death. Very well, let it be so. I am satisfied if you are.
I might do that to you now which would place you in far worse estate
than your poor brother is in. If you had your pistol in your hand, aimed
at my heart, you would still be powerless to do me an injury, for with
one glance of my eye I could force you to turn the muzzle to your own
head, and with another compel you to empty its leaden load into your own
brains. Your suspicions are insulting, but an insult from one of your
calibre to one of mine is as the sting of a fly to the elephant; I pass
it over and charge it on the bill. Ten thousand pounds for trying the
case, two thousand five hundred for accepting your insult, two thousand
five hundred for condoning it, and in one hour must this money be in my
hands with a letter--a letter written and signed by you, expressing your
satisfaction with the manner of my conducting the case, and concluding
with an allusion to your surprise that my charge is so moderate."

"'And if I refuse to submit to this outrage?' queried my client, lashed
into a show of courage which he really did not feel.

"'You leave this room a raving maniac, for I have the power to make you
so,' I was appalled to hear myself reply."

"And do you mean to tell me," said Hopkins, his bosom heaving with
indignation, "that you sat there like a zero on a pedestal, and kept
silent with this blackmailing infamy going on under your very eyes?"

"I was speechless with rage," returned the spirit, "or I should have
interfered. Before I could recover my composure the letter had been
written and the money paid, for my client still had the sixty thousand
pounds in their original form, in the one thousand pound banknotes. The
struggle he went through was terrible to witness, and as the notes
passed from his hands into mine he sighed like one who was heart-broken.
The fiend dictated the letter commending my efforts, and expressing
surprise that the amount asked for my services was so moderate, and then
he opened the door and ushered the unfortunate victim out. As the latter
left the room the fiend whispered to him in withering tones to beware
of his vengeance if he ever attempted to reveal what had passed since he
entered the room.

"'For,' said he, 'if you are not careful, it matters not in what part of
this or any other world you may be, you must forever be within my reach,
and forever subject to the consequences of my resentment.'

"Then," said the spirit, "he slammed the door violently and turned and
fixed my eyes upon the corner wherein I sat aghast with the
mortification of having my name identified in any man's mind with such a
diabolical act as that I had just witnessed.

"'Now,' he said, 'you may have this carcass of yours back and welcome.
It's lucky for you I have the power I have. If I hadn't, your body would
be riddled with bullets within twenty-four hours.'

"'Bah!' I replied. 'That man had no more intention of using that pistol
without provocation than I have, and considering the terror with which
you have managed to inspire everyone with whom you have come in contact
to-day, I don't wonder he came armed.'

"'I never thought of that,' said my substitute, 'though what you say
about everybody's terror is true; you might apply it even more broadly
than you do, because as I drove down the Strand just now even the
omnibus horses shied, and the driver of my cab had all he could do to
keep his ramshackle steed from running away. But hurry up and get ready
to relieve me of this mortal incubus of yours, and take your money--it's
a nice little sum, eh?'

"'Magnificent,' I returned. 'And when you and I have changed places I am
going to return all but five hundred pounds to that poor fellow you have
just robbed in such a conscienceless fashion.'

"The moment I said this," said the spirit, "I regretted it, for he
grasped the money with my right hand, and holding it over the fire,
which was blazing merrily in the grate, he said. 'My friend, I exact
from you an oath that you will not return one penny of this sum to Mr.
Baskins. If you refuse, I shall cast every one of these bank notes into
that fire, nor shall I admit you once more to your form until the very
ashes of those notes have disappeared into the air.'

"Now what could I do under the circumstances, Toppleton?" asked the
spirit earnestly. "Could I do anything but swear to what he asked?"

"Yes," returned Hopkins, "you could. I don't believe so vile a creature
as he could have distinguished between a bible and a city directory. I'd
have taken the oath on the city directory."

"Alas!" said the spirit sadly, and with such evident sincerity that it
jostled the Aunt Sallie from the chair to the floor. "As I said to you
before, I am only an enduring Briton where you have the inventive genius
of the Yankee. I never thought of the substitution of the directory for
the bible, and the consequent elimination of moral responsibility from
the oath. I simply swore as he desired me to, and in an hour I was alone
in my office, the occupant of a frame so exhausted that I could scarcely
lift my head, and in my pockets were those miserable bank notes, more
burning to my conscience than had they been sovereign for sovereign in
gold coin hot from the mint."

"Of course," suggested Hopkins, "you devoted them to the cause of
charity; subscribed all but your just due to the House for Imbeciles, in
which that wronged unfortunate the plaintiff was incarcerated?"

"I intended something of the sort," returned the spirit, extricating
himself from the head of Aunt Sallie, and ensconcing himself on the
paper-weight on Hopkins' desk. "But I didn't have time. You see,
immediately after the trial a perfect avalanche of litigants from other
offices slid into mine, and within a week I was so overwhelmed with
business that I had to hire the rest of this floor here to find room for
my papers. It was painful to me, too, to observe that those who had
heard of my fame, but who had never seen me, were manifestly
disappointed, when taking their departure at the close of a first
interview, at having found me so much less great than they had been led
to believe by the public estimate of my abilities. Nevertheless, cases
of the most intricate sort were fairly dumped into my hands by the
cart-load, and, worst of all, I found that eminence brought with it
other responsibilities which I was ill-prepared to meet. I was
constantly in receipt of requests to lecture on subjects of a variety
that would have appalled the fiend himself, and worse than all I was
called into consultation by the Crown in certain litigation of
international importance. For a time I tried to go it alone, and by
assiduous devotion to study to fit myself for the responsibilities which
my fame had brought me, but it was impossible. I broke down in less than
a month; but having tasted the joys of prominence I was not strong
enough to resist the temptation to prolong it indefinitely, and, without
thinking of the means, I committed myself to certain undertakings which
were utterly beyond my intellectual strength to accomplish, and then,
when brought face to face with failure and disgrace, there was but one
thing left for me to do, and that I did.

"I summoned the fiend. The mere expression of a desire to see him was
sufficient to bring him into my presence, and time and time again did I
subject my poor body for ambition's sake to the dreadful interchange of
spirits.

"From without I watched my development from mediocrity to fame with a
joyous interest, not unmixed, however, with regret, for, at such moments
as were permitted me to enjoy the undivided possession of myself, I
could not but feel conscious of a diminution of physical strength which
detracted materially from my happiness; and yet when day after day I saw
my name in print, and noted that I was regarded as one of the most
marvellous intellectual products of the day, I could not bring myself to
the point where I could renounce everything I had gained, and withdraw
to the contented life of the recluse. Let a man once taste a living
immortality, Hopkins, and I care not how strong his character may be, he
would part with all that he holds most dear sooner than he would
renounce that.

"And so it went on for a full year. I became the leading light of the
English bar; I astonished the world as a public orator; so potent were
my arguments that in court or on the hustings none were able to resist
me. At public dinners I was the speaker who alone could hold the
feasters when the seductions of the wine cup awaited the cessation of my
eloquence. Had I been able to extend the hours of my days from
twenty-four to ten times twenty-four, I could not have responded to all
the calls that were made upon my time. Then as if to show the world that
one profession was too small to hold the boundless qualities of my
genius, I startled the English reading public with a novel, the depth
and power of which stirred the soul of the most _blasé_ of
novel-readers, and the presses of my publisher were taxed to the utmost
to supply the demand for my work; then came a volume of poems which
caused my name to be mentioned as a possible successor to the
laureateship; then a series of essays on scientific and philosophical
subjects which were nearly my undoing, since my omniscient self, as I
came to call the fiend who was responsible for my greatness, was absent
upon one occasion when I was called upon unexpectedly to receive a
delegation of Scottish scientists, who had travelled from Edinburgh to
London to consult with me in regard to certain propositions advanced in
my book. What they thought of me Heaven only knows. You see, Hopkins, as
far as my original self was concerned there wasn't an atom of scientific
knowledge in my body, and to tell you the truth I hadn't even read my
book, concerning which these unwelcome grey beards had come from
Edinburgh to speak."

"I should like to have been on hand to hear you," said Hopkins with a
laugh. "You must have felt like Damocles!"

"I was worse off than Damocles. He was face to face with nothing but
death. I was having a _tête-à-tête_ with dishonour. Damocles had a sword
suspended over his head, held in place by a hair, I had a Krupp cannon
over mine, held in place by Heaven knows what."

"How did you get out of it?" queried Hopkins. "Summon the fiend?"

"What, summon that deadly green thing before those men, and change
places with him in the presence of witnesses? I fancy not. I have been a
complete hall-marked fool in many respects, Hopkins, but my idiocy never
went as far as that. The only thing left for me to do was to acquiesce
in nine things that those fellows said, and look doubtful at the tenth
and say I didn't know about that; my inherent love of compromise and my
ingenuity in that direction stood me in good stead upon that occasion.
It was a narrow squeak, but I got through all right. The _savants_ went
back to Edinburgh somewhat disappointed, I presume, with the new sun on
the scientific horizon. And you ought to have seen how the fiend
laughed when I told him about it the next time I saw him! He fixed it
all right, however, by sitting down and writing a letter to my late
visitors and answering every one of their questions, and asking them a
few additional ones, to answer which I fancy put them to their trumps.

"After making me famous as scientist, novelist and lawyer, the fiend
induced a political bee to enter my cap, and one day after an absence of
a week from my body, during which period of time I was utterly in the
dark as to its whereabouts, I was appalled to see it reel in at the door
in a maudlin state that revolted me.

"'Well,' I said as soon as I was able to speak,' what new disgrace is
this you have put upon me? Am I to make my mark now as an inebriate, or
is this simply a little practical joke you are putting upon my
sensibilities? If it is the latter, it is a mighty poor joke.'

"'No,' returned the fiend, who I am pleased to say showed some sense of
shame at the plight he had got me into this time. 'No, this is not a
practical joke, nor do I wish to ruin your reputation for sobriety. I
regret this apparent liquidation of your system quite as much as you do,
not because I care what others say, though. It is because I find it
much harder to manage your body under these present circumstances. When
one leg wants to go dancing down Pall Mall, and the other evinces a
strange desire to walk gravely off in the direction of Scotland Yard, it
is a most difficult thing for a mind not thoroughly in sympathy with
either of them to drive them down the Strand in that modest, unassuming
fashion which alone enables one to avoid police supervision. I've had
the devil's own time with this weak corse of yours, and if I had known
how abominably light-headed and airy-legged a little strong drink made
you, I never should have had you stand for Parliament--'

"'Stand for Parliament?' I cried, aghast at the new honour which was
being thrust upon me. 'Have I been standing for Parliament?'

"'Well, not exactly' laughed the fiend. 'You've been sort of held up for
Parliament; you haven't been able to stand up without wobbling for five
days; in fact, not since you tried to do your duty by your constituency,
and take a little something at your own expense with a few rounds of
doubtful voters. You were nearly defeated, my boy, because of your
disgusting inability to cope with the flowing bowl, but I managed to
pull you through. The temperance people voted to a man against you, but
the other interests stood by you pretty well, and you now represent your
old neighbours in--'

"'My old neighbours,' I moaned. 'Have I been made to appear to my old
neighbours in the light of a dissipated politician when all my life long
I had been known to them as a sober--'

"'Don't dwell on that point, my good fellow,' interrupted the fiend.
'Forget it. In forgetfulness of what you have been, and in consideration
of what you have become, lies happiness. By the way--have you a mother
living?'

"'Yes,' I answered, numb with anxiety for fear of what was coming. 'You
haven't disgraced me in her eyes, have you?'

"'Oh, no,' returned the fiend. 'But a lady claiming to be your mother
visited me during the campaign, and was very indignant because I failed
to recognize her--that cost you some votes, but not enough to change the
result. She didn't look a bit like you, and I was afraid the opposition
was putting up some game on us, so I just laughed her off.'

"'You--you laughed her off--you mean to tell me,' I stammered, 'that
when my mother came to my political headquarters to see her son, he
refused to recognize her, and laughed her off?'

"'Oh, come,' said the fiend indignantly, 'don't get angry. Remember one
thing, please. You are now a member of Parliament, a great Lawyer, a
famous Scientist, a Novelist and an Orator. It is I who have made you
so. If you don't like what I've done, we'll call the arrangement off,
and you can make a spectacle of yourself in the eyes of the world. I
hate an ingrate. You couldn't expect me to know a lady whom I never even
saw before, and when I have a big scheme on foot I do not intend to have
it spoiled for want of caution. If I made you seem an undutiful son, I
am sorry for it, and will strive to make amends next time I meet your
mother. I'll write a formal apology if you desire, but I don't wish to
hear any more of your sentimental nonsense. Much has to be sacrificed in
achieving greatness, and you have got therewith just about as little
personal inconvenience as any man in history. Stop your snivelling, or
I'll desert your cause, and what that means even you can grasp.'

"With these words," concluded the spirit, "he departed, and left me to
sleep off the effects of a seven days' campaign in which my moral
welfare had been sacrificed to the thirst of at least four hundred
doubtful voters. Credited with a seat in Parliament, I found my name
debited with the crime of intemperance, lack of self-respect, and a
gross affront to my own mother; a fine record for one week in which in
my own consciousness I was unable to recollect doing anything that could
not have been done with propriety by a candidate for canonization."

"Humph!" ejaculated Toppleton, deeply moved by the horror of the weary
spirit's story. "It strikes me that canonization in the form in which it
was used on the Sepoys in '57 would be mild punishment for that
Nile-green brute that got you into this. To tell you the truth, Sallie,
the fearful justice of your cause is almost enough to make me withdraw
entirely. I should hate to be called upon to prosecute a defendant of
the nature of your verdant visitor."




CHAPTER IX.

THE CROWNING ACT OF INFAMY.


"HEAR me to the end, Hopkins, I beseech you," said the exile earnestly.
"Of course the fiend strikes you as a being to be avoided, but I do not
believe that he is now as powerful and as terrible as he was in the days
gone by. Long confinement to a purely mortal sphere must necessarily
have weakened his supernatural powers, and it strikes me that properly
managed by a young and aggressive lawyer, our case against him would be
won in an instant. At all events, do not compel me to leave my story
unfinished. I am sure that when you hear of the crowning act of infamy
of which my evil genius was guilty, you will not hesitate a moment in
making up your mind that duty summons you to aid me."

"Very well," rejoined Hopkins. "Go on with the tale, only do not be too
sanguine as to its results in convincing me that I am the man to
extricate you from this horrid plight."

"After I had attended one or two meetings of the House of Commons," said
the exile, resuming the thread of his story, "I enjoyed the experience
so much that I almost forgave the fiend for having so nearly ruined me
with all my old friends; and having written, in accordance with his
promise, a truly beautiful letter to my mother, explaining away the
harsh treatment she had suffered at the hands of her now illustrious son
on the ground of his not being quite himself on that occasion--a state
of mind due to too close attention to work and study--I quite forgave
him for that unpleasant episode in my campaign. My mother too overlooked
the affront, and wrote me a most affectionate epistle, stating that I
might trample upon her most cherished ideals with her entire
acquiescence if my taking that course would ensure to her the receipt of
so loving and touching a letter as the one I had sent her. The fiend and
I both had to smile, on receiving my mother's note, to observe that the
dear old lady attributed my ability to express myself in such beautiful
terms to the poetic traits I had inherited from her.

"'She's very proud of her dear boy,' sneered the fiend.

"'In spite of his brutality at the committee-room,' I retorted; and then
we both grinned, for each truly believed that he had got the better of
the other."

"It was a pretty close contest," said Hopkins. "But on the whole the
laugh seems to be on you."

"It certainly was the first time I tried to speak in Parliament,"
returned the spirit. "Such a failure was never seen. I was to take part
in a very important debate, and when the hour came for me to get on my
feet and talk, I was my weak-kneed self and utterly unacquainted even
with the side I was expected to take. The fiend had promised to do all
the talking, and on this occasion failed to materialize. I spoke for ten
minutes in an incoherent fashion, mouthing my words so that no one could
understand a syllable that I uttered. It was a fearful disappointment to
my friends in the House and in the galleries; the latter being packed
when it was understood that I was to speak. Of course, when the fiend
appeared later on, he straightened it all out, and the printed speech
which he dictated and which I wrote was really a fine effort and did our
party much good. But these little embarrassments were tragedies to me,
and at every new success I quailed before the possibilities of
disastrous failure at the next effort. In but one respect was I entirely
free from the fiendish influence, and that was in the matter of my
love. From that phase of my life the fiend kept himself apart, and it
was the only joyous oasis to be found in the boundless desert of my
misery. To the fiend, Sunday was literally a day of rest, for upon that
day he never approached me, and I devoted it to calling upon the woman I
loved.

"She was a beautiful woman, the only daughter of a retired city
merchant, and fond of the admiration of successful men. That she loved
me before I attained to eminence in the various professions in which the
fiend had compelled me to dabble, I had much reason to believe; but I
had never ventured to make love to her in dead earnest, because I feared
for the result. She had often said to me that while she should never
marry for riches and position, she did not intend to fall in love with
any man just because he had neither, and that no man need ever propose
marriage to her who was not reasonably sure of a successful career. It
was not selfishness that led her to think and speak in this manner, but
a realizing sense of the unhappy fact that mediocrity married is as
hopeless as a broken-winded race-horse in harness. There is plenty of
ambition but no future, and as she often said, 'Where hopelessness
comes, happiness dwelleth not!'"

"A daughter of Solomon, I wot," interrupted Toppleton.

"Yes," said the spirit, with a sigh for her he had lost, "and rather
superior to the old gentleman in a great many ways. Of course I
understood, and, lacking achievement in my profession, discreetly held
my tongue on the subject of matrimony, taking good care, however, when I
called never to let any other fellow outstay me, unless perchance he was
some poor drivelling idiot from whose immediate present the laurel was
further removed than from my own. She understood me, I think, though I
never put that point to a practical test by a proposal of marriage. This
was the state of affairs at the time of my first meeting with the fiend,
and for a year subsequent to that ill-starred night upon which he first
crossed my path I let matters take their own course, waiting a
favourable opportunity to ask the great question, upon the answer to
which hung all my future happiness. I could see that with my increasing
fame, her interest in me waxed; but as every passing day brought new and
undreamed-of distinctions she grew more and more reserved toward me--a
most feminine trait that, Hopkins. When a woman begins to love a man in
dead earnest, in nine cases out of ten she will make him feel that he is
utterly abhorrent to her, and it's a good thing she does, because it
makes him look carefully into his own character in an endeavour to
discover and to root out all the undesirable features thereof. It is
this that enables love to redeem men whom the world considers
irredeemable, so, of course, I had no feeling of discouragement at her
growing coldness, for, understanding women, I knew exactly what it
meant. I think I was more or less of an enigma to her."

"I should think it likely," said Toppleton. "If she really knew you, she
must have been mightily surprised at your sudden strides towards
universal genius. It's a wonder to me that she did not suspect the
enigma, and give it up."

"Yes," returned the spirit. "It was very embarrassing to me when she
expressed her surprise at my progress, and asked me how I did it, and
other questions equally hard to answer. And then her father, who was
always more or less insufferable, now became absolutely insulting--that
is, his new found appreciation of my virtues led him into making
assertions which galled me, he little knew how much--assertions to the
effect that to look at me no one would suspect that I had more than
ordinary intelligence; that to hear me talk one would never suppose I
could make a speech of any kind, much less set the world on fire by my
eloquence; and finally, that no man after this could tell him that it
was possible to judge of the future by the past, or the past by the
present, for he had always thought me foredoomed to failure, and I had
achieved success, and, having achieved success, gave no present evidence
that I deserved it."

"He had the making of the accepted mother-in-law in him," said Hopkins.
"What could have induced you to fall in love with the daughter of a man
like that?"

"She was a superb woman, that's what," rejoined the spirit with
enthusiasm, "and when I think of the happiness that the Nile-green shade
first placed within my reach and then snatched from me, I regret that
the soul is immortal, and that I am not all-powerful, for it would
please me to grind his soul into absolute nothingness.

"It was at least a year and two months subsequent to my first meeting
with him," continued the spirit as soon as his overwrought feelings
would permit, "that he first broached the subject of matrimony. He had
attended a grand ball at the house of the Earl of Piccadilly and was the
lion of the occasion owing to his stand in certain recent Parliamentary
crises. His readiness in debate had gained him a high position, and his
natural grace of manner--that is, _my_ natural grace of manner--had
helped him to a hold on the affections of those with whom he was
associated, for, as he grew more accustomed to my figure and got his
angles comfortably rounded off to fit my curves, he managed to subdue
that horrible aspect he had assumed with such fearful effect in the
trial of Baskins _v._ Baskins, and when geniality was the attribute most
likely to help him on he was geniality personified. The ball was
ostensibly one of the Earl of Piccadilly's usual series of annual
functions, but in reality it was given for the purpose of introducing me
into society. From all accounts, it was a grand affair, and I seemed to
have made as fine an impression as a social debutant as I had in the law
courts, in the field of literature, and in the House of Commons. If the
fiend spoke truly that night, when he returned and handed my fatigued
body over to me for a rest, I made a marked success; all the ladies were
raving about me; I was a divine dancer, though before that night my feet
had never tripped to the strains of a waltz, polka, or any other
terpsichorean exercise. I pleased the dowagers as well as the maids, and
had, in short, become an eligible--that is I had become as desirable a
matrimonial _parti_ as an untitled person could hope to be, and the
fiend remarked with a sly wink that it was not beyond the range of
possibilities that the Premier would bestow upon me one of the peerages
at his disposal when the proper time came.

"'Bachelorhood is pardonable in a young man,' said my evil genius upon
this occasion, 'but we must marry if we are to reach the pinnacle of
success. There is a solidity about the married man's estate that
bachelorhood lacks, and I rather think I can make a match that will push
us ahead.'

"'I don't think I need your assistance,' I replied. 'In fact I prefer
that some of the things which pertain to myself shall be left entirely
in my own hands. In matters of the affections I can take care of
myself.'

"'Very well,' was the fiend's response. 'Have your own way about it,
only take my advice and get married. We need a wife.'

"'We?' I cried. 'We! I just want you to understand, my dear sir, that
the pronoun doesn't fit the case. _I_ may need a wife and _you_ may need
a wife, but if you think I'm going into any co-operative scheme with you
in that matter you are less omniscient than usual. Remember that please
and let us have nothing more to say on the subject.'"

"That was a very proper stand for you to take," said Hopkins, gravely.
"Though I think that, under the circumstances, you should have given up
all ideas of marriage. No woman would have you, knowing that you were
not yourself at times; and then having as little control over your other
self as you seem to have had, you would often have found yourself in hot
water for flirting with other women, when, in reality, your own self was
as innocent as a mountain daisy."

"I know I did wrong in thinking of marriage, Hopkins," returned the
spirit, "but if you had ever met the woman I loved, you would have loved
her too--yes, even if you were a confirmed celibate. I don't believe a
Cardinal, sir, would have hesitated between his hat and her. My sole
justification was her loveliness, and then the fiend's ready
acquiescence in my statement that in that matter he must hold aloof gave
me confidence that I might safely take the step I had so long and so
ardently desired to take.

"Weeks passed by, and in everything save the courtship of Miss
Hicksworthy-Johnstone I gave myself unreservedly over to the fiend, who
began suddenly to take an interest in my personal appearance which he
had never before manifested. He laid in a fine supply of clothes--dress
suits, walking suits, lounging suits--suits in fact of every description
and of the finest texture. Shirts and collars, and ties of the choicest
sort were imported by him from Paris, and on my hands I now observed he
was beginning to wear kid gloves of fashionable type. His hats and shoes
were distinctly in the mode, and his jewelry, as far as it went, was of
unexceptionable taste and quiet elegance. In fact, Toppleton, I began to
be something of a dandy. This I attributed to the natural vanity of my
other self. I, too, was proud of that graceful form, but I never thought
enough about it to go about arraying it in a fashion which neither
Solomon nor the lily of the field could ever have approached. I cared
nothing for gloves save as a means to a warm finger's end, and it made
no difference to me whether my hat was of the style of '48, or plucked
fresh from the French Emperor's own block. As long as my head was
covered I was satisfied. Patent leather shoes I could never bring myself
to buy, because they had always seemed to me to go hand in hand either
with poverty or laziness. To a man who cannot afford shoe blacking or
who is too lazy to black his own boots, patent leathers, I thought, were
a boon; but I never classed myself under either head, and wore the
regular foot gear of the plain but honest son of toil.

"But now all was changed. My other self was vain, and unexpectedly gave
himself over to dandyism. At first he rather disturbed my equanimity by
wearing somewhat loud patterns, but he soon got over that, and between
us, after a very little while, two or three months perhaps, my body had
the best clothes there were to be had in all London. I had not realized
all this time that I was fast becoming a millionaire, and when my
tailor's bill for fifteen hundred pounds came home one night I was in a
great stew, but the fiend came in and relieved my conscience very much
by showing me my balance in the bank. It amounted, Toppleton, to one
hundred and seventy-five thousand pounds, with an income still running
evenly along from my law practice of ten thousand pounds per annum, not
to mention the revenues from my books, which in six months had amounted
to two thousand pounds. I was a rich man, and when I observed that this
was my condition, I made up my mind to ask Miss Hicksworthy-Johnstone's
hand in marriage the very next time I saw her. I hoped this would be
soon, but, alas for human expectations, it was not. The Christmas
holidays were about to begin, and I bethought me that at the season of
goodwill toward men I might ask the possessor of my heart to accept it
as a permanent gift, a decision which I unfortunately kept to myself,
for from one end of the holidays to the other I never laid eyes upon my
mortal habitation. The fiend was off with it for one whole month,
Hopkins."

"Didn't you know where?" asked Toppleton.

"I did not," returned the spirit. "He went off with it as usual one
night late in November to attend a meeting of the leaders of our party,
telling me not to worry if he did not return for twenty-four hours,
since there was important business on hand. What the business was he did
not inform me, nor did I seek to know it, since under our arrangement it
was not necessary that I should familiarize myself with parliamentary
matters, which were usually as dry as they were weighty anyhow, and
hence distasteful to me.

"Well, I waited twenty-four hours and no fiend appeared. Another day
passed with no sign of him. A third day moved into the calendar of the
past; a week elapsed, then a second, a third, a fourth, and finally a
month had gone. I was growing sick with apprehension. What if something
dreadful had happened and my lovely, only body was lying dead somewhere,
too shattered for the fiend to remain longer within it, and gone for
ever from me? What if the present occupant of my corse had again yielded
to the seductive influence of the cup, and was off somewhere upon a
prolonged spree? I floated uneasily in and about my quarters here,
sleepless, worried to distraction. I searched my papers, as best I could
without hands, to see if there was not some clue as to my whereabouts
among them, and found none. I went through the contents of the waste
basket even, and found nothing to relieve my dreadful anxiety, and then
I went to the wardrobe to search the pockets of my clothes for possible
evidence to calm my agitated soul.

"Toppleton, there was not one vestige of a garment in that clothes press
from top to bottom. Not a shoe, not a coat, absolutely nothing. It was
bare even as Mother Hubbard's cupboard was bare. This was an additional
shock, and I became giddy with fear. I floated madly across to the
bureau and peered into the drawers thereof. Beyond the ties I had
formerly worn and the collars, frayed at the edges, of my negligée days,
nothing remained, and then for the first time I noticed that my trunk
was gone from the room.

"'What can it mean?' I asked myself, though I might as well have spared
the question, for it was one I could not answer. Days came and went,
leaving me still pondering. Christmas Eve came and found me here moping
in a cheerless apartment, friendless, forlorn, clothesless and
bodiless--a fine way to pass what should have been the happiest night of
the year."

"Elegant!" said Toppleton. "It might have been worse though. If you had
had your body and still been clothesless you would have found it rather
cold, I fancy."

"I had almost given up all hope of ever seeing myself again," continued
the exile, ignoring Hopkins' interruption, "when on the evening of
January second I heard a step coming along the hall which I at once
recognized as my own, my latch-key was inserted in the lock and the door
was opened, and at last I stood before myself again, the picture of
health and happiness.

"'Are you there?' my lips said with a broad smile, as my body entered
the room.

"'I am,' I replied shortly; 'and I've been here, Heaven knows how long,
worried sick to know what had become of you. I don't think you are the
most considerate fiend in the world to take me off for weeks without
letting me know anything of my whereabouts.'

"'I am very sorry,' said the fiend, throwing himself down on the lounge.
'I meant to have told you, but you were not here when I returned. Lord
Smitherton invited me out to his house at Snorley Farms for the
Christmas holidays along with the Earl of Pupley, General
Carlingberry-Jimpson, and a half-dozen members of the Birmingham Society
of Fine Arts. It was an invitation I could not well refuse, and,
besides, our carcass here was beginning to feel the need of an outing,
so I accepted. I came back here to tell you about it, but you must have
been floating about somewhere else. At all events, you are much better
for the outing, and your purely mortal self has had a good time. And, by
the way, I want to warn you about one point. When you are the occupant
of this corse, I think you would better not walk down Rotten Row, or go
anywhere in fact where I am accustomed to going, because you don't know
my friends any more than I know yours, and that is apt to lead to
misunderstanding. Lady Romaine Cushing, who was visiting Lady
Smitherton, told me that I had cut her dead in the Row one afternoon,
although she had stopped her carriage particularly to speak to me. It
was you who cut her, but, of course, you were not to blame, because you
never saw Lady Romaine Cushing; but it is hard to explain away little
matters of that sort, and I had the deuce of a time getting her to
believe that her eye must have deceived her. We can't afford to offend
our friends of the fair sex, you know; they can make or mar a man these
days.'

"'And I am to be kept away from the haunts of polite society,' I said,
with some natural indignation, 'just because it embarrasses _you_ to
explain why I don't bow to people I don't know.'

"'But it's all for your good,' he replied. 'You seem to forget that I am
actuated entirely by the best of motives.'

"'No doubt,' I said, 'but I think it's rather hard on me to be excluded
from the most attractive quarter of London.'

"'You are not excluded. You can walk there if you choose at night or
very early in the morning, or when Society is out of town, or, better
still, you can float there in your invisible state at anytime. In fact,'
added the fiend, 'it would be very enjoyable for you, I should think, to
do that last. You can poise yourself over a tree for instance, and watch
yourself hobnobbing with the illustrious. You can sit in your
invisibility in any one of the carriages that roll to and fro, and, as
long as you do not obtrude yourself on the occupants, there is not an
equipage in London, high or low, in which you cannot ride. You are
better off than I am in that respect. While I have no particular shape I
am visible like a bit of sea-fog, but you being invisible can go
anywhere without making trouble. The theatres are open to you free of
charge. The best seats are at your disposal. If you choose to do it you
could even sit on the throne of England, and nobody would be the wiser.'

"'That's all very well,' I said; 'but I don't care to travel about in
that impersonal fashion. I prefer the incarnate manner of doing things,
and if you will kindly permit me to assume bodily form once more, I'll
be very much obliged.'

"'Certainly!' he replied, and with that we changed places.

"The sensation of getting back to my accustomed figure once more was
delightful, and there was no denying the fact that I was better off for
the outing I had so unceremoniously taken. My step was elastic, my head
felt clear as a bell, and, altogether, I had never before enjoyed the
consciousness of so great a physical strength as now was mine.

"This feeling gave me courage to do many things which I had hitherto put
off, and among them was the making of a proposal of marriage to the
admired Miss Hicksworthy-Johnstone. It was seven o'clock when the fiend
had left me to the personal enjoyment of my complete self, and at eight
o'clock I was in a hansom cab speeding out to the dwelling-place of the
woman I loved. At eight thirty I was on my knees before her, and by
eleven o'clock I was her accepted suitor. Such happiness as was mine,
Hopkins, no man ever knew. The only trouble known to my soul at the
moment was the consciousness that Arabella, as I was now permitted to
call Miss Hicksworthy-Johnstone, was in the dark as to the methods by
which my greatness had been achieved. I could not confess my dreadful
secret to her, for that would have put an end entirely to our relations,
and I loved her so that I could not bring myself to give her up. She
asked me numberless questions of a most embarrassing sort, as if she
suspected there was something wrong, but I managed in some way, I know
not how, to give a plausible answer to every one of them."

"Possibly the fiend left a little of his brain in your head when he got
out," suggested Toppleton.

"Perhaps so," returned the exile. "However it was, I managed to make out
a satisfactory case for myself, and at the close of a cross-examination
such as no man ever went through before, lasting two and a half hours,
Arabella threw herself into my arms and called me by my first name. She
was mine, and all the world seemed bright.

"I walked home," continued the spirit, "and in a condition of ecstasy
that almost compensates for all I have suffered since. My feet seemed
hardly to touch the ground, and I whistled from the time I left Arabella
until I entered my room here,--a reprehensible habit, perhaps, but one
which had always been my method of expressing satisfaction with the
world. As I entered this room I was brought down from my ecstatic
heights to an appreciation of my actual state, for the first thing to
greet my eyes was the fiend, greener than ever, sitting by the fire
ruminating apparently, for it was at least five minutes before he took
note of my presence, although I addressed him politely as soon as I saw
him.

"'Hallo,' he said finally. 'Where have you been?'

"The question was as unexpected as it was natural, and I was unprepared
for it, so I made no reply, covering my silence by taking off my shoes
and preparing for bed.

"'Where have you been?' he asked again, this time in a tone so
peremptory that I decided in an instant not to tell him.

"'Out,' I answered. 'Where have you?'

"At this he laughed.

"'Don't be impudent,' he said. 'I do not wish to pry into your affairs.
I only wanted to know where you had been because I am interested in
you, and I want to help you to avoid pitfalls.'

"'That's all right,' I responded graciously. 'I appreciate your
kindness, but you need not be interested in where I have been to-night,
because I have been engaged in a little matter that concerns you not at
all.'

"'Very well,' he replied, turning once more to the fire. 'I'll take your
word for it; only you and I must be perfectly candid with each other, or
complications may arise, that's all. By the way, I'll have to borrow you
again to-morrow morning. There are a half-dozen members of Parliament
coming here to discuss certain matters of state, and you would be
somewhat embarrassed if you undertook to meet them.'

"'That suits me,' I said, happy enough to acquiesce in anything. 'Only
I'll want to get back here to-morrow evening. I have an engagement.'

"The fiend eyed me narrowly for a moment, and I winced beneath his gaze.

"'All right,' he said, 'you can get back, but this Parliamentary
business is very important, and I _must_ have the semblance of a mortal
being every morning this week.'

"'That can be arranged,' I replied. Arabella could have my evenings,
and he could have my mornings. That was fair enough, I thought, and so
it happened. Every night for a week I spent in the company of my
_fiancée_,--whose name, by the way, I never mentioned in the fiend's
presence--and every morning for the same period he was in charge,
conducting negotiations which only served to make me more famous.

"Finally the dreadful morning came. It was Saturday, and the fiend and I
were sitting together in my quarters. We had just changed places. I was
in my present disembodied state, and the fiend had taken possession for
the day, when there was heard in the corridor a quick nervous step which
stopped as he who directed it came to my door, and a voice, which to my
consternation I recognized at once as that of Arabella's father
following close upon a resounding knock, cried out,--

"'This is the place. This is the kennel in which the hound lives. Open
the door!'

"There was not time for the fiend and me to change places. Indeed, I had
hardly recognized the old gentleman's voice, when the fiend in answer to
his demand opened the door.

"A madder man than my prospective father-in-law appeared to be I never
saw, Hopkins," said the spirit, his voice trembling with emotion. "He
was livid, and when the door opened, and he saw the man he supposed to
be me standing before him showing absolutely no signs of recognition, he
fairly foamed at the mouth.

"'How do you do, sir?' said the fiend, polite as Chesterfield.

"'Don't speak to me, you puppy,' roared the old gentleman. 'Don't you
dare to address me until I address you.'

"'This is most extraordinary,' said the fiend, seemingly nonplussed at
Mr. Hicksworthy-Johnstone's inexplicable wrath; for he could understand
it no better than I, and to me it was absolutely incomprehensible, for I
was not aware of anything that I had done that could possibly give rise
to so violent an ebullition of rage. 'I am at a loss, sir, to understand
why you enter the office of a gentleman in a fashion so unbecoming to
one of your years; you must have made some mistake.'

"'Mistake!' shrieked Arabella's father. 'Mistake, you snivelling
hypocrite? What mistake can there be? Do you see that note in this
week's _Vanity Fair_, you vile deceiver? Do you see me? Do you see
anything?'

"'I see you,' replied the fiend calmly, 'and I wish I didn't.'

"'I'll go bond you wish you didn't,' howled the enraged visitor. 'And
when I get through with you you'll wish I hadn't brought this oak stick
along with me. Now I want to know what explanation you have to make of
that paragraph in the paper.'

"'I cannot explain what I have not read,' returned the fiend. 'Nor shall
I attempt to read what you wish to have explained until I know who you
are, and what possible right you can have to demand an explanation of
anything from me. What are you, anyhow, a retired maniac or simply an
active imbecile?'

"As the fiend spoke these words," said the spirit, "I tried to arrest
him; but he was so angry that he either could not or would not hear my
whispered injunction that he be silent. As for the old gentleman, he sat
gasping in his chair, glaring at my poor self, a perfect picture of
apoplectic delirium. The fiend returned the glare unflinchingly.

"'Well!' gasped Mr. Hicksworthy-Johnstone after a minute's steady
glance, 'if you aren't the coolest hand in Christendom. Who am I, eh?
What am I here for, eh? What's my name, eh? What claim have I on you,
eh? Young man, you are the most consummate Lothario on the footstool.
You are a Don Juan with the hide of a rhinoceros and the calmness of a
snow-clad Alp, but I can just tell you one thing. You can't trifle with
Arabella!'

"And then, Hopkins, that infernal fiend looked my father-in law elect
square in the eye and asked,--

"'Who the devil is Arabella?'

"As the words fell from my lips, the old gentleman with an oath started
from his chair, and grasping the inkstand from the table, hurled it with
all his force at my waistcoat, which received it with breathless
surprise; and then, Toppleton, it breaks my heart to say it, but my
foot--the foot of him who loved Arabella to distraction,--was lifted
against her father, and the man to whom he had promised his daughter's
hand, appeared to kick him forcibly, despite his grey hairs, out into
and along the corridor to the head of the stairs. Then, as I watched,
the two men grappled and went crashing down the stairs, head over heels
together.

"Sick with fear and mortification, I flew back into the room, where,
lying upon the floor, I saw the copy of _Vanity Fair_ that Mr.
Hicksworthy-Johnstone had brought, and marked with blue pencil upon the
page before me was printed the announcement of the engagement of myself
to Ariadne Maude, second daughter of John Edward Fackleton, Earl of
Pupley, of Castle Marrowfat, Sauceton Downs, Worcestershire."




CHAPTER X.

THE SPIRIT'S STORY IS CONCLUDED.


"I SHOULD say," volunteered Hopkins, with a shake of his head, "that
that was about the most unpleasant situation he had got you into yet;
and yet he was not entirely to blame. He requested candour from you, and
you declined to be candid. You should have told him of your engagement
to Miss Hicksworthy-Johnstone. That would at least have prevented his
kicking her father out of your office and rolling downstairs with him."

"It is easy enough to say now what ought to have been done," sobbed the
exile. "I do not think you would have done very differently if you had
been in my position. I was jealous of the fiend, I suppose, and I didn't
know but what he would insist upon doing some of the courting--which
would have been intolerable."

"Better that than to be set down by your _fiancée_ as a heartless
trifler," returned Hopkins. "But what happened next? Was the old
gentleman hurt?"

"Not he," replied the exile. "When he and I, as he supposed me to be,
reached the bottom of the stairs he landed on top, and was the first to
get on his feet again. And then, Hopkins, I was glad not to be in my
normal condition; for as the fiend attempted to rise my Arabella's
father, who still retained his grip upon that oak stick, gave me the
worst licking I ever had in my life, and I--well, I really enjoyed the
spectacle, because I knew that I deserved it. The fiend, hampered
somewhat by the corse to which he was not yet entirely accustomed was at
a tremendous disadvantage, and I know Mr. Hicksworthy-Johnstone's blows
caused him considerable pain. The only possible escape for him was to
leave the body, which he did just as the attacking party landed a
resounding thwack upon the back of my neck. Of course, the minute the
fiend evacuated the premises, I appeared to Mr. Hicksworthy-Johnstone to
have been killed, because there was in reality no slightest bit of
animation left in my body. It was the horror of this discovery that
covered the retreat of the fiend, who, more horribly green than
ever--the green that comes from rage--mounted the steps he had so
summarily descended a moment before, and hurried into my room, dragging
me by sheer force of will, which I was unable to resist, after him. You
see, Hopkins, we were now nothing more than two consciousnesses; two
minds, one mortal, the other immortal; one infinitely strong, the other
finite in its limitations, and I was of course as powerless in the
presence of the fiend as a babe in the arms of its nurse. Mr.
Hicksworthy-Johnstone, thinking that he had killed me, after a vain
endeavour to restore my stricken body to consciousness--in which he
would have succeeded had the fiend permitted me to take possession
again, for I did not wish Arabella's father to suppose for one instant
that he was a murderer--sneaked on tip-toes from the building, and,
mumbling to himself in an insane fashion, disappeared in the crowd of
pedestrians on the street.

"'This is a pretty mess you've got us into,' said the fiend. 'I should
like to know what excuse you can have for such infernal duplicity as you
have been guilty of?'

"'I cannot discuss this matter with you,' I answered. 'The duplicity is
not mine, but yours. You have endeavoured to exercise rights which were
clearly not yours to exercise. I informed you that in matters of love--'

"'Matters of love!' he ejaculated. 'Do you call this a matter of love?
Do you think it's a matter of love for an entire stranger to throw a
two-pound crystal inkstand loaded with ink at the very core of my
waistcoat? Is it a matter of love for a grey-haired villain like that to
drag me or you, whichever way you choose to put it, down a flight of
stairs and then knock the life out of us? It seems to me, you have a
strange idea of love.'

"'Don't you understand!' I cried. 'That man was only doing his duty. He
is Arabella's father!'

"'Again, I must ask,' said the fiend, in a manner that aggravated me as
it had aggravated the old gentleman, 'who, in all creation, is
Arabella?'

"'My _fiancée_!' I yelled. 'My _fiancée_, you poor blind omniscient!
Whom did you suppose?'

"As I uttered these words, Hopkins, the fiend's whole manner changed. He
was no longer flustered and angry merely; he was a determined and very
angry being. He rose from his chair, and fixing his eye upon the point
where he thought I was--and he had a faculty of establishing that point
accurately at all times--and pointing that horrible finger of his at me,
fairly hissed with rage.

"'That settles it, sir,' he cried. 'You and I part for ever. You, by
your foolish perversity, by your inexplicable lack of candour, by your
sinful refusal to trust your welfare to my hands, who have done so much
for you, have nearly overthrown the whole structure of the greatness I
have builded up. Your idiotic behaviour has decided me to do that which
from the very beginning I have most feared. I have been haunted by the
fear that you would want to marry some woman simply for the empty,
mortal reason that you loved her, utterly ignoring the fact that by a
judicious matrimonial step you could attain to heights that otherwise
could never be yours. Having your interests entirely in view, I had
arranged a match which would strengthen into permanence your, at
present, rather uncertain hold upon society. Lady Ariadne Maude
Fackleton, to whom you are at present engaged, as the daughter of the
Earl of Pupley, can give you the _entrée_ to the best circles in London
or out of it; while this Arabella of yours can serve only to assist you
in spending your income and keeping your parlour free from dust. Now,
what earthly use was there in your philandering--'

"'I fancy I have a right to select my own wife,' I said.

"'You always were strong on fancies,' he retorted. 'You might have
known that with the career opening up before you a plain Arabella would
never do. Do you suppose you could take her to a ball at the Earl of
Mawlberry's? Do you suppose that any woman, in fact, who would consent
to marry you as your weak inefficient self could go anywhere and do me
justice? I guess not; and your behaviour has settled our partnership for
ever. We part for good.'

"'Well, I'm glad of it,' I retorted, goaded to anger by his words. 'Get
out. I don't want to see you again. You've ruined me by putting me in
false positions from the time we met until now, and I am sick of it. You
can't leave too soon to suit me.'

"When I had spoken these words he darted one final venomous glance at
me, and walked whistling from the room. As long as his whistle was
perceptible I remained quiet--quiet as my agitation would permit; and
then, when the last flute-like note died away in the distance, I floated
from the room and down the stairs to get my poor bruised body and put it
in shape to call on Arabella.

"Hopkins, when I reached the foot of the stairs my body had disappeared!
I was frantic with fear. I did not know whether it had been found by the
janitor and conveyed to the morgue, whether Arabella's father had
returned to conceal it, and so conceal his fancied crime, or whether the
fiend had finally crowned his infamous work by stealing it. I sought for
it in vain. Forgetful of my invisibility, I asked the janitor if he had
seen it, and he fled shrieking with fear from the building, and declined
ever thereafter to enter it again. Every nook and corner in the Temple I
searched and found it not, and then I floated dejectedly to Arabella's
home, where I found her embracing her father in a last fond farewell.
The old gentleman was about leaving the country to escape the
consequences of his crime.

"'Arabella!' I cried, as I entered the room.

"The girl turned a deadly white, and her father fell cringing upon his
knees, and then I realized that, recognizing my voice, they feared my
ghost had come to haunt them, and with this realization came to my
consciousness the overwhelming thought that both would go insane were I
to persist in speaking while invisible.

"The situation, Hopkins, was absolutely terrible, and if I had had my
teeth I should have gnashed them for the very helplessness of my
condition."

"Did the old gentleman persist in his determination to leave the
country?" asked Hopkins.

"He did. He sailed for the United States on a small freight schooner
that night, and reached New York in time to hear in that far-off clime
of the marriage of his supposed victim; but I must not anticipate," said
the exile.

"For three weeks after that horrible day I never caught sight of my
missing person, nor did I discover the slightest clue as to its
whereabouts. It never turned up at my quarters that I could learn, but
that it was not dead or buried I had good reason to believe; for one
morning, while I was away from my rooms floating along Rotten Row,
hoping to catch sight of myself if perchance I still lived, four
truckmen arrived at the Temple here and moved all my clothes and
furniture, whither I never discovered, in consequence of which act, upon
my return here, I found the room cold and bare as a barn."

"That was rank robbery," said Toppleton.

"We should have trouble in establishing that fact in court," returned
the exile. "I could not deny on oath that my hand had penned the order
for the removal of the goods, and as for the clothes and other things,
most of them had been bought by the money I had earned through the
fiend's instrumentality."

"That is so," said Toppleton, hastily acquiescing in the exile's words,
lest he should seem to his visitor less acute than a full-fledged lawyer
should be. "And how long was it before you encountered yourself once
more?"

"Three weeks," returned the exile. "And where do you suppose the meeting
took place?"

"I don't know," said Hopkins. "At Buckingham Palace?"

"No, sir. In Arabella's parlour! It was just three weeks from the hour
in which Mr. Hicksworthy-Johnstone appeared at my office door in the
Temple that, for the want of something better to do, I floated into
Arabella's parlour again, and was filled with consternation to see
standing there before the mirror, adjusting his tie, the fiend in full
possession of my treasured self. I was about to utter a cry of delight
when I heard an ejaculation of fear behind me, and turning saw Arabella
herself entering the room, pale as a sheet. I tell you Hopkins, it was
dramatic; though, as far as the fiend was concerned, he was as
nonchalant as could be.

"'You are not dead!' cried Arabella, hoarsely.

"'Not that I am aware of, madam,' said the fiend coolly.' Have I the
honour of addressing Miss Arabella Hicksworthy-Johnstone?'

"'Oh, Edward, Edward,' she cried--'I forgot to tell you, Hopkins,'
explained the spirit, 'my name was Edward'--'oh, Edward, what does this
mean?' she cried. 'My father has fled to America, thinking that in that
unhappy moment of Saturday three weeks ago he had killed you.'

"'Indeed!' returned the fiend. 'I sincerely hope he will enjoy the trip,
though he did inflict injuries upon me from which I shall be a long time
in recovering. But tell me, madame, are you Miss Arabella
Hicksworthy-Johnstone?'

"'Edward,' she replied, 'are you mad?'

"'I have a right to be indignant at your father's treatment of me, if
that vilely vindictive old person was your father, but I am not what you
might call mad. I cherish no vindictive feelings. But as my time is
limited I should like to proceed at once to the business I have in hand,
if you will permit me.'

"Arabella sat aghast as the man she deemed her _fiancé_ spoke these
words to her. She was utterly unable to comprehend the situation, and I
could not clarify the cloud upon her understanding without imperilling
her reason. Oh, Hopkins, Hopkins, were the fires of Hades to become
extinguished to-day, there are other tortures for the spirit close at
hand more hideously unbearable even than they!"

"It would seem so," said Hopkins. "If I had my choice between your
experience and Hades, I think I should warm up to the latter. But go on.
What did Arabella say?"

"She drew herself up proudly after a moment of hesitation, and said, 'I
have no desire to hinder you in going about your business.'

"'Thanks,' said the fiend. 'Assuming that you are Miss Arabella
Hicksworthy-Johnstone, I would say to you that I should like to know
upon what your father's claim that you and I are engaged rests.'

"'Really, Edward,' she returned impatiently, 'I cannot comprehend your
singular behaviour this afternoon. You know how we became engaged. You
know you asked me to be your wife, and you know that after keeping you
on your knees for several hours I consented.'

"'Madam,' observed the fiend, 'I never went on my knees to a woman in my
life. I never asked but one woman in this world to be my wife, and you
are not she.'

"'What!' cried Arabella. 'Do you mean to say to me, Edward, that you did
_not_ ask me to be your wife?'

"'I meant to say exactly what I said. That I am engaged to be married to
Lady Ariadne Maude Fackleton, daughter of the Earl of Pupley, the only
woman to whom I ever spoke or thought of speaking a word of love in my
life. I mean to say that Lady Ariadne Maude Fackleton and I expect to be
married before the month is up. I mean to say that I never saw you
before in my life, and I should like to know what your intentions are
concerning this absurd claim that I am engaged to you may be, for I do
not intend to have my future marred by any breach of promise suits. In
short, madam, do you intend to claim me as your matrimonial prize or
not? If not, all well and good. If so, I shall secure an injunction
restraining you from doing anything of the sort. Even should you force
me to the altar itself I should then and there forbid the banns.'

"'Sir,' said my Arabella, drawing herself up like a queen, 'you may
leave this house, and never set foot again within its walls. I should as
soon think of claiming that celebrated biblical personage, of whom you
remind me, Ananias, for a husband as you. Do not flatter yourself that I
shall ever dispute the Lady Ariadne's possession of so accomplished a
lord and master as yourself,--though I should do so were I more
philanthropically disposed. If it be the duty of one woman to protect
the happiness of another, I should do all that lies in my power to
prevent this marriage; but inasmuch as my motive in so doing would, in
all likelihood, be misconstrued, I must abstain; I must hold myself
aloof, though the whole future happiness of one of my own sex be at
stake. Farewell, sir, and good riddance. If you will leave me Lady
Ariadne's address, I will send her my sympathy as a wedding gift.'

"'Madam,' returned the fiend, bowing low, 'your kind words have taken a
heavy load from my heart. You deserve a better fate; but farewell.'

"Then as the fiend departed Arabella swooned away. My first impulse was
to follow the fiend, and to discover if possible his address; but I
could not bring myself to leave Arabella at that moment, she was so
overcome. I floated to the prostrate woman, and whispered the love I
felt for her in her ear.

"'Arabella,' I said. 'Arabella--my love--it is all a mistake. Open your
eyes and see. I am here ready to explain all if you will only listen.'

"Her answer was a moan and a fluttering of the eyelids.

"'Arabella,' I repeated. 'Don't you hear me, sweetheart? Open your eyes
and look at me. It is I, Edward.'

"'Edward!' she gasped, her eyes still closed. 'What _does_ it all mean?
Why have you treated me so?'

"'It is not I who have done this Arabella; it is another vile being over
whose actions I have no control. He is a fiend who has me in his power.
He is--oh, Arabella, do not ask me, do not insist upon knowing all, only
believe that I am not to blame!'

"'Kiss me, Edward,' she murmured. 'One little kiss.'

"Hopkins," moaned the exile, "just think of that! One little kiss was
all she asked, and I--I hadn't anything to kiss her with--not the
vestige of a lip.

"'Kiss me, Edward,' she repeated.

"'I cannot,' I cried out in anguish.

"'Why not?' she demanded, sitting up on the floor and gazing wildly
around her, and then seeing that she was absolutely alone in the room,
and had been conversing with--"

"Oh!" ejaculated Hopkins, wringing his hands. "Dear me! The poor girl
must have been nearly crazy."

"Nearly, Hopkins?" said the exile, in a sepulchral tone. "Nearly?
Arabella never did anything by halves or by nearlies. She became quite
crazy, and as far as I know has remained so until this day, for with the
restoration of consciousness, and the shock of opening her eyes to see
nothing that could speak with her, and yet had spoken, her mind gave
way, and she fled chattering like an imbecile from the room. I have
never seen her since!"

"And the fiend?" queried Toppleton.

"I saw him at St. George's on the following Wednesday," returned the
exile. "I had been wandering aimlessly and distractedly about London for
four days since the dreadful episode at Arabella's, when I came to St.
George's Church. There was an awning before the door, and from the
handsome equipages drawn up before the edifice I knew that some notable
function was going on within. The crowds, the usual London crowds, were
being kept back by the police, but I, of course, being invisible,
floated over their heads, past the guards, through the awning into the
church. There was a wedding in progress, and the groom's back seemed
familiar, though I could not place it at first, and naturally,
Toppleton, for it was my own, as I discovered, a moment later. When the
last irrevocable words binding me to a woman I had never before seen had
been spoken, and the organ began to peal forth the melodious measures of
the Lohengrin March, the bride and groom, made one, turned and faced
the brilliant assemblage of guests, among whom were the premier and the
members of his cabinet, and as complete a set of nabobs, mentioned in
Burke, as could be gathered in London at that time of the year, and I
recognized my own face wreathed in smiles, my own body dressed in
wedding garb, standing on the chancel steps ready to descend.

"I was married, Hopkins, at last. Married to a woman of beauty and
wealth and high position, utterly unknown to me, and not only were my
own mother and my best friends absent, but I myself had only happened in
by accident.

"My rage knew no bounds, and as the fiend and his bride passed down the
aisle amid the showered congratulations of the aristocratic multitude, I
impotently endeavoured to strike him, of which he was serenely
unconscious; but as he left the church my voice, which had been stifled
with indignation, at last grew clear, and I howled out high above the
crowds,--

"'You vile scoundrel, restore me to myself! Give me back the presence of
which you have robbed me, or may every curse in all the universe fall
upon you and your house for ever.'

"He heard me, Toppleton, and his answer was a smile--a green
smile--seeing which his bride, the Lady Ariadne Maude Fackleton, fainted
as they drove away.

"That, Hopkins, is substantially the tale of villainy I have come to
tell. Little remains to be told. The fiend has been true to his promise
to make me famous, for every passing year has brought some new honour to
my name. I have been elevated to the peerage; I have been ambassador to
the most brilliant courts of Europe; I have been all that one could hope
to be, and yet I have not been myself. I ask your assistance. Will you
not give it to me?"

"Edward," said Toppleton warmly, "I will. I will be candid with you,
Edward. I am almost as ignorant of law as a justice of the peace, but
for your sake I will study and see what can be done. I will fight your
case for you to the very last, but first tell me one thing. Your name is
what?"

"Edward Pompton Chatford."

"What!" cried Toppleton, "the famous novelist?"

"He made me so," said the exile.

"And the fiend's present title is?"

"Lord Barncastle of Burningford."

"He?" said Toppleton, incredulously, recognizing the name as that of one
who fairly bent beneath the honours of the world.

"None other," returned the exile.

"Heavens!" ejaculated Toppleton. "How Morley, Harkins, Perkins, Mawson,
Bronson, Smithers, and Hicks will open their eyes when I tell them that
I have been retained to institute _habeas corpus_ proceedings in the
case of Chatford v. Barncastle of Burningford! Morley particularly, I am
afraid will die of fright!"




CHAPTER XI.

TOPPLETON CONSULTS THE LAW AND FORMS AN OPINION.


AT the conclusion of the exile's story Hopkins glanced at his watch, and
discovered that he had barely time to return to his lodging and dress
for a little dinner he had promised to attend that evening.

"I will look up the law in this case of yours, Chatford," he said,
rising from his chair and putting on his hat and coat, "and in about a
week I rather think we shall be able to decide upon some definite line
of action. It will be difficult, I am afraid, to find any precedent to
guide us in a delicate matter of this sort, but as a lay lawyer, if I
may be allowed the expression, it seems to me that there ought to be
some redress for one who has been made the victim of so many different
kinds of infamy at once as you have. The weak part of our case is that
you were yourself an accessory to every single one of the fiend's
crimes, and in instituting a suit at law we cannot get around the fact
that in a measure you are both plaintiff and defendant. I believe those
are the terms usually employed to designate the two parties to a suit,
except in the case of an appeal, when there is an appellant and a
repellant if my memory serves me."

"It may be as you say," returned the exile, sadly. "I'll have to take
your word for it entirely, since, as I have already told you, all the
law I ever knew I have forgotten, and then, too, my business being
purely one of adjudication, I used to distinguish my clients one from
another--representing, as I did, both sides--by calling them,
respectively, the compromisee and the compromisor."

"Well," Toppleton said, "I'll find out all about it and let you know,
say, by Friday next. We'll first have to decide in what capacity you
shall appear in court, whether as a plaintiff or defendant. I think
under the circumstances you will have to go as a plaintiff, though in a
case in which my father was interested some years ago, I know that it
was really the plaintiff who was put on the defensive as soon as the old
gentleman took him in hand to cross-examine him. It was said by experts
to have been the crossest examination on the calendar that year; and
between you and me, Edward, the plaintiff never forgave his attorneys
for not retaining the governor on his side in the beginning. If you
would rather go as a defendant, I suppose I could arrange to have it so,
but it strikes me as a disadvantageous thing to do in these days,
because in most cases, it is the defendant who has committed the wrong
upon which the suit is based, and a man who starts in as the underdog,
has to combat the prejudices of judge, jury and general public, with
whom it is a time-honoured custom to believe a man guilty until he has
proven his innocence. I think, on the whole, it would be easier for you
to prove Lord Barncastle's guilt than your own innocence."

"I know from the lucid manner in which you talk, Toppleton," said the
exile, with a deep sigh indicating satisfaction, "from the readiness and
extemporaneousness with which you grasp the situation, not losing sight
of side issues, that I have made no mistake in coming to you. Heaven
bless you, sir. You will never regret the assistance you are so nobly
giving to one you have never seen."

"Don't mention it, Sallie--I should say Chatford," said Toppleton. "I am
an American citizen and will ever be found championing the cause of the
oppressed against the oppressor. My ears are ever open to the plaint of
the plaintiff, nor shall I be deaf to the defendant in case you choose
to be the latter. Count on me, Edward, and all will yet be well!"

With these inspiring words, Toppleton lit his cigar and walked jauntily
from the room, and the exile relapsed into silence.

Faithful to his promise, Toppleton applied himself assiduously to the
study of the law as it seemed to him to bear upon the case of his
mysterious client. To be sure, his library was not quite as extensive as
it might have been, and there may have been points in other books than
the ones he had, which would have affected his case materially, but the
young lawyer was more or less self-reliant, and what he had to read he
read intelligently.

"If I were called upon suddenly to rescue a young woman from drowning,
and possessed nothing but an anchor and a capstan bar to do it with, my
duty clearly would be to do the best I could with those tools, however
awkward they might be. I could not ease my conscience after neglecting
to do all that I could with those tools, by saying that I hadn't a
lifeboat and a cork suit handy. Here is a parallel case. I must do the
best I can with the tools I have, and I guess I can find enough law in
Blackstone and that tree calf copy of the sixteenth volume of Abbott's
'Digest' I picked up the other day to cover this case. If I can't, I'll
have to use the sense that Nature gave me, and go ahead anyhow."

To his delight, Hopkins found it utterly unnecessary for him to read the
tree calf sixteenth volume of Abbott's "Digest," he found so much in the
"Comic Blackstone" that applied.

"Why, do you know," he said to the exile when they met, the one to
explain the law, the other to listen, "do you know you have the finest
case in all Christendom, without leaving the very fundamental principles
of the law? It's really extraordinary what a case you have, or rather,
would have, if you could devise some means of appearing in court. That's
the uncrackable nut in the case. How the deuce to have you appear on the
witness stand, I can't see. The court would not tolerate any such
makeshift as the Aunt Sallie scheme you and I have adopted, it would be
so manifestly absurd, and would give the counsel for the defence--for
you must be the plaintiff after all, can't help yourself--it would give
the counsel for the defence the finest chance to annihilate us by the
use of his satirical powers he had ever had, and before a jury that
would simply ruin our cause at the outset."

"I don't see why I can't testify as I am--bodiless as I have been left.
The mere absence of my body and presence of my consciousness would
almost prove my case," said the exile.

"It would seem as if it ought to," said Toppleton. "But you know what
men are. They believe very little that they hear, and not much more than
half that they see. You couldn't expect anyone to believe the points of
a person unseen. If they can't see you they can't see your hardships,
and besides, hearsay evidence unsupported is not worth shucks."

"I don't know what shucks are," returned the exile, "but I see your
point."

"It's a serious point," said Toppleton. "And then there is another most
embarrassing side to it. We can't afford to have our case weakened by
putting ourselves in a position where countercharges can be brought
against us, and I am very much afraid our opponents would charge
vagrancy against you, for the very obvious and irrefutable reason that
you have absolutely no visible means of support. You wouldn't have a leg
to stand on if they did that, and yet it does seem a pity that something
cannot be done to enable you to appear, for as I said a minute ago, you
have otherwise a perfectly magnificent cause of action. Why, Edward,
there isn't a page in the Comic Blackstone that does not contain
something that applies to your case, and that ought to make you a
winner if we could get around this horrible lack of body of yours.

"For instance," continued Toppleton, opening A'Beckett's famous
contribution to legal lore, "in the very first chapter we find that
Blackstone divides rights into rights of _persons_ and rights of things.
Clearly you have a right to your own person, and no judge on a sane
bench would dare deny it. Absolute rights, it says here, belong to man
in a state of nature, which being so, you have been wronged, because in
being deprived of your state of nature you have been robbed of your
absolute rights. Clear as crystal, eh?"

"That's so," said the exile. "You are a marvel at law, Hopkins."

"In section six reference is made to the _habeas corpus_ act of Charles
the Second, and unless I have forgotten my Latin, that is a distinct
reference to a man's right to the possession of his own body. Section
eight, same chapter, announces man's right to personal security, and
asserts his legal claim to the enjoyment of _life, limbs, health and
reputation_. Have you enjoyed your life? No! Have you enjoyed your
limbs? Not for thirty years. Have you enjoyed your health. No!
Barncastle of Burningford has enjoyed that as well as your reputation. I
think on the whole though, we would better not say anything about your
reputation if we get into court, for while it is undoubtedly _yours_,
and has been by no means enjoyed by you, you didn't make it for
yourself. That was his work, and he is entitled to it."

"True," said the exile. "I do not wish to claim anything I am not
entitled to."

"That's the proper spirit," said Toppleton. "You want what belongs to
you and nothing more. You are entitled to your property, for which
section eleven of this same chapter provides, saying that the law will
not allow a man to be deprived of his property except by the law itself.
If a man's own body isn't his, I'd like to know to whom it belongs in a
country that professes to be free!"

Toppleton paused at this point to make a few notes and to reinforce his
own spirit by means of others.

"Now, under the head of real property, Chatford," he said, "I find that
in England property is real or personal. I think that in this case, that
of which you have been deprived comes under both heads. One's body is
certainly real and unquestionably personal, and if a man has a right to
the possession of each, he has a right to the possession of both, and he
who robs him of both is guilty of a crime under each head. Real
property consists of lands, tenements and hereditaments. Lands we must
perforce exclude because you have lost no lands. Tenements may be
alluded to, however, with absolute fairness because the body is the
tenement of the soul. Of hereditaments I am not sure. I don't know what
hereditaments are, and I haven't had time to find out anything about
them except that they are corporeal or incorporeal, which leads me to
infer that you have been wronged under this head also, for I must assume
that a hereditament is something that may or may not have a body
according to circumstances, which is your case exactly.

"Now a man's right to the possession of an estate is called his title,
if I am not mistaken," continued Hopkins, "and it is only reasonable to
suppose that this refers to bodily estate as well as to landed estate.
What we must dispute is Barncastle's title to your bodily estate. Our
case is referred to in section two, chapter nine, part second of this
book, which deals with joint tenancy in which two or more persons have
one and the same interest in an estate, but it must be held by both at
the same time. Now, even granting, as the other side may say, that you
entered into a partnership with the fiend, we could knock him right off
his pins on the sole fact that in declining to admit you to your own
bodily estate, he has not only deprived you of an undoubted right, but
has in reality forfeited his own claim to possession, since he has
violated the only principle of law upon which he could claim entrance to
the estate under any circumstances."

"Superb!" ejaculated the exile.

"Now we come to an apparent difficulty," continued Hopkins. "Possession
is, according to my authority, five points of the law. The fiend has
possession, and in consequence tallies five points; out of how many I do
not know. What the maximum number of points in the law is, the book does
not say, but even assuming that they form a good half, I think we can
bring forward five more with a dozen substitutes for each of the five in
support of our position. Some of these points will evolve themselves
when we come to consider whence Barncastle's title was derived.

"Did he acquire his title by descent? No; unless it was by a descent to
unworthy tricks which, I fear, are outside of the meaning of the law. By
purchase? If so, let him show a receipt. By occupancy? Yes, and by a
forcible occupancy which was as justifiable as his occupation of the
throne would be, an occupancy which can be shown in court to be an
entire subversion of the right of a prior occupant whose title was
acquired by inheritance."

"That's a strong point," said the exile.

"Yes, it is," said Hopkins, "especially in a country where birth means
so much. But that isn't all we have to say on this question of title. A
title can be held by prescription. Barncastle may claim that he got his
this way, but we can meet that by showing that he compounded his own
prescription, and originally got you to swallow it by a trick. He also
has a title by alienation, and there I think we may be weak since you
were a party to the final alienation, though we may be able to pull
through on even that point by showing that you consented only in the
expectation of an early return of the premises. It was an alienation by
deed, an innocent deed on your part, an infamous one on his. It was not
an alienation of record, which weakens his claim, but one of special
custom, which by no means weakens yours.

"And so, Edward, we might go on through the whole subject of the right
of property, and on every point we are strong, and on few can Barncastle
of Burningford put in the semblance of a defence."

"It's simply glorious," said the exile. "I don't believe there ever was
a case like it."

"I don't believe so either," said Toppleton. "And on the whole I'm glad
there never was. I should hate to think that a crime like this could
ever become a common one.

"Now," he said, resuming the discussion of the legal aspect of the
exile's case, "let us see what we can find under the head of 'Private
and Public Wrongs and their Remedies!' I suppose yours would come under
the head of a civil wrong, though your treatment has been very far from
civil. As such your redress lies in the Courts. You are forbidden to
take back what has been taken from you by a force which amounts to a
breach of the peace,--that is, it would not be lawful for you to seize
your own body and shake the life out of it for the purpose of yourself
becoming once more its animating spirit.

"First we must decide, 'What is the wrong that has been put upon you?'
Well, it's almost any crime you can think of. He has dispossessed you of
that which is yours. He has ousted you from your freehold. He has been
guilty of trespass. He has subjected you to a nuisance, that is if it is
a nuisance to be deprived of one's body, and I should think it would so
appear to any sane person. He has been guilty of subtraction. He has
subtracted you from your body and your body from you, leaving apparently
no remainder. He has been guilty of an offence against your religion.
To an extent he has committed an offence against the public health in
that he has haunted citizens of this city and caused you unwittingly to
do the same to the detriment of the sanity of those who have been
haunted. I think we might even charge him with homicide, for if
depriving a man of thirty years of his corporeal existence isn't
depriving him of life, I don't know what is. However this may be, I am
convinced that he is guilty of mayhem, for he certainly has deprived you
of a limb--that is shown by your utter absence of limb. He has been
guilty of an offence against your habitation, corporeal and incorporeal,
and finally he has been guilty of larceny both grand and petty. Grand in
the extent of it, petty in the method. By Jove, Chatford, if we could
bring you into Court as a concrete individual, and not as an abstract
entity, we could get up an indictment against Lord Barncastle of
Burningford that would quash him for ever.

"A body obtained for you, I should carry the case to the Appellate Court
at once, for two reasons. First because it would not be appropriate to
try so uncommon a cause in the Common Pleas, second because a decision
by the Court of Appeals is final, and we should save time by going there
at once; but the point with which we must concern ourselves the most
is, how shall we bring you before the eyes of the court; how shall we
get our plaintiff into shape--visible shape?"

A painful silence followed the conclusion of Toppleton's discussion of
the law in the case of Chatford _v_. Barncastle of Burningford. It was
evident that the exile could think of no means of surmounting the
unfortunate barrier to a successful prosecution of the case. Finally the
exile spoke:

"I perceive the dreadful truth of what you say. Having no physical
being, I have no standing in court."

"That's the unfortunate fact," returned Hopkins. "Can't you get a body
in some way? Can't you borrow one temporarily?"

"Where?" asked the exile. "You are my only material friend. You wouldn't
lend me yours."

"No, I wouldn't," said Toppleton. "If I did, where would your only
material friend be? It's hopeless, Edward; and now that I think of it,
even if you did get a form and should go to court, where are your
witnesses? You could only assert, and Barncastle could always deny.
Strong as your cause is, the courts, under the circumstances, will give
you no redress, because you cannot prove your case. We must seek other
means; this is a case that requires diplomatic action. Strategy will do
more for us than law, and I think I have a scheme."

"Which is?"

"I will go to Lord Barncastle, and by means of a little clever
dissembling will frighten him into doing the right thing by you. I
realize what a tremendous undertaking it is, but failure then would not
mean public disgrace, and failure in the courts would put us, and
particularly myself, under a cloud. In short, we might be suspected of
blackmail, Chatford; Barncastle is so prominent, and liable to just such
attacks at all times."

"But how do you propose to reach him? He has the reputation now of being
the haughtiest and most unapproachable member of the aristocracy."

"Oh, dear!" laughed Hopkins. "You don't understand Americans. Why,
Chatford, we can push ourselves in anywhere. If you were a being like
myself, and had ten pounds to bet, I would wager you that within
forty-eight hours I could have an invitation in autograph from the
Prince of Wales himself to dine with him and Prince Battenburg at
Sandringham, at any hour, and on any day I choose to set. You don't know
what enterprising fellows we Yankees are. I'll know Lord Barncastle
intimately inside of one month, if I once set out to do it."

"Excuse me for saying it, Hopkins," said the exile, sadly, "but I must
say that what I have liked about you in the past has been your freedom
from bluster and brag. To me these statements of yours sound vain and
empty. I would speak less plainly were it not that my whole future is in
your hands, and I do not want you to imperil my chances by rashness.
Tell me how you propose to meet Barncastle, and, having met him, what
you propose to do, if you do not wish me to set this talk down as
foolish braggadocio."

"I'll tell you how I propose to meet him," said Hopkins, slightly
offended, and yet characteristically forgiving; "but what I shall do
after that I shall not tell you, for I may find that he is a politer
person than you are, and it's just possible that I shall like him. If I
do, I may be impelled to desert you and ally myself with him. I don't
like to be called a braggart, Edward."

"Forgive me, Hopkins," said the spirit. "I am so wrought up by my hopes
and fears, by the consciousness of the terrible wrongs I have suffered,
that I hardly know what I am saying."

"Well, never mind," rejoined Hopkins. "Don't worry. The chances of my
deserting you are very slight. But to return to your question. I shall
meet Barncastle in this way; I shall have a sonnet written in his praise
by an intimate friend of mine, a poet of very high standing and little
morality, which I shall sign with my own name, and have printed as
though it were a clipping from some periodical. This clipping I will
send to Lord Barncastle with a note telling him that I am an American
admirer of his genius, the author of the sonnet, and have but one
ambition, which I travelled from America to gratify--to meet him face to
face."

"Aha!" said the spirit. "An appeal to his vanity, eh?"

"Precisely," said Toppleton. "It works every time."

"And when you meet him?"

"We shall see," rejoined Toppleton. "I have given up brag and bluster;
but if Lord Barncastle of Burningford does not take an interest in
Hopkins Toppleton after he has known him fifteen minutes, I'll go back
home to New York, give up my law practice and become--"

"What?" said the spirit as Hopkins hesitated.

"A sister of charity," said Hopkins, gravely.




CHAPTER XII.

TOPPLETON MAKES A FAIR START.


A FEW weeks later Toppleton was able to report progress to his invisible
client. He had the sonnet to Barncastle of Burningford and was much
pleased with it, because, in spite of the fact that it was two lines too
long, he was confident that it would prove very fetching to the man to
whom it was addressed.

"You ought to take out those two extra lines, though," said the exile.
"Barncastle is a great stickler for form, and he will be antagonized at
once by your violation of the rules."

"Not a bit of it," returned Toppleton. "Those lines stay right there,
and I'll tell you why. In the first place Barncastle, as an Englishman,
will see in the imperfect sonnet something that will strike him as a bit
of American audacity, which will be very pleasing to him, and will give
him something to talk about. As a Briton you are probably aware that
your countrymen are very fond of discovering outrages of that sort in
the work of those over the sea, because it is a sort of convincing proof
that the American as a writer is still an inferior, and that England's
controlling interest in the Temple of Immortality is in no danger of
passing into alien hands. In the second place, he will be so pleased
with the extra amount of flattery that is crammed into those two lines
that he will not have the heart to criticize them; and thirdly, as one
who knows it all, he will be prompted to send for me to come to him, in
order that he may point out to me in a friendly spirit one or two little
imperfections in what he will call my otherwise exquisite verse. I tell
you what it is, Edward," said Toppleton, pausing a moment, "I never
devoted myself with any particular assiduity to Latin, Greek, or
mathematics, but when it comes to human nature, I am, as we New Yorkers
say, a daisy, which means that I am the flower upon which you may safely
bet as against the field."

"You certainly have an ingenious mind, Hopkins," returned the exile,
"and I hope it will all go as you say, but I fear, Hopkins, I fear."

"Wait and see," was Hopkins' confident reply, and being unable to do
otherwise the exile obeyed.

In three days the sonnet was printed, and so fixed that it appeared to
be a clipping from the _Rocky Mountain Quarterly Review, a Monthly
Magazine_.

"That'll strike him as another interesting Americanism," said Hopkins,
with a chuckle. "There is no people on earth but my own who would dare
publish a quarterly twelve times a year."

To the sonnet was appended the name "Hopkins Parkerberry Toppleton;"
Parkerberry being a novelty introduced into the signature by the young
lawyer, not because he was at all entitled to it, but for the proper
reason, as he said, that no American poet was worth a nickel who hadn't
three sections to his name. A note with a distinctly western flavour to
it was penned, and with the "decoy" sonnet went that night to
Burningford Castle addressed to "His Excellency, Lord Barncastle," and
then Toppleton and the exile sat down to await the result.

They had not many days to wait, for within a week of the dispatch of the
poem and the note Hopkins, on reaching the office one morning, found the
exile in a great state of excitement over a square envelope lying on the
floor immediately under the letter slot Hopkins had had made in the
door.

"It's come, Hopkins, it's come!" cried the exile.

"What's come?" queried Hopkins, calmly.

"The letter from Barncastle. I recognize my handwriting. It came last
night about five minutes after you left the office, and I have been in a
fever of excitement to learn its contents ever since. Do open it at
once. What does he say?"

"Be patient, Edward, don't get so excited. Suppose you were to have an
apoplectic stroke!"

"I can't be patient, and I can't have apoplexy, so do hurry. What do I
say?"

"Seems to me," returned Hopkins, picking up the letter and slowly
opening it, "it seems to me you are getting confused. But let's see;
what _does_ Barncastle say? H'm!" he said, reading the note.
"'Barncastle Hall, Fenwick Morton, Mascottonton-on-the-Barbundle,
December 19th, 189--. Hopkins Parkerberry Toppleton, Esquire, 17,
Temple, London. Dear Sir,--I have to thank you for your favour and
enclosure of the 13th inst. Your sonnet is but one of a thousand
gratifying evidences I am daily receiving that I have managed to win to
no inconsiderable degree the good will of your countrymen. It is also
evidence to me that you are a young man of much talent in the line of
original versification, since, apart from the sentiment you express,
your sonnet is one of the most original I have ever seen, not only for
its length, but also for the wonderful mixture of your metaphor. It is
truly characteristic of your great and growing country, and I cannot
resist your naïve appeal to be permitted to meet the unworthy object of
its praise. I should be gratified to have you to dinner at Barncastle
Hall, at eight o'clock on the evening of December 23rd, 189--. Kindly
inform me by return post if your engagements will permit us to have the
pleasure of having you with us on that evening. Believe me to be, with
sentiments of regard, ever, my dear sir, faithfully yours, BARNCASTLE.'"

"By heavens!" ejaculated the exile, in delighted accents, "you've got
there, Hopkins, you've got there. You'll go, of course?"

"Well, rather," returned Toppleton; "and to carry out the illusion, as
well as to pique his interest in America, I'll wear a blue dress coat.
But first let me reply."

"Dear Barncastle," he wrote. "I'll be there. Yours for
keeps,--TOPPLETON."

"How's that?" he asked, reading it aloud to the exile.

"You're not going to send that, are you?" said the exile in disgust.

"I'm not, eh? Well just you watch me and see," said Toppleton. "Why,
Edward, that will be the biggest _coup_ of the lot. He will get that
letter, and he will be amused by it, and the more he thinks of it the
more he'll like it, and then he'll say to himself, 'why, this man is a
character;' and then do you know what will happen, Chatford?"

"I'll be hanged if I do," growled the exile.

"Well, I'll tell you. He will invite all the high panjandrums he knows
to that dinner to meet me, and he will tell them that I am an original,
and they'll all come, Chatford, just as they would flock to see a
seven-humped camel or a dwarf eight feet high, and then I will have Lord
Barncastle of Burningford just where I want him. I could browbeat him
for weeks alone and never frighten him, but once I let him know that I
know his secret, in the presence of his wife and a brilliant company,
_he_ will be apprehensive, and, if I mistake not, will be more or less
within my reach."

"Lady Barncastle is no longer living," said the exile. "His household is
presided over by his daughter."

"Very well," said Hopkins. "We'll dazzle the daughter too."

"Is this the way American lawyers do business generally?" sneered the
exile.

"No," returned Toppleton; "there is probably not another American lawyer
who would take a case like yours. That's the one respect in which they
resemble your English lawyers, but I'll tell you one thing. When they
start in to do a thing they do it, unless their clients get too fresh,
and then they stop _in medias res_."

"I hope there is nothing personal in your remarks, Hopkins," said the
exile, uneasily.

"That all depends on you," retorted Hopkins. "Despite your croakings and
fears, the first step we have taken has proven justifiable. We have
accomplished what we set out to accomplish. I am invited to meet the
fiend. Score one point for us. Now, when I advance a proposition for the
scoring of a second point, you sneer. Well, sneer. I'll win the case for
you, just to spite you. This despised note posted to Barncastle, I shall
order a blue dress coat with brass buttons on it. I shall purchase, if
it is to be found in London, one of those beaver hats on which the fur
is knee deep, a red necktie, and a diamond stud. My trousers I shall
have cut to fit the contour of my calves like a glove. I shall sport the
largest silver watch to be found on the Strand, with a gold chain heavy
enough to sustain a weight of five hundred pounds; in short, Chatford,
you won't be able to distinguish me from one of Teniel's caricatures of
Uncle Sam."

"You won't be able to deceive Barncastle that way. He's seen New Yorkers
before."

"Barncastle doesn't know I'm a New Yorker, and he won't find it out. He
thinks I'm from the Rocky Mountains, and he knows enough about geography
to be aware that the Rocky Mountains aren't within two hours' walk of
Manhattan Island. He knows that there is a vast difference between a
London gentleman and a son of the soil of Yorkshire, and he doesn't know
but what there are a million citizens of our great republic who go about
dressed up in fantastic garments similar to those I shall wear to his
dinner. If he is surprised, his surprise will add to his interest, and
materially contribute to the pleasure of those whom he invites to see
the animal the untamed poet of the Rockies. See?"

"Yes, I see," said the exile. "But clothes won't make the illusion
complete. You look too much like a gentleman; your manners are too
polished. A man like Barncastle will see through you in a minute."

"Again, Chatford, I am sorry that your possessions are nil, for I would
like to wager you that your noble other self will do nothing of the
sort. I have not been an amateur actor for nothing, and as for manners I
can be as bad mannered as any nabob in creation if I try. Don't you
worry on that score."

The acceptance of Lord Barncastle's invitation was therefore sent as
Hopkins wrote it, and the ensuing days were passed by the young lawyer
in preparing the extraordinary dinner suit he had described to his
anxious client, who could hardly be persuaded that in taking this step
Toppleton was not committing a bit of egregious folly. He could not
comprehend how Barncastle upon receipt of Hopkins' note could be
anything but displeased at the familiarity of its tone. The idea of a
common untitled mortal like Toppleton even assuming to be upon familiar
terms with a member of the aristocracy, and especially one so high as
Barncastle of Burningford, oppressed him. He would as soon expect an
ordinary tradesman to slap the Prince of Wales on the back, and call him
by one of his first names, without giving offence, as that Barncastle
should tolerate Toppleton's behaviour, and he in consequence was fearful
of the outcome.

Toppleton, on the other hand, went ahead with his extraordinary
sartorial preparations, serenely confident that the events of the next
few days would justify his course. The exile was relieved to find that
the plan was of necessity modified, owing to Toppleton's inability to
find a typical Uncle Sam beaver in London; but his relief was
short-lived, for Hopkins immediately proceeded to remedy this defect by
purchasing a green cotton umbrella, which, he said, was perhaps better
than the hat as an evidence of eccentricity.

"If I cling to that umbrella all through dinner, Chatford," said
Toppleton, with a twinkle in his eye, "preferring rather to part with
life, honour, or virtue than lose sight of it, I will simply make an
impression upon the minds of that assembled multitude that they'll not
forget in a hurry."

"They'll think as I do," sighed the exile. "They'll think you are a
craz--"

"What?" asked Toppleton, sharply.

"They'll think you are a genius," returned the exile humbly and quickly
too, fearing lest Toppleton should take offence. "Have you--er--have you
considered what Barncastle's servants will think of this strange
performance? They won't let you into the house, in the first place," he
added, to cover his retreat.

"I shall be admitted to the house by Barncastle himself; for I prophesy
that his curiosity to meet this Rocky Mountain poet will be so great
that he will be at the railway station to greet me in person. Besides,"
continued Toppleton, "why should I care what his servants think? I never
had nor ever knew any one who had a servant whose thoughts were worth
thinking. A servant who can think becomes in my country a servant of the
people, not the lackey of the individual. Furthermore, I am after high
game, and servants form no part of my plan. They are not in it. When I
go out on a lion hunt I don't bother my head about or waste my
ammunition upon beasts of burden. I am loaded to the muzzle for the
purpose of bringing down Barncastle. If he can't be brought down without
the humbling of his butler, why, then, his butler must bite the dust. If
I become an object of suspicion to the flunkies, I shall not concern
myself about it unless they become unpleasant, and if they become
unpleasant I shall corrupt them. I'll buy every flunkey in the house, if
it costs a five-pound note."

"Well, go your own gait," said the exile, not much impressed by
Toppleton's discourse. "If you are not clapped into a lunatic asylum, I
shall begin to believe that the age of miracles is still extant; not
that _I_ think you crazy, Hopkins, but these others do not know you as
well as I do. For my part, I think that by going to Barncastle's as your
own handsome, frank, open-hearted self, you will accomplish more than
you will in this masquerade."

"Your flattery saves your cause," said Hopkins. "I cannot be indignant,
as I ought, with a man who calls me handsome, frank, and open-hearted,
but you must remember this: in spite of your long absence from your
body, you retain all the commonplace weakness of your quondam
individuality. You would have me do the commonplace thing you yourself
would have done thirty years ago. If there is a common, ordinary,
uninteresting individual in the world, it is the handsome, frank, and
open-hearted man. You find him everywhere--in hut and in palace, in
village, town, and city. He is the man who goes through life unobserved,
who gets his name in the paper three times in his lifetime, and always
at somebody else's expense. Once when he is born, once when he marries,
and once when he dies, and it is a paid advertisement, not an earned
one, each time. The first is paid for by his parents, the second by his
father-in-law, the third by his executors. People like him well enough,
but no one ever cares enough about him to hate him. His conversation
ranges from babies--if he has any himself--through the weather to
politics. Beyond these subjects he has nothing to say, and he rarely
dines out, save with the parson, the candidate, or the man who wants to
get the best of him in a business transaction. He is an idol at home, a
zero abroad. Nobody is interested in him, and he would as likely be
found dining with the Khedive of Egypt as with Lord Barncastle, and I'll
wager that, even if he should in some mysterious manner receive an
invitation to lend his gracious presence to the Barncastle board, he
would be as little in evidence as an object of interest as the
scullery-maid. Were I to accept your advice, Chatford, Barncastle's
guests would be bored, Barncastle himself would be disappointed, and
your chance of ever becoming the animating spirit of your own body would
correspondingly diminish. Only by a bold stroke is success to be
obtained. The means I am about adopting are revolting to me as a man of
taste, but for the sake of our cause I am willing to stifle my natural
desire to appear as a gentleman, to sink my true individuality, and to
go as a freak."

"But why do you think you will succeed, Hopkins? Even granting that you
make a first-class freak, has it really ever happened that idiocy--I say
idiocy here not to imply that I think you are an idiot, understand
me--has it ever happened that a freak succeeds with us where that
better, truer standard which is represented by you as you really are has
failed?"

"Not exactly that way," replied Hopkins. "But this has happened. Your
Englishmen have flocked by the tens of thousands to see, and have been
interested by an American Wild West show, where tens of hundreds have
straggled in to witness the thoughtful Shakespearian productions of our
most intellectual tragedians. Barncastle can have a refined, quiet,
gentlemanly appearing person at his table three hundred and sixty-five
times a year. He can get what I am going to give him but once in a
lifetime, so say no more about it. I am set in my determination to stand
or fall in the manner I have indicated."

"All right," said the exile. "I've nothing more to say; but there's one
thing mighty certain. I'm going with you. I want to witness your
triumph."

"Very well," said Toppleton. "Come along. But if you do, leave that
infernal whistle of yours home, or there'll be trouble."

"I'm hardly anything else but a whistle. I can't help whistling, you
know."

"Then there are only two things to be done. You must either get yourself
set to the tune of Yankee Doodle, or stay right here. I'm not going to
have my plans upset by any such buoy like tootle-toot as you are when
you get excited."

"Perhaps, on the whole, I'd better stay home."

"I think you had," said Toppleton. "You would be sure to whistle before
we were out of the woods."

Hopkins and his invisible client had hardly finished this interview when
the tailor's boy arrived, bringing with him the fantastic garments
Hopkins had ordered, and almost simultaneously there came a second
letter from Barncastle of Burningford, which set many of the exile's
fears at rest, and gave Toppleton good reason to believe that for the
first part of his plan all was plain sailing. Barncastle's note was very
short, but it was a welcome one, for it acknowledged the receipt of
Toppleton's "characteristically American acceptance to dine," and closed
with an expression of Barncastle's hope that Hopkins would become one of
his guests for the Christmas holidays at the Hall.

"See, there!" said Hopkins, triumphantly. "That is the way my plans
work."

"You are a Napoleon!" ejaculated the exile.

"Not quite," returned Hopkins, drily. "I won't have any Waterloo in
mine; but say, Edward, let's try on our Uncle Sam's."

"Let's!" echoed the exile. "I am anxious to see how we look."

"There!" said Toppleton, ten minutes later, as he grasped the green
cotton umbrella, and arrayed in the blue dress coat and red tie and
other peculiar features of the costume he had adopted, stood awaiting
the verdict of the exile.

"You look it, Toppleton; but I think there is one thing missing. Where
is your chin whisker?"

"By Jove!" ejaculated Hopkins, with a gesture of impatience. "How could
I forget that? And it's too late now, for if there is one thing a Yankee
can't do, Chatford, it is to force a goatee inside of forty-eight hours.
I'll have to cook up some explanation for that--lost it in an Indian
fight in Fairmount Park, Philadelphia, or some equally plausible theory,
eh?"

"I think that might work," said the exile, in an acquiescent mood since
the receipt of Barncastle's second note.

"I thought you would," returned Hopkins. "The little detail that there
aren't any Indians in Fairmount Park, Philadelphia, doesn't affect the
result, of course. But tell me, Chatford, how do I look?"

"Like the very devil!" answered the exile with enthusiasm.

"Good," said Toppleton. "If I look like him I've got Barncastle down,
for if the devil is not his twin brother, he is his master. In either
event I shall be a _persona grata_ at the court of Barncastle of
Burningford."




CHAPTER XIII.

AT BARNCASTLE HALL.


TOPPLETON'S surmises as to Barncastle's method of receiving him appeared
to be correct, for upon his arrival, green umbrella and carpet bag in
hand, at the Fenwick Merton station he was met by no less a person than
his host himself, who recognized him at once.

"I knew it was you," said Barncastle, as he held out his hand to grasp
Toppleton's. "I knew it was you as soon as I saw you. Your carpet bag,
and the fact that you are the only person on the train who travelled
first class, were the infallible signs which guided me."

"And I knew you, Barncastle, the minute I saw you," said Hopkins,
returning the compliment, "because you looked less like a lord than any
man on the platform. How goes it, anyhow?"

The Englishman's countenance wore a puzzled expression as Toppleton put
the question.

"How goes it?" he repeated slowly. "How goes what? The train?"

"Oh, no," laughed Hopkins. "How goes it is Rocky Mountain for how's
things, all your family well, and your creditors easy?"

"Ah! I see," said Barncastle with a smile. "All is well with us, thank
you. My daughter is awaiting your coming with very great interest; and
as for my creditors, my dear sir, I am really uncertain as to whether I
have any. My steward can tell you better than I how they feel."

"It's a great custom, ain't it?" said Hopkins with enthusiasm, "that of
being dunned by proxy, eh? I wish we could work it out my way. If you
don't ante up right off out in the Mountains, your grocer comes around
and collects at the point of his gun, and if you pay him in promises, he
gives you back your change in lead."

"Fancy!" said Barncastle. "How unpleasant it must be for the poor."

"Poor!" laughed Toppleton; "there's none of them in the Rockies. You
don't get a chance to get poor in a country where boys throw nuggets at
birds, and cats are removed from back-yard fences with silver
boot-jacks. Ever been in the Rockies, Barncastle?"

"No," returned the lord, "I have not, but if all you say is true, I
should like to visit that section very much."

"True, Barncastle?" said Toppleton, bristling up. "Why, my dear lord,
that if of yours would have dug your grave out near Pike's Peak."

"I meant no offence, my dear fellow," returned Barncastle,
apologetically.

"No need to tell me that," said Toppleton, affably. "The fact that you
still survive shows I knew it. What time is dinner? I'm ravenous."

"Eight o'clock," replied Lord Barncastle, looking at his watch. "It is
now only three."

"Phew!" ejaculated Toppleton. "Five hours to wait!"

"I thought we might take a little drive around the country until six,
and then we could return to the Hall and make ready for dinner," said
Barncastle.

"That suits me," returned Toppleton. "But I wish you'd send that
gentleman with the mutton-chop whiskers that drives your waggon to the
lunch counter and get me a snack before we start."

"No," said Barncastle, ushering Toppleton into his dog-cart. "We'll do
better than that. We'll give up the drive until later. I take you
directly to the Hall, and send a cold bird and a glass of wine to your
apartment."

"Good!" ejaculated Toppleton, with a smack of the lips. "You must live
pretty near as fine here as we do in our big hotels at home. They're the
only other places I know where you can get your appetite satisfied at
five minutes' notice."

Toppleton and his host then entered the carriage, and in a short time
they reached the Hall--a magnificently substantial structure, with
ivy-clad towers, great gables, large arched windows looking out upon
seductive vistas, and an air of comfortable antiquity about it that
moved Hopkins' tongue to an utterance somewhat at variance with his
assumed character.

"How beautiful and quiet it all is," he said, gazing about him in
undisguised admiration. "A home like this, my lord, ought to make a poet
of a man. The very air is an inspiration."

Barncastle shrugged his shoulders and laughed; and had Toppleton not
been looking in rapt silence out through the large bowed window at the
end of the hall they had entered, along an avenue of substantial oak
trees to the silver waters of the Barbundle at its other end, he might
have seen a strange greenish light come into the eyes of his host,
which would have worried him not a little. He did not see it, however,
and in a moment he remembered his mission and the means he had adopted
to bring it to a successful issue.

"It beats the deck!" he ejaculated, with a nervous glance at Barncastle,
fearful lest his enthusiasm had led him to betray himself.

"I find it a pleasant home," said Barncastle, quietly, ushering him into
a spacious and extremely comfortable room which Toppleton perceived in a
moment was the library, at the other end of which was a large open
fireplace, large enough to accommodate a small family, within whose
capacious depths three or four huge logs were blazing fiercely. Before
the fire sat a stately young woman, about twenty-five years of age, who
rose as the Lord of Burningford and his guest entered.

As she approached Toppleton would have given all he possessed to be rid
of the abominable costume he had on; and when the young heiress of
Burningford's eye rested upon the fearfully green cotton umbrella, he
felt as if nothing would so have pleased his soul as the casting of that
adjunct to an alleged Americanism into the fire; for Lady Alice was, if
he could judge from appearances, a woman for whose good opinion any man
might be willing to sacrifice immortality itself. But circumstances
would not permit him to falter, and, despite the fact that it hurt his
self-respect to do it, Hopkins remained true to the object he had in
view.

"Alice, this is Mr. Toppleton. My daughter, Lady Alice Chatford, Mr.
Toppleton," said Barncastle.

"Howdy," said Hopkins, making an awkward bow to Lady Alice. "She don't
need her title to show she's a lady," he added, turning to Barncastle,
who seemingly acquiesced in all that he said.

"My friend Toppleton, my dear," said Barncastle, "has paid me the
compliment of travelling all the way from his home in the Rocky
Mountains in the United States to see me. He is the author of that
wonderful sonnet I showed you the other night."

"Yes, I remember," said Lady Alice, with a gracious smile, which won
Toppleton's heart completely, "it was delightful. Lord Barncastle and I
are great admirers of your genius, Mr. Toppleton, and we sincerely hope
that we shall be able to make your stay with us here as pleasant for you
as it is for us."

Again Hopkins would have disappeared through the floor had he been able
to act upon the promptings of his own good taste. It made him feel
unutterably small to think that he had come here, under the guise of an
uncultivated, boorish clod with poetical tendencies, to work the
overthrow of the genius of the house.

"Thank you," he said, his voice husky with emotion. "I had not expected
so cordial a reception. In fact," he added, remembering his true
position, "I had a bet of ten to one with a friend of mine who is doing
the Lakes this afternoon that I'd get frozen stiff by a glance of your
ladyship's eye. I'm mighty glad I've lost the bet."

"He has some courtliness beneath his unpolished exterior," said Lady
Alice later, when recounting the first interview between them to some of
her friends. "I quite forgave his boorishness when he said he was glad
to lose his wager."

"Now, Mr. Toppleton," said his host, "if you care to go to your
apartment I will see that you get what you want. Just leave your
umbrella in the coat room, and let Parker take your bag up to your
room."

"Thanks, Barncastle, old fellow," said the Rocky Mountain poet, "I'll go
to my room gladly; but as for leaving that umbrella out of my sight, or
transferring the handle of that carpet bag to any other hand than my
own, I can't do it. They're my treasures, my lady," he added, turning
to Lady Alice. "That bag and I have been inseparable companions for
eight consecutive years, and as for the umbrella we haven't been parted
for five. It's my protector and friend, and since it saved my life in a
shooting scrape at the Papyrus Club dinner in Denver, I haven't wanted
to let it get away from me."

"How odd he is," said Lady Alice a moment later to her father, Toppleton
having gone to his room. "Are you sure he is not an impostor?"

"No, I'm not," returned Barncastle with a strange smile; "but I know he
is not a thief. I fancy he is amusing, and I believe he will be a
valuable acquisition to my circle of acquaintances. Have you heard from
the Duchess of Bangletop?"

"Yes, she will be here. I told her you had a real American this
time--not an imitation Englishman--a poet, and, as far as we could
judge, a character who would surely become a worthy addition to her
collection of oddities; a match, in fact, for her German worshipper of
Napoleon and that other strange freak of nature she had at her last
reception, the young Illinois widow who whistled the score of Parsifal."

"The duchess must have been pleased," said Barncastle with a laugh.
"This Toppleton will prove a perfect godsend to her, for she has
absolutely nothing that is _bizarre_ for her next reception."

Toppleton, upstairs in a magnificently appointed chamber, from the
windows of which were to be seen the most superb distances that he had
ever imagined, was a prey alternately to misery and to joy. He
felicitated himself upon the apparent success of his plan, while
bemoaning his unhappy lot in having to keep his true self under in a
society he felt himself capable of adorning, and to enter which he had
always aspired.

"It's too late to back out now, though," he said. "If I were to strike
my colours at this stage of the battle, I should deserve to be put in a
cask and thrown into the Barbundle yonder. When I look about me and see
all these magnificent acres, when I observe the sumptuous furnishing of
this superb mansion, when I see unequalled treasures of art scattered in
profusion about this castle, and then think of that poor devil of a
Chatford roaming about the world without a piece of bric-a-brac to his
name, or an acre, or a house, or bed, or chair, or table, of any kind,
without even a body, it makes me mad. Here his body, the inferior part
of man, the purely mortal section of his being, is living in affluence,
while his immortal soul is a very tramp, an outcast, a wanderer on the
face of the earth. Barncastle, Barncastle, you are indeed a villain of
the deepest--"

Here Toppleton paused, and looked apprehensively about him. He seemed to
be conscious of an eye resting upon him. A chill seized upon his heart,
and his breath came short and quick as it had done but once before when
his invisible client first betrayed his presence in No. 17.

"I wonder if this is one of those beastly castles with secret doors in
the wainscot and peep-holes in the pictures," he said nervously to
himself. "It would be just like Barncastle to have that sort of a house,
and of course nothing would please him better than to try a haunted
chamber on me. The conjunction of a ghost and a Rocky Mountain poet
would be great, but after my experience with Chatford, I don't believe
there is a ghost in all creation that could frighten me. Nevertheless, I
don't like being gazed at by an unseen eye. I'll have to investigate."

Then Toppleton investigated. He mounted chairs and tables to gaze into
the stolid, unresponsive oil-painted faces of somebody's ancestry, he
knew not whose. Not Barncastle's, he was sure, for Barncastle was an
upstart. Nothing wrong could be found there. The eyes were absolutely
proof against peeping Toms. Then he rolled the heavy bureau and several
antique chests away from the massive oak wainscoting that ran about the
room, eight feet in height and superbly carved. He tapped every panel
with his knuckles, and found them all solid as a rock.

"No secret door in that," he said; and then for a second time he
experienced that nervous sensation which comes to him who feels that he
is watched, and as the sensation grew more and more intense and
terrifying, an idea flashed across Toppleton's mind which heightened his
anxiety.

"By Jove!" he said; "I wonder if I am going mad. Can it be that Chatford
is an illusion, a fanciful creation of a weak mind? Am I become a prey
to hallucinations, and if so, am I not in grave danger of my personal
liberty here if Barncastle should discover my weakness?"

It was rather strange, indeed, that this had not occurred to Hopkins
before. It was the natural explanation of his curious experience, and
the sudden thought that he had foolishly lent himself to the impulses of
a phantasm, and was carrying on a campaign of destruction against one of
the world's most illustrious men, based solely upon a figment of a
diseased imagination, was prostrating. He staggered to the side of a
large tapestried easy-chair, and limp with fear, toppled over its broad
arm into its capacious depths an almost nerveless mass of flesh and
bones. He would have given worlds to be back in the land of the midnight
sun, in New York, in London, anywhere but here in the house of
Barncastle of Burningford, and he resolved then and there that he would
return to London the first thing in the morning, place himself in the
hands of a competent physician, and trifle with the creations of his
fancy no more.

A prey to these disquieting reflections, Toppleton lay in the chair for
at least an hour. The last rays of a setting sun trembled through the
leaves of the tree that shaded the western side of the room, and
darkness fell over all; and with the darkness there came into
Toppleton's life an experience that scattered his fears of a moment
since to the winds, and so tried and exercised his courage, that that
fast fading quality gained a renewed strength for the fearful battle
with a supernatural foe, in which he had, out of his goodness of heart,
undertaken to engage.

A clock in the hall outside began to strike the hour of six in deep
measured tones, that to Toppleton in his agitated state of mind was
uncomfortably suggestive of the bell in Coleridge's line that "Knells us
back to a world of death." At the last stroke of the hammer the tone
seemed to become discordant, and in a frenzy of nervous despair
Toppleton opened his eyes and sprang to his feet. As he did so, his
whole being became palpitant with terror, for staring at him out of the
darkness he perceived a small orb-like something whose hue was that of
an emerald in combustion. He clapped his hands over his eyes for a
moment, but that phosphorescent gleam penetrated them, and then he
perceived that it was not an eye that rested upon him, but a ray of
light shining through a small hole that had escaped his searching glance
in the wainscoting. The relief of this discovery was so great that it
gave him courage to investigate, and stepping lightly across the room,
noiseless as a particle of dust, he climbed upon a chair and peeped
through the aperture, though it nearly blinded him to do so. To shade
his eyes from the blinding light, he again covered them with his hand,
and again observed that its intensity was sufficient to pierce through
the obstruction and dazzle his vision. The hand so softened the light,
however, that he could see what there was on the other side of the wall,
though it was far from being a pretty sight that met his gaze.

What he saw was a small oblong room in which there was no window, and,
at first glance, no means of entrance or exit. It was high-ceiled like
the room in which he stood, and, with the exception of a narrow couch
covered with a black velvet robe, with a small pillow of the same
material at the far end, the room was bare of furniture. There was no
fire, no fixture of any kind, lamp or otherwise, from which illumination
could come, and yet the room was brilliant with that same green light
that Chatford had described to Hopkins at his office in the Temple. So
dazzling was it, that for a moment Hopkins had difficulty in
ascertaining just what there was in the apartment, but as he looked he
became conscious of forms which grew more and more distinct as his eye
accustomed itself to the light. On the couch in a moment appeared, rigid
as in death, the body of Barncastle; the eyes lustreless and staring,
the hands characterless and bluish even in the green light, the cheeks
sunken and the massive forehead white and cold as marble. The sight
chilled Toppleton to the marrow, and he averted his eyes from the
horrible spectacle only to see one even more dreadful, for on the other
side of the apartment, grinning fiendishly, the source of the wonderful
light that flooded the room, he now perceived the fiend, making ready
to assume once more the habiliments of mortality. He was stirring a
potion, and, as Hopkins watched him, he began to whistle a combination
of discords that went through Toppleton's ears like a knife.

The watcher became sick at heart. This was the frightful thing he had to
cope with! So frightful was it that he tried to remove his eye from the
peep-hole, and seek again the easy chair, when to his horror he found
that he could not move. If his eye had in reality been glued to the
aperture, he would not have found it more firmly fixed than it was at
present. As he struggled to get away from the vision that was every
moment being burned more and more indelibly into his mind, the fiend's
fearful mirth increased, at the close of one of the paroxysms of which
he lifted the cup in which the potion had been mixed to his lips, and
quaffed its contents to the very dregs. As the last drop trickled down
the fiend's throat, Hopkins was startled further to see the light
growing dim, and then he noticed that the fiend was rapidly decreasing
in size, shrinking slowly from a huge spectral presence into a hardly
visible ball of green fire which rolled across the apartment to where
the body lay; up the side of the couch to the pillow; along the pillow
to that marble white forehead, where it paused. A tremor passed through
the human frame lying prostrate there, and in a moment all was dark as
night. The ball of fire had disappeared through the forehead, and a deep
groan told Toppleton that the body of Barncastle was once more a living
thing having the semblance of humanity. A moment later another light
appeared in the apartment into which Toppleton still found himself
compelled to gaze. This time the light was more natural, for it was the
soft genial light of a lamp shining through a sliding panel at the other
end of the room, through which the Lord of Burningford passed. It lasted
but a moment, for as the defendant in this fearful case of Chatford _v._
Burningford passed into the room beyond, the slide flew back and all was
black once more.

With the departure of Barncastle, Toppleton was able to withdraw from
his uncomfortable position, and in less than a moment lay gasping in his
chair.

"It is too real!" he moaned to himself. "Chatford did not deceive me. I
am not the victim of hallucination. Alas! I wish I were."

A knock at the door put an end to his soliloquizing, and he was relieved
to hear it. Here was something earthly at last. He flew from his chair
across the room through the darkness to the door and threw it wide open.

"Come in," he cried, and Barncastle himself, still pale from the effects
of the ordeal he had passed through, entered the room.

"I have come to see if there is anything I can do for you," he said
pleasantly, touching an electric button which dissipated the darkness of
the room by lighting a hundred lamps. "The Duchess of Bangletop has
arrived and is anxious to meet you; but you look worn, Toppleton. You
are not ill, I hope?"

"No," stammered Toppleton, slightly overcome by Barncastle's coolness
and affability, "but I--I've been taking a nap and I've had the--the
most horrible dream I ever had."

"Which was?"

"That I--ah--why, that I was writing an obituary poem on--"

"Me?" queried Barncastle, calmly.

"No," said Toppleton. "On myself."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE DINNER AND ITS RESULT.


A HALF-HOUR later Toppleton entered the drawing room of Barncastle Hall,
umbrella in one hand, carpet-bag in the other; his red necktie arranged
grotesquely about his neck, the picture of Americanism "as she is drawn"
by British cartoonists. Any other than a well-bred English gathering
would have received him with hilarious enthusiasm, and Hopkins was
rather staggered as he passed through the doorway to note the evident
interest, and yet utter lack of surprise, which his appearance inspired
in those who had been bidden to the feast to meet him. He perceived at
once that he no more than fulfilled the expectations of these highly
cultivated people, and it was with difficulty that he repressed the
mirth which was madly endeavouring to take possession of his whole
system.

The only portions of his make-up that attracted special attention--if
he could judge from a whispered comment or two that reached his ears,
and the glances directed toward them by the Duchess of Bangletop and the
daughters of the Earl of Whiskerberry--were the carpet-bag and the
umbrella. The blue dress coat and tight-fitting trousers were taken as a
matter of course. The red necktie and diamond stud were assumed to be
the proper thing in Rocky Mountain society, but the bag and umbrella
seemed to strike the English mind as a case of Ossa piled upon Pelion.

"Good evening, ladies," said Hopkins with a bow which was graceful in
spite of his efforts to make it awkward. "I hope I haven't increased
anybody's appetite uncomfortably by being late. This watch of mine is
set to Rocky Mountain time, and it's a little unreliable in this
climate."

"He's just the dear delightful creature I have been looking for for
years and years," said the Duchess of Bangletop to Lady Maude
Whiskerberry.

"So very American," said Lady Cholmondely Persimmon, of Persimmon
Towers--a well-preserved young noblewoman of eighteen or twenty social
seasons.

"Duchess," said Barncastle, coming forward, "permit me to present to you
my friend Hopkins Parkerberry Toppleton, the Poet Laureate of the Rocky
Mountains."

"Howdy do, Duchess," said Toppleton, dropping his carpet-bag, and
extending his hand to grasp that of the Duchess.

"So pleased," said the Duchess with a smile and an attempt at hauteur,
which was hardly successful.

"Glad you're pleased," said Toppleton, "because that means we're both
pleased."

"Lady Maude Whiskerberry, Mr. Toppleton. Lady Persimmon, Mr. Toppleton,"
said Barncastle, resuming the introductions after Toppleton had picked
up the carpet-bag again and announced his readiness to meet the other
ladies.

In a very short time Toppleton had been made acquainted with all in the
room, and inasmuch as he seemed so taken with the Duchess of Bangletop,
Lady Alice, who was a young woman of infinite tact, and not too rigidly
bound by conventionality, relinquished her claim to the guest of the
evening, and when dinner was announced, permitted Toppleton to escort
the Duchess into the dining-room.

"Don't you think, my dear Mr. Toppleton," said the Duchess as the
American offered her his arm, "don't you think you might--ah--leave your
luggage here? It's rather awkward to carry an umbrella, a carpet-bag,
and a Duchess into dinner all at once."

"Nothing is too awkward for an American, Duchess," said Toppleton.
"Besides," he added in a stage whisper, "I don't dare leave these things
out of my sight. Barncastle's butler looks all right, but I've lived in
a country where confidence in your fellow-men is a heaven-born gift. I
wasn't born with it, and there hasn't any of it been sent down since."

"Aren't you droll!" said the Duchess.

"If you say it I'll bet on it," said Toppleton, gallantly, as they
entered the beautiful dining-room and took their allotted chairs, when
Hopkins perceived, much to his delight, that Barncastle was almost the
length of the table distant; that on one side of him was Lady Alice, and
on the other the Duchess of Bangletop.

"These two women are both an inspiration in their way," he said to
himself. "Lady Alice, even if she loves that monster of a father of
hers, ought to be rescued from him. She will inspire me with courage,
and this portly Duchess will help me to be outrageous enough in my
deportment to satisfy the thirst of the most rabidly uninformed
Englishman at the board for American unconventionality."

"Have you been in this country long?" asked the Duchess, as Toppleton
slid his umbrella and carpet-bag under his chair, and prepared to sit
down.

"Yes, quite a time," said Toppleton. "Ten days."

"Indeed. As long as that?" said the Duchess. "You must have seen a great
deal of England in that time."

"Yes, I have," said Hopkins. "I went out to see Shakespeare's house and
his grave and all that. That's enough to last a lifetime; but it seems
to me, Lord Barncastle, you don't give Shakespeare the mausoleum he
ought to have. Out in the Rockies we'd have had a pile set up over him
so high that you could sit on top of it and talk with St. Peter without
lifting your voice."

"You are an admirer of Shakespeare, then, Mr. Toppleton?" said
Barncastle with a look of undisguised admiration at Hopkins.

"Am I? Me? Well, I just guess I am," replied Toppleton. "If it hadn't
been for William Shakespeare of Stratford-on-Avon, you'd never have
heard of Hopkins P. Toppleton, of Blue-bird Gulch."

"How poetic! Blue-bird Gulch," simpered Lady Persimmon.

"He was your inspiration, Mr. Toppleton?" suggested Lady Alice with a
gracious smile.

"That's what he was," said Toppleton. "I might say he's my library.
There's three volumes in my library all told. One's a fine thick book
containing the total works of the bard of Avon; another is a complete
concordance of the works of the same author; and the third is the
complete works of Hopkins Parkerberry Toppleton, consisting of
eighty-three poems, a table of contents, and a portrait in three colours
of the author. I'd be glad to give you all a copy, ladies, but it's
circulated by subscription only."

"I should so like to see the book," said Lady Maude Whiskerberry.

"I'd be mighty proud to show it to you," said Toppleton, "and if you and
your father here, the earl, ever pass my way out there in the Rockies,
just look me up and you shall see it. But Shakespeare was my guiding
genius, Duchess. When I began to get those tired feelings that show a
man he's either a poet or a victim to malaria, I began to look about and
see who I'd better take as a model. I dawdled around for a year, reading
some of Milton's things, but they didn't take me under the eighth rib,
which with me is the rib of appreciation, so I bought a book called
'Household Poetry,' and I made up my mind that Shakespeare, taking him
altogether, was my poet. He was a little old-fangled in some things,
but in the main he seemed to strike home, and I sent word to our
bookseller to get me everything he wrote, and to count on me to take
anything new of his that happened to be coming out."

"Not a costly matter that!" said the Earl of Whiskerberry with the
suggestion of a sneer. He did not quite approve of this original.

"No, my dear Earl," replied Toppleton. "For you know Shakespeare is
dead--though I didn't know it at the time, either. But I got the book,
and I tell you it made a new man of me. 'Here' I said, 'is my model.
I'll be like him, and if I succeed, H. P. T.'s name will be known for
miles around.' And it was so. It was not a year before I had a poem of
600 lines printed in our county paper, and there wasn't a word in it
that wasn't Shakespearean. I took good care of that, for when I had the
poem written, I bought the concordance, and when I found that I had used
a word that was not in the concordance, I took it out and used another
that was."

"That's a very original idea, and, I think, a good one," said Lady
Alice. "You are absolutely sure of your English if you do that; but
wasn't it laborious, Mr. Toppleton?"

"It was at first, miss, but as I went along, and began to use words
over again it got easier and easier, and for the last fifteen pages of
the poem I hardly had to look up on an average more than six words to a
page."

"But poetry," put in Barncastle, half closing his eyes and gazing
steadfastly at Hopkins as he did so, "poetry is more than verbiage. Did
you become a student of nature?"

As Barncastle spoke, Toppleton's nerve weakened slightly, for it was the
very question he had desired to have asked. It brought him to the point
where his winning stroke was possible, and to feel that he was on the
verge of the struggle was somewhat disquieting. His uneasiness was
short-lived, for in a moment when he realized how eminently successful
had been his every step so far, how everything had transpired even as he
had foreseen it would, he gained confidence in himself and in his
course.

"I did, Barncastle; particularly a student of human nature. I studied
man. I endeavoured to learn what quality in man it was that made him
great and what quality made him weak. I became an expert in a great many
osophies and ologies that had never been heard of in the Rocky Mountains
before," answered Toppleton, forgetting his assumed character under the
excitement of the moment and speaking, flushed of face, with more
vehemence than the occasion seemed to warrant. "And I venture to
assert, sir, that there is no physiognomy in all creation that I cannot
read, save possibly yours which baffles me. I read much in your face
that I would rather not see there."

Barncastle flushed. The ladies toyed nervously with their fans. Lady
Alice appeared slightly perturbed, and Hopkins grew pale. The Duchess of
Bangletop alone was unmoved. Toppleton's heat was hardly what was
expected on an occasion of this sort, but the duchess had made up her
mind not to marvel at anything the guest of the evening might do, and
she regarded his vehemence as quite pardonable inasmuch as it must be
characteristic of an unadulterated Americanism.

"Fancy!" she said. "Do you mean to say, Mr. Toppleton, that you can tell
by a face what sort of a life one has led; what his or her character has
been, is, and is to be?"

"I do, Duchess," returned Toppleton. "Though for your comfort as well as
for that of others at this table, let me add that I invariably keep what
I see religiously to myself."

The humour of this rejoinder and the laughter which followed it cleared
the atmosphere somewhat, but from the gravity of his host and the tense
way in which Barncastle's eye was fastened upon him, Hopkins knew that
his shaft as to the baffling qualities of Barncastle's face had struck
home.

"You interest me," said the Earl, when the mirth of his guests had
subsided. "I too have studied physiognomy, but I never observed that
there was anything baffling about my own. I am really quite interested
to know why you find it so."

"Because," said Toppleton nervously yet firmly, "because your face is
not consistent with your record. Because you have achieved more than one
could possibly read in or predict from your face."

"I always said that myself, Barncastle," said the duchess airily. "I've
always said you didn't look like a great man."

"While acknowledging, Duchess, that I nevertheless am?" queried
Barncastle with a smile.

"Well, moderately so, Barncastle, moderately so. Fact is," said the
Duchess, "you can stir a multitude with your eloquence; you can write a
novel that so will absorb a school-girl that she can't take her eyes
from its early pages to look into the back of the book and see how it is
all going to turn out; you can talk a hostile parliament into doing
violence to its secret convictions; but in some respects you are
wanting. You are an atrocious horse-back rider, you never take a run
with the hounds, and I must say I have seen times when you seemed to me
to be literally too big for yourself."

"By Jove!" thought Toppleton. "What a clever fellow I am! If this
duchess is so competent a reader of character as her estimate of
Barncastle shows her to be, it's a marvel she hasn't found me out."

Barncastle laughed with a seeming heartiness at the duchess's remark,
though to Toppleton, who was now watching him closely, he paled
slightly.

"One of us is more than he expected, and two of us simply shock him,"
said Hopkins to himself.

"Of course, Mr. Toppleton," said Barncastle, "in view of my perfect
willingness to have you do so, you can have no hesitation in telling me
what you read in my face. Eh?"

"I have not," said Toppleton, gulping down a glass of wine to gain a
little time as well as to stimulate his nerves. He had not expected to
be so boldly met by his host. "I have not; but truly, my dear
Barncastle, I'd rather not, for it's a mighty poor verdict that the
lines of your face return for you, and inasmuch as that verdict is
utterly opposed to your record, it seems hardly worth--"

"Oh, do tell it us, Mr. Toppleton," put in Lady Alice. "It will be the
more interesting coming from one who has so admired my father that he
has travelled thousands of miles to see him. Do go on."

Hopkins blushed, hesitated a minute and then began.

"Very well," he said, "let it be as you say. My lord," he added, looking
Barncastle straight in the eye, "if I were to judge you by the lines of
your face, I should say that your character was essentially a weak one.
That you possessed no single attribute of greatness. That your whole
life was given over to an almost criminal tendency to avoid
responsibility; to be found wanting at crises; to a desire, almost a
genius I might say, for meeting your troubles in a half-hearted,
compromising spirit which should have resulted in placing you in the
ranks of the mediocre. The lines of your head are singularly slight for
one of your years. There is hardly a furrow on your brow; on the
contrary your flesh is so tightly drawn over your skull, that it would
seem to suggest the presence in that skull of a brain too far developed
for its prison; in other words your brain is as badly accommodated by
your skull, I should judge, as a man of majestic proportions would be in
the best Sunday suit of a little Lord Fauntleroy."

"You are giving me a fine idea of my personal appearance, my dear
Toppleton," said Lord Barncastle, pouring a tablespoonful of wine into a
small glass into which, if his guests had been watching his hands
closely, they might have seen him place a small white powder.

"The strange part of it is that it is true, Barncastle," said the
duchess. "I've thought pretty much the same thing many a time."

"Anything more, Toppleton?" queried Barncastle.

"Yes, one thing, my lord," said Hopkins, nerving himself up to the final
stroke. "The eyes, one of our American poets has said, are the windows
of the soul. Now if I were to look into your eyes at your soul, I'd say
to myself, 'Hopkins, my boy, there's an old man living in a new house,'
for I'll take my oath that _I_ see the soul of a centenarian, Lord
Barncastle, in the body of a man of sixty every time I look into your
eyes."

Toppleton's bold words had hardly passed his lips when Lady Alice, who
was becoming very uncomfortable because of the personal trend of the
conversation, rose from her chair and gave the signal for the ladies to
depart into the drawing-room, leaving Barncastle and his guests over
their coffee and cigars.

"What an extraordinary gift that is of yours!" the Earl of Whiskerberry
said to Toppleton as Barncastle walked with the duchess as far as the
drawing-room door. "D'ye know, my deah sir, it's truly appalling to
think you can do it, you know, because there's so much that--"

The earl's sentence was never finished, for a heavy fall interrupted him
at this point, and Toppleton, turning to see whence it came, was
horrified and yet not altogether displeased to see prostrate on the rug,
white and lifeless as it had been in the room on the other side of the
wainscoting upstairs two hours before, the body of Barncastle of
Burningford.

"Frightened him out at the very first shot!" said Toppleton gleefully to
himself. "He is easier game than I thought."

"I believe the man is dead!" said the earl, anxiously putting his hand
over Barncastle's heart, and standing appalled to find that it had
stopped beating.

"No," said Toppleton, with an effort at calmness, "this is a case of
trance only--suspended animation. He will revive in a very short time, I
fancy. This sort of thing is common among men of his peculiar character;
I've seen it happen dozens of times. Have him carried to his room; tell
Lady Alice that at my request he has started out to show me the
Barbundle in the moonlight--in fact, say anything about me you please,
only get up a plausible pretext for Barncastle's absence. I do not think
his daughter knows he has these attacks, and there is no reason why she
should know, because they are not dangerous."

With this the earl repaired to the drawing-room, where he made the
excuses for Hopkins and Lord Barncastle. Toppleton and the butler
carried the prostrate Barncastle up to his room, and then the American,
utterly worn out with excitement, entered his own apartments to await
developments.




CHAPTER XV.

BARNCASTLE CONFIDES IN HOPKINS.


TOPPLETON had not long to wait. His nerves had hardly resumed their
normal condition when he heard a tottering step in the hall outside,
followed by a soft tapping at the door.

"Who's there?" he cried.

"It is I, Toppleton--Barncastle. Let me in and be quick. I have
something very important to say to you."

Hopkins ran to the door and opened it, and Barncastle entered, his face
pale and his general aspect that of a man who had passed through a
terrible ordeal.

"By Jove! I've landed my man!" said Toppleton to himself. Then he added
aloud, "My dear Barncastle, you don't know what a turn you gave me
downstairs. I sincerely hope you are not ill?"

"I am ill, Toppleton; ill almost unto death, and it is you who have made
me so."

"I?" cried Hopkins, with well-feigned surprise. "I don't quite catch
your drift."

"Your accursed faculty for reading character in the face, and searching
out the soul of man in the depths of his eyes has made you the only man
I have ever feared. We must come to some understanding in this matter. I
want to know what your object is in coming here to expose me before my
friends, to lay bare--"

"Object? What is my object?" returned Hopkins, with capital
dissemblance. "Why, my dear fellow, what object could I have? I read
your face and searched your eyes for indications of your character at
your own request, and with your permission made known what I saw
there--for it is there, Barncastle, plain as any material object in this
room."

"It is dreadful! dreadful!" said Barncastle, covering his eyes with his
hands and quivering with emotion and fear. "I had no idea your power was
so great. Do you suppose for an instant that had I known how unerringly
accurate you are as a reader of mind and face, that I would ever have
asked you to lay bare to those people--"

"Dear me, Barncastle," said Toppleton, rising and putting his hand on
the other's shoulder in a caressing manner, "really you ought to lie
down and rest. This thing will all pass off with a night's sleep.
You--you don't seem to be quite yourself to-night. You mustn't mind
what I have said."

"You do not know, Toppleton, you do not know. You have done that
to-night which has shown me that a dreadful secret which I have carried
locked in my breast for thirty years, is as easily to be wrested from me
by you as my jewels by a house-breaker."

"But, my dear fellow," said Toppleton, his spirit growing with pride at
his success in bringing down his game with so little effort, "I--I
understand that this is only one of the exceptions to the rules which
govern the mind-reader's art. I do not really believe, of course, that
what I seem to see beneath the surface is actually there. I--"

"Do not try to deceive me, Mr. Toppleton," sobbed Barncastle. "I, too,
am something of a reader of character, as I told you, and I know exactly
what you believe and what you do not believe. Had I been in such a
position at dinner as would have permitted me to look as deeply into
your eyes as you looked into mine, I should not have asked you to
divulge what you saw. In fact, Toppleton, as you have probably seen for
yourself, I have all along under-estimated your abilities, which do not,
I confess, show up as advantageously as they might. You Americans are a
cleverer people than you appear to be, and you have a faculty of
dissemblance that is baffling to us in the older world, who have
acquired candour through our conceit. We are so conscious of our
superiority and ultimate ability to gain the upper hand in all that we
undertake, that we do not consider it necessary to cloak our real
feelings. The whole world speaks of the Briton's brutal frankness, and
speaks justly. We are candid often against our best interests. We are
impulsively frank where you Americans are diplomatically reserved. It is
this trait in my people that makes it difficult for our Government to
find suitable diplomats to fill the various foreign missions that must
be filled, while your Government finds it difficult to find missions for
all the diplomats who must be provided for. We have to train our
Ministers and Ambassadors in the hard school of experience, as
_attachés_ to legations, while you have only to go to your newspaper
offices, to your great political organizations, or to your flourishing
business concerns to find all the Envoys Extraordinary you need with a
comfortable reserve force standing always ready to step into any shoes
that death, advancement, or revulsion of popular sentiment may make
vacant. You are a great people; greater far than you seem on the
surface, and it is this fact, unheeded by me who should have known
better, that deceived me. I judged you from the standpoint of your
exterior; I saw that you were a character, but beyond the green umbrella
and carpet-bag indications I failed to look, and I thought I might
safely venture the act which has come so nearly to my undoing. I see you
now as you are. I apologize for underrating your ability, and I say to
you frankly, that I rejoice all the more greatly in your proffered
friendship since I have come to see that it is an honour not lightly to
be worn."

"My dear Barncastle," ejaculated Hopkins, breathless with wonder and
pride. "I assure you that your words overwhelm me. Your kind heart, I
fear, has led you into over-estimating my poor character as much as you
claim to have under-estimated it. I am by no means all that--"

"Ah, Toppleton!" said Barncastle, "let us not waste words. I know you as
you are at last, and you need cloak your real self from me no more. I
feared for an instant that you might be my enemy, though why you should
be I do not know, and to have you read my secret as though it were
printed upon an open page before you, filled my soul with terror. You
have found me out, but you do not and you cannot know what has brought
me to this unless I tell you, and I must insist that you become
acquainted with my story, that you may the better judge of my innocence
in the matter. When I have told you this story, I wish to exact from you
a promise never to reveal it, for once revealed it would be my ruin."

"I do not wish, my dear Barncastle," said Toppleton, burning with
anxiety to hear the other's story, and yet desirous of appearing
unconcerned in order that Barncastle might throw himself unreservedly in
his hands. "I have no desire to pry into another man's secrets, to wrest
unwilling confidences from any man. If I have discovered one of your
secrets, I have done so unwittingly, and I do not wish you to feel that
I am holding you up, to use one of our Western expressions, for
confidences. Keep your secret if it is one you wish to hold inviolate. I
shall never tell what I have seen or what you have said to me."

"You are a generous, high-minded person, Toppleton. A poet at soul and a
gentleman as well; but you must hear my story, for it is my
justification in your eyes, and that is as necessary to my happiness,
now that I know you for the man you are, as justification in the eyes of
the world would become were the world to suspect what you have seen. I
did not mind any portion of what you said at the table to-night,
Toppleton, until you delivered yourself of the opinion that the soul of
a man of a hundred and more years was dwelling in this body of mine, a
body many years younger. Mr. Toppleton, I do not want you to think me
mad. I want you to believe me when I say that what you saw is absolutely
a fact. My soul has lived precisely one hundred and twenty-six years, my
body sixty-one!"

Toppleton's expression of surprise as Barncastle spoke would have done
credit to a tragedian of the highest rank.

"Excuse me, Barncastle," he said, kindly. "I really think you'd better
let me send for Lady Alice and have the family physician summoned. Your
mind is somewhat affected."

"Come with me," said Barncastle, rising from his chair and leading
Toppleton out through the door into and along the hallway until they
reached his private apartment. "I want you on entering this room to
swear never to divulge what you shall see within, for I shall prove the
truth of my assertion respecting my soul before you leave it, and,
Toppleton, the maintenance of my secret is a matter of life and death to
me."

"Of course, my lord, I shall not tell anyone of this interview except
for your good. It is truly painful to me, for in spite of your apparent
clearness of head I cannot help feeling that the excitement of this
evening, together with the responsibilities a man of your position must
necessarily assume, have made you feverish and slightly delirious."

"I shall dispel all such ideas as that," said Barncastle, opening the
door and ushering Hopkins into his room. "Pray be seated," he said, "and
do not leave your seat until I request you to."

"I hear and obey," quoted Toppleton, his mind reverting to the Arabian
Tales, the splendour of his surroundings and the generally uncanny
quality of his experience reminding him forcibly of the land of the
Genii.

"I am going to prove to you now," said Barncastle, "that what I have
said about my soul is true. Excuse me for being absent from the room for
just five minutes, and also pardon me if I extinguish the light here.
Darkness is necessary to convince you that what I say is truth; and,
above all, Toppleton, look to your nerves."

Barncastle suited his action to his words. He extinguished the light and
disappeared. In five minutes, during which time Hopkins sat in the inky
darkness alone trying to formulate a plan for future action, a panel in
the wainscot was moved softly to one side and Toppleton found himself
face to face with the fiend.

For a moment he was numb with fear, but when the green shadow moved
toward him and spoke in soft insinuating tones and appeared to fear him
quite as much as he feared it, his courage returned.

"What the deuce is this?" he cried, springing to his feet.

"I am the soul of Barncastle. Barncastle lies prostrate as in death in
the den beyond the wall. I am also the soul of Horace Calderwood who
died forty-five years ago at the age of eighty, whose body lies buried
in the yard of Monckton Chapel, at Kennelly Manor, Kent."

"What is the meaning of it--how--how has it come that you--that you are
here?" cried Hopkins, with well-feigned terror. "What awful power have
you that you can leave your body and appear as you do now?"

"Calm yourself, Toppleton. There is no awful power about it," said the
fiend. "It is a simple enough matter when you understand it. I am simply
an immortal soul with mortal cravings. I love this world. It delights me
to live in this sphere, and it is given to the soul to return here if it
sees fit. That is what makes heaven heaven. The soul is free to do
whatsoever it wills."

"But how is it," said Toppleton, "that this has never happened before?"

"It has happened before. It is happening all the time, only you mortals
never find it out. You want instances? The soul of Macchiavelli returned
to earth and entered the body of a Jew; result, Beaconsfield. The soul
of Cæsar returned to earth and entered the body of a puny Corsican;
result, Bonaparte. The soul of Horace returned to earth and entered the
body of an English boy; therefore, Thackeray. The soul of Diogenes
returned to earth and entered the body of another English boy; result,
Thomas Carlyle. Six souls, those of Terence, Plato, Æsculapius, Cicero,
Cæsar, Chaucer, combined and, returning to earth, took possession of the
body of a wayward child of Warwickshire; whence, Shakespeare."

"And the real souls of these men?" cried Hopkins.

"Became a part of space, and still so remain. How else account for the
evolution of genius? Did you ever know a genius in his infancy?"

"No; I can't say that I ever did," said Toppleton.

"Well, with very rare exceptions geniuses are the stupidest of babies,
or, supposing that in youth they give great promise, the valedictorian
of his college class ends his life oftener than not without distinction,
a third-rate lawyer, perhaps a poor doctor, a prosy clergyman, or as
Mrs. Somebody's husband. The man who is graduated at the foot of his
class has oftener won the laurels than he. How is it accounted for? How
did Keats, son of a stableman, become the sweetest of our sonneteers? In
your own country, how did Lincoln and Grant spring from nothing to
greatness? Was the germ of greatness discoverable in them in their
youth? Would the most reckless of prophets have dared assert that the
heavy tanner's boy would become the immortal hero of the Wilderness, the
saviour of the Republic, the uncrowned ruler of fifty millions of people
even with a thousand years of life to live? I tell you, Toppleton, the
mystery of this life is more mysterious than you think. There are things
happening every minute of the day, every second of the minute, the
knowledge of which would drive a mortal mind--that is, a mind which has
never put on immortality by passing into the other world--to despair."

"But, Barncastle," said Hopkins, his knees growing weak and his blood
running cold, this time in actual terror, "how comes it that I, a
mortal, inspire you, an immortal, with fear, as you claim I have done?"

"There is a point beyond which an immortal mind cannot with safety
indulge in mortal habiliments. Have you never observed how men of
genius outlive their genius? Did Bonaparte die at the height of his
glory? Did Grant die at the zenith of his power?"

"D'Israeli did."

"D'Israeli embodied Macchiavelli, and Macchiavelli made no mistakes. I
have made a mistake. I have lived too long as Barncastle, and every day
beyond the day on which I should have left this body has lessened my
greatness, my power, until I am become as weak as though I had never put
on immortality. It is my craving to be among men, that has been my
weakening, if not my ruin. The love of contact with mankind is as strong
with me as is the love of drink with others. I cannot give it up."

"And the poor soul whose place you took?" said Toppleton.

"Don't speak of him," said the fiend. "I have made his name a great one.
I have suffered more than he in my efforts to lift his personality to a
plane it would never have reached had he been left to go his own way, to
occupy his own person. He is my debtor, Toppleton. I have no feelings of
regret for him. I went to him in a spirit of fairness and honesty, and
offered to make him a famous man. He declined the offer. I assumed the
risk of compelling him, and after the first compulsion he was
acquiescent but not candid. When Horace Calderwood died, and I, his
soul, for the first time learned that it was possible for a spirit to
return to earth and do these things, the idea of depriving a fellow-soul
of material existence was repellent to me, and seemed not to be strictly
honest. He should enjoy, it seemed to me, something more than the
consciousness of his greatness. He should be permitted to taste _in
propriâ personâ_ the delights of fame. And I resolved that I would not
do as these others before me had done, and drive the real spirit of
my,--ah--well, call him my victim if you choose--I resolved that I would
not drive the real spirit of my victim out into space, leaving him to
sigh and bewail his unhappy estate throughout all eternity. My plan was
to go shares. To assume possession only so far as was necessary to
insure the winning of the laurel; to let the other return to his
corporeal estate in hours of leisure. I should have continued of this
mind until to-day had I not had the misfortune to select for my
operations an uncandid person, who had no genius, save that for tearing
down what I was up-building. It became necessary for me to exile him for
ever to save him from himself. He had been made a great man, and had I
deserted him he would have become a conspicuous failure; his name would
have been disgraced in proportion to the greatness it had had thrust
upon it, and the soul of that one would have lived a life of humiliation
and misery. What I did was the humane thing. I exiled him from himself,
and I have no regrets for having done so."

"Well, of course," said Toppleton, "you know more about it than I do,
but it seems to me it's a mighty rough thing to condemn a soul to
perpetual existence on this earth deprived of the only means which can
put him in a position to enjoy that life. If you are not joking with me,
Barncastle, and your present appearance is pretty good proof that you
are not, it seems to me that you have been guilty of a wrong, although
your reasons for believing that you have done right are worthy of
consideration. It strikes me that an omniscient, such as you pretended
to be, ought not to have been bothered by the lack of candour of a
purely finite mind; and, after all, it was but a bit of superb conceit
on your part to think that you could do things differently from those
who had gone before you."

"But my motive, Toppleton. Credit me with a proper motive," pleaded the
fiend.

"Yes, I do," said Hopkins. "But out in the Rocky Mountains, my lord, we
have lynched several thieves who stole to keep their families from
starving. Their motives were all right, but they were suspended just the
same. But let me ask you one question. To what extent do you retain that
remarkable omniscient quality? I want to know, for candidly, much as I
admire you, Barncastle, it rather awes me to think that you can
penetrate to the innermost recesses of my brain--"

"I can no longer do that," said Barncastle. "My power through long
confinement to mortal habitations has materially lessened, as I have
already told you. Do you suppose, my dear sir, that, were it not so, I
should be here, at this moment, unbosoming myself to you, and begging
you in the name of humanity never to utter one word of what has passed
between us? Do you think that I, who was once able to destroy a mortal's
reason by one glance of my eye, would be so overcome by the words of a
mind-reading American poet if I still had the power to subject his will
to mine?"

"No one would believe me were I to tell him your horrible secret," said
Hopkins. "Indeed, I don't know that I believe it myself. There is, of
course plenty of evidence of which I have had ocular demonstration, but
this may be all a dream. I may wake up to-morrow and find myself in my
hammock in Blue-bird Gulch."

"No, it is no dream," said the fiend. "It is all too real, but you will
not expose me, Toppleton. There are those who would believe it, some who
half suspect me even now would gain re-enforcement in their suspicions.
My daughter would be shocked beyond expression and--"

"That, my lord," said Hopkins "is your convincing argument. Lady Alice's
peace of mind must be held inviolate, and I shall be dumb; but I think
you might let the exiled spirit enter once more into bodily life. The
allotted days of the body you have wrested from him must be growing few
in number. Why not atone for the past by admitting him once more?"

"There are two reasons, Toppleton," said Barncastle, fixing his eye with
great intensity upon Hopkins, who maintained his composure with great
difficulty. "In the first place, there are responsibilities which still
devolve upon the Lord of Burningford which he would be utterly unable to
assume. You might assume them, for you are a clever man. You have the
making of a brilliant man in you, but he has not, and never will have.
He is the most pusillanimous soul in the universe, and with him in
charge, that body would die in less than six months. In the second place
I have lost sight of him of late years, or rather lost consciousness of
him, for he has been visible at no time since he departed from his
normal condition, and since the day of my marriage, whose happiness he
made a mad public endeavour to destroy, I have had no dealings with him.
Where he is now, I have not the slightest idea."

"Well, I know!" ejaculated Toppleton, forgetting himself and throwing
caution to the winds.

"You know what? Where he is?" returned the fiend, with a look that
restored Toppleton's senses and showed him that he had made a mistake.

"Oh, no!" he replied, his face getting red with confusion. "Oh, no, not
that. You interrupted me. I was going to say that I know--er--I know how
difficult your--er--your position is in the matter, and--er--that I
hardly knew what to advise."

"Ah!" returned the fiend, with a smile that to Toppleton's eyes
betokened relief. "You have taken a load off my mind. Do you know, my
dear fellow, that for one instant I half believed that you really knew
of the original Chatford's whereabouts, and that perhaps you were in
league with him against me. I see, however, how unfounded the impression
was."

"How could you suspect me of that?" said Toppleton, reproachfully, his
heart beating wildly at the narrowness of the escape. "But you don't
intend to let him back?"

"Not if I can help myself, Toppleton," said the fiend. "I shall hang on
here as long as I can, not only for my own sake and for that of my
daughter, but also for the peace of mind of the exiled soul. You will
respect my confidence, will you not?"

"I shall, Barncastle. You may count on me," said Toppleton.

"Good. Now I will resume the mortal habitation for which I have so long
been a trustee, and we can rejoin the ladies."

Ten minutes later Barncastle and the Poet of the Rockies entered the
drawing-room.

"Did you enjoy your walk, Mr. Toppleton?" queried Lady Alice.

"Well, I guess!" returned Toppleton. "Your father has one of the finest
estates I have ever seen since I left Colorado, and as for your moon, it
fairly out-moons any moon I've seen in the Rockies in all my life."

"It's the same moon that everybody else has," said the Duchess of
Bangletop with a smile.

"Yes, Duchess," returned Toppleton, sitting beside her. "But you've
furnished it better than we have. That Barbundle River gives it a
setting beside which the creek in Blue-bird Gulch is as a plate-glass
window to a sea of diamonds."




CHAPTER XVI.

MR. HOPKINS TOPPLETON MAKES A DISCOVERY.


IT is hardly to be wondered at that Toppleton did not sleep much that
night at Barncastle Hall. The state of his nerves was not calculated to
permit him to sleep even had he been willing to do so. The experiences
of the day were not of a nature to give him such confidence in his
surroundings as would have enabled him to woo rest with a serene sense
of safety. Furthermore, it was his desire to push his endeavour through
to as immediate a conclusion as was possible, and time was too precious
to waste in rest. Hence it was that the dawning of another day found him
utterly fagged out, awake, and still meditating upon the means most
likely to crown his efforts with success.

"I am afraid," he said, as he turned the matter over and over in his
mind, "I am afraid it's going to be a harder task than I thought. My
plan has worked admirably up to a certain point, but there it has ceased
to result as I had anticipated. He is frightened, that is certain; but
he cannot be frightened into a restitution. He is too selfish to give up
Chatford's body and take his chances of getting another, and his rather
natural distrust of Chatford's ability to sustain the greatness of the
name of Barncastle re-enforces his selfishness. I can't blame him
either. I haven't a doubt that Chatford's spirit would prove too weak to
keep the body going a year at the outside, and yet it is his, and he
ought to have it. He ought to--have--"

Here wearied Nature asserted herself, and Hopkins' head dropped back on
the soft cushion of his couch, and he lost consciousness in a sleep that
knew no dreams.

The morning hours passed away and still he slept. Afternoon gave place
to night, and as the moon rose over the Barbundle and bathed the
beautiful scene as with silver, Hopkins opened his eyes again and looked
about him. He was annoyed to find that his vision had in some manner
become slightly obscured; he seemed to see everything through a faint
suggestion of a haze, and an object ten feet distant that he remembered
admiring as he lay on his couch the afternoon before, its every detail
clear cut and distinct to the eye, was now a confused jumble of lines
only, suggestive of nothing in particular, though the moonlight
streaming in through the window shone directly upon it.

"Dear me!" he said, passing his hands over his eyes as if to sweep away
the filmy web that interfered with his sight. "I seem to have a slight
vertigo, and yet I cannot understand why I should. I hardly drank
anything last night, and as for what I ate it was simplicity itself. But
I wonder how long I have been asleep; let me see." Here he consulted his
watch, the great silver timepiece he had brought with him.

"Humph," he said; "half-past seven. I must have slept nearly thirteen
hours; unlucky number that. No wonder I have vertigo."

He rose from the couch and walked, or rather tottered, to the window to
look out upon the beautifully serene Barbundle.

"Mercy! How weak I am!" he cried, grasping the sill for support. "This
trouble seems to have gone to my knees as well. I can hardly stand,
and--ow--there is a touch of rheumatism in my right arm! I shall have to
ring for Parker to bring me a little resolution in the form of a stiff
horn of whiskey. These old English homes I'm afraid are a little damp."

He touched the bell at the side of the doorway and staggered back to the
couch, falling upon it in a heap in sheer weakness, and as he did so he
again became conscious of someone gazing at him from the other side of
the room, and as he looked, the fiend in his emerald disembodiment took
shape and approached him.

"Ah, Barncastle," said Toppleton, to whom custom had rendered the
fiend's appearance less terrible. "I am glad to see you. I'm afraid I am
ill. I have the most unaccountable weakness in my knees. My eyesight
seems to have grown dim, and I am conscious of my head which is really a
new sensation to me. I wish you'd send your butler up here with some
whiskey."

"All right, I'll send him," returned the fiend with, or so it seemed to
Toppleton, a lack of friendly interest in his tone which rather
surprised him, for Barncastle had hitherto been the quintessence of
politeness. "I fancy you'll be better in the morning; and between you
and me I'd let whiskey alone. Brandy and soda is my drink, and I think
it will do you more good in your present state than whiskey."

"Very well, Barncastle," Hopkins began.

"Don't call me Barncastle," returned the fiend, impatiently. "Your
discovery of my secret has made all that intolerable to me, and I intend
hereafter to spend as little of my time in that form as is consistent
with propriety. I did not realize until you came here how long
confinement within anatomical limits had weakened my powers, and to find
myself at this period of my existence almost, if not quite, as
incompetent to meet the grave crises of life as any mortal, is galling
in the extreme. Call me anything you please, but drop Barncastle."

"Very well," again replied Toppleton. "I will call you my friend
Greene."

"Humorous to the last, Toppleton," laughed the fiend. "That's a truly
American characteristic. I believe you'll jest with your dying breath."

"Quite likely," said Hopkins, lightly. "That is if I ever draw it."

"Ah! Have you discovered an Elixir of Life, then?" queried the fiend.

"Not yet," returned Hopkins. "But I am sure I cannot see why, with your
assistance, I should not do so. If you know all the secrets of the
universe, I think you might confide at least one of them to me, and the
only one I ask is, what shall I do to live for ever?"

"You are an insinuating young man," returned the fiend. "And I must say
I like you, Toppleton, in spite of your abominable poetry, for now I am
going to be candid with you."

"So much, then, is gained," said Hopkins, cheerfully. "If you like me,
give me the recipe of life."

"I would, my boy," the fiend replied with a harsh laugh, "I would do it
gladly, if I hadn't forgotten it. Some day I shall take a day off from
these mundane operations of mine, and return to the spirit vale and
freshen up my formulæ. Then perhaps I can help you. But I have something
very important to say to you, and if you will come with me to my own
quarters I will say it. This room is too chilly for a spirit with
nothing on."

Toppleton readily acquiesced. His other sensations had been so acute
since his awakening, that he did not realize until the fiend spoke of
the chill in the atmosphere that he was himself cold to the very marrow
of his bones; that his blood seemed hardly to run in his veins, so
congealed had it become. He followed the fiend, who led the way from
Toppleton's room to Barncastle's own quarters, where a log fire blazed
fiercely on the hearth. There was no other light than that of the fire
in the room, and Hopkins was glad of it, his eyes were too weary for any
illumination save the one which made the darkness in which he now sat
even blacker than was natural.

"Lie down there on my bed, Toppleton," said the fiend. "Lie down and
listen to me."

Toppleton obeyed, and gladly.

"You are a sick man," began the fiend, "though you may not know it. You
have no more than an even chance of living beyond this night. If you do
live until to-morrow morning I see no reason why you should not continue
to do so for many years to come; in fact I confidently anticipate that
such will be the case, but you have got to be careful."

"If you were not one of the supernatural element, Mr. Greene," said
Toppleton, nervously tapping his fingers together, "I should be inclined
to laugh at your notions respecting my health. A man of my habits and
physique doesn't go to pieces after a single late supper, to be brought
up standing at the doors of death uncertain as to whether he will be
invited in or requested to move on, all in a single night."

"For an acute man you are an obtuse sort of a person," returned the
fiend, gravely. "I do not mean that you are in immediate danger of
physical collapse, though that will come shortly unless you take care of
yourself. It is a worse than physical death that I refer to. You are on
the verge of intellectual death, Toppleton. You need twenty-four hours
of wakefulness to put you in an insane asylum, an incurable, hopelessly
mad for the balance of your days. You remarked a moment since that you
were conscious of your head. By that you meant that you felt the weight
of it, and it is a leaden weight unless my eyes deceive me. I have
experienced it, and I know what it means."

Hopkins' face blanched as the fiend spoke. It was too easy for him to
believe all that had been said; and why should it not be so, he asked
himself. Here was a case of mortal arrayed in combat against a
supernatural being, and in the nature of things it was a contest of the
intellectuals and not one of the sort in which Toppleton's training
would have made him an easy victor. In a bout at arms Barncastle would
have been a prey to Toppleton with scarce an effort on the American's
part, but mind for mind, the young lawyer was fighting against terrible
odds. He had proven to a very considerable extent a winner, and yet his
victory was quite as hollow as the victory of a trotting horse who has
won only the preliminary heats and still has the final test to undergo;
but to win even the trial heat was a great thing, and that his mind
should be well-nigh used up was to have been expected. Realizing this,
and realizing also that it was his defeated adversary who was advising
him as to what was necessary to be done for the preservation of his
sanity, he was quite overcome. He nearly fainted, in fact he would have
done so had not the fiend seeing his condition applied restoratives to
his head and feet, and poured between his open lips a concoction which
made every drop of blood in his body glow as with health, which imparted
strength to his weary limbs, and which seemed to clear his aching head
with its magical potence.

"You have had a narrow escape, my dear fellow," said the fiend, as
Hopkins revived. "If I hadn't saved you, you would have stepped over the
line."

"You--are--very--very kind," murmured Hopkins, raising himself on his
elbow and then dropping wearily back into the pillows again. "You place
me under very deep obli--"

"Don't speak of that," said the fiend with a smile. "The obligation you
have placed me under is still greater. But now, Toppleton, you must
sleep, or you will be beyond all hope to-morrow."

"I will," said Toppleton, faintly, and then he closed his eyes and
consciousness departed from him.

The fiend regarded him for a moment and turned away with a sigh.

"If I had had the good fortune to operate on you instead of upon
Chatford," he said, "well, there'd have been a president of the United
States in your family by this time, or, better still, a railway king
with an amount of brains equal to the possessions of the best of them.
Oh, well! he wasn't to be had, and I haven't done badly with Chatford."

With which reflection the fiend passed from the room, and left Toppleton
breathing heavily in sleep.

When next Toppleton opened his eyes consciously to himself, he was lying
on a great oak bed with a tapestry canopy over his head. The sun was
streaming in through the broad mullioned windows. The world without was
white with snow, the tall evergreens down by the now ice-covered
Barbundle presenting the only vestige of green in sight.

"Ah!" he sighed, as he looked wearily out of the window. "We shall have
a white Christmas after all, but," he added, gazing about him, "how the
dickens did I ever come to be here, I wonder? In Barncastle's own
room--oh, yes, I remember. I fell asleep here last night and I suppose
he has--Hello!--Who's that?"

The last words were addressed to whomsoever it was that entered the room
at the moment, for the door had opened and closed softly.

"It is I," came a soft, sweet voice, and before Hopkins had time to
place it, Lady Alice entered the room.

"Good morning!" said Toppleton, slightly embarrassed at the unexpected
appearance of his hostess.

"Good morning!" she replied, coming to his side and stroking his
forehead lightly. "And I can say with all my heart, after these awful
days of suspense, that it is a good morning. You have been very ill."

"Oh, it was nothing," said Hopkins, endeavouring to conceal his surprise
at the way things were going. "Only a little headache and rackety
feeling generally. It will pass off. Barncastle was very good to let me
have his quarters."

Lady Alice's face took on a troubled look.

"How beautiful it is out," said Toppleton, turning his eyes toward the
snow-clad landscape again. "I was just thinking that we should have a
white Christmas after all."

"Why, my dear, Christmas is over by two weeks. You have been ill here
for three weeks yesterday."

"What?" cried Toppleton. "I?"

"Why, certainly," said Lady Alice. "Of course, you didn't know it, but
it is so. You haven't had a lucid moment in all that time."

A sudden fear clutched at Toppleton's heart.

"But--but tell me, have I--what do--what have the doctors said--that I
had lost my mind, was in danger of a living death; that--"

"Don't get so excited," returned Lady Alice, softly, still retaining the
look of anxiety on her face. "Here, read this. It is a letter from your
Rocky Mountain friend, I think, and I fancy it will amuse you. It has
only just come."

"My Rocky Mountain friend!" ejaculated Hopkins under his breath. "What
devilish complication does this mean, I wonder?"

"Shall I open it for you?" asked Lady Alice.

"Yes," said Hopkins mechanically; "I'll be very much obliged to you if
you will do so. Thank you," he added, staring wildly at the foot of the
bed as the young woman opened and handed him the letter.

"While you are reading it," said she, "I'll run downstairs a moment, and
tell Parker to prepare you a little breakfast."

"You are very kind," said Toppleton, faintly; and then as Lady Alice
went softly from the room he began to read the letter. "'17, The Temple,
London, January 2nd. My dear Barncastle--' Why, she must have made a
mistake," he said; "this is for Barn--by Jove! it's in my handwriting,
and signed--Hopkins--Top--ple--ton. What in the name of Heav--"

Here he ceased his soliloquizing and began to read the letter which was
as follows:--

          "MY DEAR BARNCASTLE,--I understood your game from
          the beginning. It was audacious, but unavailing,
          as the attack of a finite upon an infinite mind
          must always be. I led you on to your own undoing
          if you so regard it. I removed gladly every
          obstacle from your path, and let you think in your
          own conceit that you were an easy victor in the
          fight. By so doing I put your caution asleep, and
          when your caution slept you became a victim to my
          ambition just as did Chatford, with this
          exception, that I have left you in a position to
          enjoy life, while circumstances made it necessary
          for me to place him in perpetual exile. Perhaps
          when you get this letter and realize what I have
          done, you will curse me. Do not do so. You are not
          a loser in the premises. You have gained the
          Burningford estates, you have gained the enjoyment
          of the honours which I have won, at the expense of
          the difference of strength between the body I have
          put off and this one of yours which I now occupy.
          The latter, let me say to you, is a superb
          specimen, the ideal habitation for a soul like
          mine. Aided by it a still greater future than the
          one, to be paradoxical, I have left behind me,
          will be mine, and not mine only, but yours also,
          since it is under your name that my future
          greatness is to be achieved. I repeat, do not
          curse me, for in cursing me you but curse
          yourself, and when you get over the first
          sensation of horror at the changes I have wrought
          in our respective destinies, and can think upon it
          calmly and dispassionately, you will not find me
          so much to blame. Nor are you to be deprived of
          any of your years by my act. The infusion of a
          younger spirit into the corse of Barncastle will
          make it young again, and gradually you will
          recover the physical ground you now seem to have
          lost.

          "I sail for New York on the _City of Paris_
          to-morrow, and you may rest assured that the name
          that now flies at the mast-head in the firm of
          Toppleton, Morley, Bronson, Mawson, Perkins,
          Harkins, Smithers and Hicks will no longer be a
          mere figurehead, a minimum among maxima; it will
          become once more what it used to be, a tower of
          strength in the legal profession, and, permit me
          to say, a tower of such height that beside it the
          famous structure erected by your illustrious
          father will become but as an ant hill to the
          pyramid of Cheops.

          "Good-bye, Barncastle, for that is now your name.
          In the years to come we may meet again, and when
          we do, may it be in friendship, for as Barncastle
          I loved myself, and as Toppleton I love you. May
          you go and do likewise, and above all, give up
          masquerading as a Broncho poet, and get down to
          the business for which you were fitted by nature,
          if not by birth: that of a member of the noblest
          aristocracy in the world; that of a peer of the
          British realm.

                         "Faithfully yours,
                   "HOPKINS TOPPLETON, _alias_ BARNCASTLE,
                               "_Né_ CALDERWOOD.

          "P.S.--I have had an interview with the original
          Chatford, and have informed him that it is
          impossible for him to return to his former
          corporeal state, because Barncastle no longer
          knows the formula by which the re-entrance can be
          effected, which is true. He believes it, and has
          gone off into space with his whistle and his
          sigh."

For a moment Toppleton was overcome. This unexpected denouement was
almost too much for him, but the indignation that surged up in his
breast gave him strength to withstand the shock; and then, singular to
relate, he laughed.

"To think that I should be born a Yankee and at my time of life become a
peer surrounded by everything that wealth can procure, and loaded down
with every honour that man can devise; oh, nonsense! it's all a joke,
and a good one. Barncastle saw through my trick, and is paying me back
in my own coin."

Here Hopkins laughed till the room echoed with his mirth, and as his
laugh died away the door opened and the heiress of Burningford entered.

"Why, father!" she cried, exultantly, "do you feel as well--"

At the word "father," Hopkins' heart gave a great throb.

"My dear," he said in a moment, "I have been ill you say for three
weeks, and with no lucid intervals?"

"Yes."

"And my hallucination was what?"

"That you were that ridiculous American poet."

"Bring me the glass, my child," said Hopkins, gravely. "I--I'd just like
to see my face in the mirror."

The glass was brought and Hopkins looked into it. The face of Barncastle
in very truth gazed back at him from its silver depths.

"Ah!" he said. "I have changed; have I not?"

"Yes, indeed," said the Lady of Burningford. "But really I think your
illness has done you good, for I do believe you look ten years younger."

"It is well," said the new Barncastle, with a sigh of resignation. "I
have worked too hard. I shall now retire from public life and devote my
remaining years to--to the accomplishment of my one great ambition."

"And what is that?" asked his daughter.

"To becoming a leader in the busy world of leisure, my child," said
Toppleton, falling back to his pillow once more, and again losing
consciousness in sleep.

This time fortunately the sleep was that of one who had fought a good
fight, had lost, but whose conscience was clear; and to whom, after many
days, had been restored a sound mind in a body sound enough to last
through many years of unremitting rest.




CHAPTER XVII.

EPILOGUE.


A SINGLE year has passed since the episode which brought our last
chapter to a close.

The new Barncastle of Burningford is well and happy in the paths of
pleasantness and peace, into which he was so unexpectedly and so
unwittingly brought. His daughter has become engaged to a promising
scion of a neighbouring house of large means and high estate in the
social world. Hopkins Toppleton is in New York, busy at the practice of
the law, developing a genius in the profession he had adopted for the
convenience of his partners at which they stand amazed; steadily forging
his way to the front, his energy, his aggressiveness, and extraordinary
fertility of resource dazzling all beholders.

As for the weary spirit,--alas for him! He still whistles, wearily,
through space, hopeless and forlorn, but at all times a welcome visitor
to Burningford, whither he personally went, shortly after Toppleton's
departure for New York, to lay his petition at the feet of Barncastle
himself. He knows now what has happened to his young counsel, and his
regret for himself is tempered by his regret for what he has brought
upon him who so nobly undertook to champion his cause, for the quondam
Toppleton has concealed from his first client the happiness that he
feels over the strange metamorphosis in his fortunes, lest, comparing it
with his own miserable condition, the exile may become more unhappy than
ever.


THE END.




THE GENIAL IDIOT

I

HE DISCUSSES MAXIMS AND PROVERBS


"Good!" cried the Idiot, from behind the voluminous folds of the
magazine section of his Sunday newspaper. "Here's a man after my own
heart. Professor Duff, of Glasgow University, has come out with a public
statement that the maxims and proverbs of our forefathers are largely
hocus-pocus and buncombe. I've always maintained that myself from the
moment I had my first copy-book lesson in which I had to scrawl the
line, 'It's a long lane that has no turning,' twenty-four times. And
then that other absurd statement, 'A stitch in the side is worth two in
the hand'--or something like it--I forget just how it goes--what
Tommy-rot that is."

"Well, I don't know about that, Mr. Idiot," said Mr. Whitechoker,
tapping his fingers together reflectively. "Certain great moral
principles are instilled into the minds of the young by the old proverbs
and maxims that remain with them forever, and become a potent influence
in the formation of character."

"I should like to agree with you, but I can't," said the Idiot. "I don't
believe anything that is noble in the way of character was ever fostered
by such a statement as that it's a long lane that has no turning. In the
first place, it isn't necessarily true. I know a lane on my
grandfather's farm that led from the hen-coop to the barn. There wasn't
a turn nor a twist in it, and I know by actual measurement that it
wasn't sixty feet long. You've got just as much right to say to a boy
that it's a long nose that has no twisting, or a long leg that has no
pulling, or a long courtship that has no kissing. There's infinitely
more truth in those last two than in the original model. The leg that's
never pulled doesn't go short in a stringent financial market, and a
courtship without a kiss, even if it lasted only five minutes, would be
too long for any self-respecting lover."

"I never thought of it in that way," said Mr. Whitechoker. "Perhaps,
after all, the idea is ill-expressed in the original."

"Perfectly correct," said the Idiot. "But even then, what? Suppose they
had put the thing right in the beginning and said 'it's a long lane that
has no ending.' What's the use of putting a thing like that in a
copy-book? A boy who didn't know that without being told ought to be
spanked and put to bed. Why not tell him it's a long well that has no
bottom, or a long dog that has no wagging, or a long railroad that has
no terminal facilities?"

"Oh, well," interposed the Bibliomaniac, "what's the use of being
captious? Out of a billion and a half wise saws you pick out one to jump
on. Because one is weak, all the rest must come down with a crash."

"There are plenty of others, and the way they refute one another is to
me a constant source of delight," said the Idiot. "There's
'Procrastination is the thief of time,' for instance. That's a clear
injunction to youth to get up and hustle, and he starts in with all the
impulsiveness of youth, and the first thing he knows--bang! he runs slap
into 'Look before you leap,' or 'Second thoughts are best.' That last is
what Samuel Johnson would have called a beaut. What superior claims the
second thought has over the first or the seventy-seventh thought, that
it should become axiomatic, I vow I can't see. If it's morality you're
after I am dead against the teachings of that proverb. The second
thought is the open door to duplicity when it comes to a question of
morals. You ask a small boy, who has been in swimming when he ought to
have been at Sunday-school, why his shirt is wet. His first thought is
naturally to reply along the line of fact and say, 'Why, because it fell
into the pond.' But second thought comes along with visions of hard
spanking and a supperless bed in store for him, and suggests the idea
that 'There was a leak in the Sunday-school roof right over the place
where I was sitting,' or, 'I sat down on the teacher's glass of water.'
That's the sort of thing second thought does in the matter of morals.

"I admit, of course, that there are times when second thoughts are
better than first ones--for instance, if your first thought is to name
the baby Jimmie and Jimmie turns out to be a girl, it is better to obey
your second thought and call her Gladys or Samantha--but it is not
always so, and I object to the nerve of the broad, general statement
that it _is_ so. Sometimes fifth thoughts are best. In science I guess
you'll find that the man who thinks the seven hundred and ninety-seventh
thought along certain lines has got the last and best end of it. And so
it goes--out of the infinitesimal number of numbers, every mother's son
of 'em may at the psychological moment have a claim to the supremacy,
but your self-sufficient old proverb-maker falls back behind the
impenetrable wall of his own conceit, and announces that because he has
nothing but second-hand thoughts, therefore the second thought is best,
and we, like a flock of sheep, follow this leader, and go blatting that
sentiment down through the ages as if it were proved beyond peradventure
by the sum total of human experience."

"Well, you needn't get mad about it," said the Lawyer. "I never said
it--so you can't blame me."

"Still, there are some proverbs," said Mr. Whitechoker, blandly, "that
we may not so summarily dismiss. Take, for instance, 'You never miss the
water till the well runs dry.'"

"One of the worst of the lot, Mr. Whitechoker," said the Idiot. "I've
missed the water lots of times when the well was full as ever. You miss
the water when the pipes freeze up, don't you? You--or rather I--I
sometimes miss the water like time at five o'clock in the morning after
a pleasant evening with some jovial friends, when there's no end of it
in the well, but not a drop within reach of my fevered hand, and I
haven't the energy to grope my way down-stairs to the ice-pitcher.
There's more water in that proverb than tangible assets. From the
standpoint of veracity that's one of the most immoral proverbs of the
lot--and if you came to apply it to the business world--oh, Lud! As a
rule, these days, you never _find_ the water till the well has been
pumped dry and put in the hands of a receiver for the benefit of the
bond-holders. Fact is, all these water proverbs are to be regarded with
suspicion."

"I don't recall any other," said Mr. Whitechoker.

"Well," said the Idiot, "there's one, and it's the nerviest of 'em
all--'Water never runs up hill.' Ask any man in Wall Street how high the
water has run up in the last five years and see what he tells you. And
then, 'You may drive a horse to water, but you cannot make him drink,'
is another choice specimen of the Waterbury School of Philosophy. I know
a lot of human horses who have been driven to water lately, and such
drinkers as they have become! It's really awful. If I knew the name of
that particular Maximilian who invented those water proverbs I'd do my
best to have him indicted for doing business without a license."

"It's very unfortunate," said Mr. Whitechoker, "that modern conditions
should so have upset the wisdom of the ancients."

"It is too bad," said the Idiot. "And I am just as sorry about it as you
are; but, after all, the wisdom of the ancients, wise and wisdomatic as
it was, should not be permitted to put at nought all modern thought. Why
not adapt the wisdom of the ancients to modern conditions? You can't
begin too soon, for new generations are constantly springing up, and I
know of no better outlet for reform than in these self-same Spencerian
proverbs which the poor kids have to copy, copy, copy, until they are
sick and tired of them. Now, in the writing-lessons, why not adapt your
means to your ends? Why make a beginner in penmanship write over and
over again, 'A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush?'--which it
isn't, by-the-way, to a man who is a good shot--when you can bear in on
his mind that 'A dot on the I is worth two on the T'; or, for the
instruction of your school-teachers, why don't you get up a proverb like
'It's a long lesson that has no learning'? Or if you are interested in
having your boy brought up to the strenuous life, why don't you have him
make sixty copies of the aphorism, 'A punch in the solar is worth six on
the nose?' You tell your children never to whistle until they are out of
the woods. Now, where in the name of all that's lovely should a boy
whistle if not in the woods? That's where birds whistle. That's where
the wind whistles. If nature whistles anywhere, it is in the woods.
Woods were made for whistling, and any man who ever sat over a big
log-fire in camp or in library who has not noticed that the logs
themselves whistle constantly--well, he is a pachyderm."

"Well, as far as I can reach a conclusion from all that you have said,"
put in Mr. Whitechoker, "the point seems to be that the proverbs of the
ancients are not suited to modern conditions, and that you think they
should be revised."

"Exactly," said the Idiot.

"It's a splendid idea," said Mr. Brief. "But, after all, you've got to
have something to begin on. Possibly," he added, with a wink at the
Bibliomaniac, "you have a few concrete examples to show us what can be
done."

"Certainly," said the Idiot. "Here is a list of them."

And as he rose up to depart he handed Mr. Brief a paper on which he had
written as follows:

"You never find the water till the stock falls off twenty points."

"A stitch in time saves nothing at all at present tailors' rates."

"You look after the pennies. Somebody else will deposit the pounds."

"It's a long heiress that knows no yearning."

"Second thoughts are always second."

"Procrastination is the theme of gossips."

"Never put off to-day what you can put on day after to-morrow."

"Sufficient unto the day are the obligations of last month."

"One good swat deserves another."

       *       *       *       *       *

"By Jove!" said Mr. Brief, as he read them off, "you can't go back on
any of 'em, can you?"

"No," said the Bibliomaniac; "that's the great trouble with the Idiot.
Even with all his idiocy he is not always a perfect idiot."




II

HE DISCUSSES THE IDEAL HUSBAND


"Well, I see the Ideal Husband has broken out again," said the Idiot,
after reading a short essay on that interesting but rare individual by
Gladys Waterbury Shrivelton of the Woman's Page of the Squehawkett
_Gazoo_. "I'd hoped they had him locked up for good, he's been so little
in evidence of late years."

"Why should you wish so estimable an individual to be locked up?"
demanded Mr. Pedagog, who, somehow or other, seemed to take the Idiot's
suggestion as personal.

"To keep his idealness from being shattered," said the Idiot. "Nothing
against the gentleman himself, I can assure you. It would be a pity, I
think, once you have really found an Ideal Husband, to subject him to
the coarse influences of the world; to let him go forth into the madding
crowd and have the sweet idyllic bloom rubbed off by the attritions of
the vulgar. I feel about the Ideal Husband just as I do about a
beautiful peachblow vase which is too fragile, too delicate to be
brought into contact with the ordinary earthen-ware of society. The
earthen-ware isn't harmed by bumping into the peachblow, but the
peachblow will inevitably turn up with a crack here and a nick there and
a hole somewhere else after such an encounter. If I were a woman and
suddenly discovered that I had an Ideal Husband, I think at my personal
sacrifice I'd present him to the Metropolitan Museum of Art or immure
him in some other retreat where his perfection would remain forever
secure--say, up among the Egyptian mummies of the British Museum. We
cannot be too careful, Mr. Pedagog, of these rarely beautiful things
that are now and again vouchsafed to us."

"What is an Ideal Husband, anyhow?" asked Mr. Brief. "Has the recipe
for such an individual at last been discovered?"

"Yes," put in Mrs. Pedagog, before the Idiot had a chance to reply, and
here the dear old landlady fixed her eyes firmly and affectionately upon
her spouse, the school-master. "I can tell you the recipe for the Ideal
Husband. Years, sixty-three--"

"Sixty-two, my dear," smiled Mr. Pedagog, "and--er--a fraction--verging
on sixty-three."

"Years, verging on sixty-three," said Mrs. Pedagog, accepting the
correction. "Character developed by time and made secure. Eyes, blue;
disposition when vexed, vexatious; disposition when pleased, happy;
irritable from just cause; considerate always; calm exterior, heart of
gold; prompt in anger and quick in forgiveness; and only one old woman
in the world for him."

"A trifle bald-headed, but a true friend when needed, eh?" said the
Idiot.

"I try to be," said Mr. Pedagog, pleasantly complacent.

"Well, you succeed in both," said the Idiot.

"For your trifling baldness is evident when you remove your hat, which,
like a true gentleman, you never fail to do at the breakfast-table, and,
after a fifteen years' experience with you, I for one can say that I
have found you always the true friend when I needed you--I never told
how, without my solicitation and entirely upon your own initiative, you
once loaned me the money to pay Mrs. Pedagog's bill over which she was
becoming anxious."

"John," cried Mrs. Pedagog, severely, "did you ever do that?"

"Well, my dear--er--only once, you know, and you were so relieved--"
began Mr. Pedagog.

"You should have lent the money to me, John," said Mrs. Pedagog, "and
then I should not have been compelled to dun the Idiot."

"I know, my dear, but you see I knew the Idiot would pay me back, and
perhaps--well, only perhaps, my love--you might not have thought of it,"
explained the school-master, with a slight show of embarrassment.

"The Ideal Husband is ever truthful, too," said the landlady, with a
smile as broad as any.

"Well, it's too bad, I think," said the Lawyer, "that a man has to be
verging on sixty-three to be an Ideal Husband. I'm only forty-four, and
I should hate to think that if I should happen to get married within the
next two or three years my wife would have to wait at least fifteen
years before she could find me all that I ought to be. Moreover, I have
been told that I have black eyes."

"With the unerring precision of a trained legal mind," said the Idiot,
"you have unwittingly put your finger on the crux of the whole matter,
Mr. Brief. Mrs. Pedagog has been describing _her_ Ideal Husband, and I
am delighted to know that what I have always suspected to be the case is
in fact the truth: that _her_ husband in her eyes is an ideal one.
That's the way it ought to be, and that is why we have always found her
the sweetest of landladies, but because Mrs. Pedagog prefers Mr. Pedagog
in this race for supremacy in the domain of a woman's heart is no
reason why you who are only bald-headed in your temper, like most of us,
should not prove to be equally the ideal of some other woman--in fact,
of several others. Women are not all alike. As a matter of fact, a
gentleman named Balzac, who was the Marie Corelli of his age in France,
once committed himself to the inference that no two women ever were
alike, so that, if you grant the truth of old Balzac's inference, the
Ideal Husband will probably vary to the extent of the latest count of
the number of women in the world. So why give up hope because you are
only forty-nine?"

"Forty-four," corrected the Lawyer.

"Pardon me--forty-four," said the Idiot. "When you are in the roaring
forties, five or six years more or less do not really count. Lots of men
who are really only forty-two behave like sixty, and I know one old
duffer of forty-nine who has the manners of eighteen. The age question
does not really count."

"No--you are proof of that," said the Bibliomaniac. "You have been
twenty-four years old for the last fifteen years."

"Thank you, Mr. Bib," said the Idiot. "You are one of the few people in
the world who really understand me. I have tried to be twenty-four for
the past fifteen years, and if I have succeeded, so much the better for
me. It's a beautiful age. You feel that you know so much when you're
twenty-four. If it should turn out to be the answer to 'How old is Ann?'
the lady should be congratulated. But, as a matter of fact, you can be
an Ideal Husband at any old age."

"Humph! At seven, for instance?" drawled Mr. Brief.

"Seven is not any old age," retorted the Idiot. "It is a very certain
old youth. Nor does it depend upon the color of the eyes, so long as
they are neither green nor red. Nobody could ever make an Ideal Husband
out of a green-eyed man, or a chap given to the red eye, either--"

"It all depends upon the kind of a man you are, eh?" said the
Bibliomaniac.

"Not a bit of it," said the Idiot. "It depends on the kind of wife
you've got, and that's why I say that the Ideal Husband varies to the
extent of the latest count of the women in the world. Take the case of
Mr. Pedagog here. Mrs. Pedagog accuses him of being an Ideal Husband,
and he, without any attempt at evasion, acknowledges the corn, like the
honorable gentleman he is. But can you imagine Mr. Pedagog being an
Ideal Husband to some lady in the Four Hundred, with a taste for grand
opera that strikes only on the box; with a love for Paris gowns that are
worth a fortune; with the midnight supper and cotillion after habit
firmly intrenched in her character; with an ambition to shine all summer
at Newport, all autumn at Lenox, all winter at New York, with a dash to
England and France in the merry, merry springtime? Do you suppose our
friend John Pedagog here would be in it with Tommie Goldilocks Van
Varick as the Ideal Husband of such a woman? Not on your life. Well,
then, take Tommie Goldilocks Van Varick, who'd be the Ideal Spouse of
this brilliant social light Mrs. Van Varick. How would he suit Mrs.
Pedagog, rising at eleven-thirty every day and yelling like mad for the
little blue bottle which clears the head from the left-over cobwebs of
yesterday; eating his egg and drinking his coffee with a furrow in his
brow almost as deep as the pallor of his cheek, and now and then making
a most awful grimace because the interior of his mouth feels like a
bargain day at the fur-counter of a department store; spending his
afternoon sitting in the window of the Hunky Dory Club ogling the
passers-by and making bets on such important questions as whether more
hansoms pass up the Avenue than down, or whether the proportion of
red-haired girls to white horses is as great between three and four
P.M. as between five and six--"

"I don't see how a woman could stand a man like that," said Mrs.
Pedagog. "Indeed, I don't see where his ideal qualities come in, anyhow,
Mr. Idiot. I think you are wrong in putting him among the Ideal Husbands
even for Mrs. Van Varick."

"No, I am not wrong, for he is indeed the very essence of her ideal
because he doesn't make her stand him," said the Idiot. "He never
bothers Mrs. Van Varick at all. On the first of every month he sends her
a check for a good round sum with which she can pay her bills. He
presents her with a town house and a country house, and a Limousine car,
and all the furs she can possibly want; provides her with an opera-box,
and never fails, when he himself goes to the opera, to call upon her and
pay his respects like a gentleman. If she sustains heavy losses at
bridge, he makes them good, and when she gives a dinner to her set, or
to some distinguished social lion from other zoos, Van Varick is always
on hand to do the honors of his house, and what is supposed to be his
table. He and Mrs. Van Varick are on the most excellent terms; in fact,
he treats her with more respect than he does any other woman he knows,
never even suggesting the idea of a flirtation with her. In other words,
he does not interfere with her in any way, which is the only kind of
man in the world she could be happy with."

"It's perfectly awful!" cried Mrs. Pedagog. "If they never see each
other, what on earth did they ever get married for?"

"Protection," said the Idiot. "And it is perfectly splendid in its
results. Mrs. Van Varick, being married to so considerate an absentee,
is able to go about very much as she pleases backed with the influence
and affluence of the Van Varick name. This as plain little Miss Floyd
Poselthwaite she was unable to do. She has now an assured position, and
is protected against the chance of marrying a man who, unlike Van
Varick, would growl at her expenditures, object to her friends, and
insist upon coming home to dinner every night, and occasionally turn up
at breakfast."

"Sweet life," said the Bibliomaniac. "And what does the Willieboy
husband get out of it?"

"Pride, protection, and freedom," said the Idiot. "He's as proud as
Punch when he sees Mrs. Van V. swelling about town with her name kept
as standing matter in every society column in the country. His freedom
he enjoys, just as she enjoys hers. If he doesn't turn up for six weeks
she never asks any questions, and so Van Varick can live on easy terms
with the truth. If he sits up all night over a game of cards, there's
nobody to chide him for doing so, and--"

"But where does his protection come in? That's what I can't see," said
the Bibliomaniac.

"It's as plain as a pike-staff," said the Idiot. "With Mrs. Van Varick
on the _tapis_, Tommie is safe from designing ladies who might marry him
for his money."

"Well, he's a mighty poor ideal!" cried Mr. Pedagog.

"He certainly would not do for Mrs. Pedagog," said the Idiot. "But you
would yourself be no better for Mrs. Van Varick. The red Indian makes an
Ideal Husband for the squaw, but he'd never suit a daughter of the
British nobility any more than the Duke of Lacklands would make a good
husband for dusky little Minnehaha. So I say what's the use of
discussing the matter any further with the purpose of arbitrarily
settling on what it is that constitutes an Ideal Husband? We may all
hope to be considered such if we only find the girl that likes our
particular kind."

"Then," said Mr. Brief, with a smile, "your advice to me is not to
despair, eh?"

"That's it," said the Idiot. "I wouldn't give up, if I were you. There's
no telling when some one will come along to whom you appear to be the
perfect creature."

"Good!" cried Mr. Brief. "You are mighty kind. I don't suppose you can
give me a hint as to how soon I may expect to meet the lady?"

"Well--no, I can't," said the Idiot. "I don't believe even Edison could
tell you about when to look for arrivals from Mars."




III

THE IDIOT'S VALENTINE


"Well, old man," said the Poet, as the Idiot entered the breakfast-room
on the morning of Valentine's day, "how did old St. Valentine treat you?
Any results worth speaking of?"

"Oh, the usual lay-out," returned the Idiot, languidly. "Nine hundred
and forty-two passionate declarations of undying affection from unknown
lady friends in all parts of the civilized world; one thousand three
hundred and twenty-four highly colored but somewhat insulting
intimations that I had better go 'way back and sit down from hitherto
unsuspected gentlemen friends scattered from Maine to California; one
small can of salt marked 'St. Valentine to the Idiot,' with sundry
allusions to the proper medical treatment of the latter's freshness, and
a small box containing a rubber bottle-stopper labelled 'Cork up and
bust.' I can't complain."

"Well, you did come in for your share of it, didn't you?" said Mr.
Brief.

"Yes," said the Idiot, "I think I got all that was coming to me, and I
wouldn't have minded it if I hadn't had to pay three dollars over-due
postage on 'em. I don't bother much if some anonymous chap off in the
wilds of Kalikajoo takes the trouble to send me a funny picture of a
monkey grinding a hand-organ with 'the loving regards of your brother,'
or if somebody else who is afraid of becoming too fond of me sends me a
horse-chestnut with a line to the effect that here is one I haven't
printed, I don't feel like getting mad; but when I have to pay the
postage on the plaguey things it strikes me it is rubbing it in a little
too hard, and if I could find two or three of the senders I'd spend an
hour or two of my time banging their heads together."

"I got off pretty well," said the Bibliomaniac. "I only got one
valentine, and though it cast some doubt upon the quality of my love for
books, I found it quite amusing. I'll read it to you."

Here the Bibliomaniac took a small paper from his pocket and read the
following lines:

    "THE HUNGRY BIBLIOMANIAC

    "If only you would cut your books
       As often as your butter,
     When people ask you what's inside
       You wouldn't sit and sputter.
     The reading that hath made _you_ full,
       The reading that doth chain you,
     Is not from books, or woman's looks,
       But fresh from off the menu."

"What do you think of that?" asked the Bibliomaniac, with a chuckle, as
he folded up his valentine and stowed it away in his pocket once more.

"I think I can spot the sender," said the Idiot, fixing his eyes
sternly upon the Poet. "It takes genius to get up a rhyme like 'menu'
and 'chain you,' and I know of only one man at this board or at any
other who is equal to the task."

"If you mean me," retorted the Poet, flushing, "you are mightily
mistaken. I wouldn't waste a rhyme like that on a personal valentine
when I could tack it on to the end of a sonnet and go out and sell it
for two-fifty."

"Then you didn't do it, eh?" demanded the Idiot.

"No. Did you?" asked the Poet, with his eyes twinkling.

"Sir," said the Idiot, "if I had done it, would I have had the
unblushing effrontery to say, as I just now did say, that its author was
a genius?"

"Well, we're square, anyhow," said the Poet. "You cast me under
suspicion, to begin with, and it was only fair that I should whack back.
I got a valentine myself, and I suspect it was from the same hand. It
runs like this:

    "TO THE MINOR POET

    "You do not pluck the fairy flowers
       That bloom on high Parnassus,
     Nor do you gather thistles like
       Some of those mystic asses
     Who browse about old Helicon
       In hope to fill their tummies;
     Yours rather are those dandy-lines--
       Gilt-topped chrysanthemummies--
         Quite pleasant stuff
         That ends in fluff--
     Yet when they are beholden
     Make all the world look golden."

"Well," ejaculated the Idiot, "I don't see what there is in that to make
you angry. Seems to me there's some very nice compliments in that. For
instance, your stuff when 'tis

        'beholden
    Makes all the world look golden,'

according to your anonymous correspondent. If he'd been vicious he might
have said something like this:

        '--withal so supercilious
    They make the whole earth bilious.'"

The Poet grinned. "I'm not complaining about it. It's a mighty nice
little verse, I think, and my only regret is that I do not know who the
chap was who sent it. I'd like to thank him. I had an idea you might
help me," he said, with a searching glance.

"I will," said the Idiot. "If the man who sent you that ever reveals his
identity to me I will tell him you fell all over yourself with joy on
receiving his tribute of admiration. How did you come out, Doctor?"

"Oh, he remembered me, all right," said the Doctor. "Quite in the same
vein, too, only he's not so complimentary. He calls me 'The Humane
Surgeon,' and runs into rhyme after this fashion:

    "O, Doctor Blank's a surgeon bold,
       A surgeon most humane, sir;
     And what he does is e'er devoid
       Of ordinary pain, sir.

    "If he were called to amputate
       A leg hurt by a bullet,
     He wouldn't take a knife and cut--
       But with his bill he'd pull it."

"He must have had some experience with you, Doctor," said the Idiot. "In
fact, he knows you so well that I am inclined to think that the writer
of that valentine lives in this house, and it is just possible that the
culprit is seated at this table at this moment."

"I think it very likely," said the Doctor, dryly. "He's a fresh young
man, five feet ten inches in height--"

"Pooh--pooh!" said the Idiot. "That's the worst description of Mr. Brief
I ever heard. Mr. Brief, in the first place, is not a young man, and he
isn't fresh--"

"I didn't mean Mr. Brief," said the Doctor, significantly.

"Then you ought to be ashamed of yourself to intimate that Mr.
Whitechoker, a clergyman, would stoop to the writing of such a rhyme as
that," cried the Idiot. "People nowadays seem to me to be utterly
lacking in that respect for the cloth to which it is entitled. Mr.
Brief, if you really wrote that thing you owe it to Mr. Whitechoker to
own up and thus relieve him of the suspicion the Doctor has so
unblushingly cast upon him."

"I can prove an alibi," said the Lawyer. "I could no more turn a rhyme
than I could play 'Parsifal' on a piano with one finger, and I wouldn't
if I could. I judge, from what I know of the market value of poems these
days, that that valentine of the Doctor's is worth about two dollars. It
would take me a century to write it, and inasmuch as my time is worth at
least five dollars a year it stands to reason that I would not put in
five hundred dollars' worth of effort on a two-dollar job. So that lets
me out. By-the-way, I got one of these trifles myself. Want to hear it?"

"I am just crazy to hear it," said the Idiot. "If any man has reduced
you to poetry, Mr. Brief, he's a great man. With all your many virtues,
you seem to me to fit into a poetical theme about as snugly as an
automobile with full power on in a china-shop. By all means let us have
it."

"This modern St. Valentine of ours has reduced the profession to verse
with a nicety that elicits my most profound admiration," said Mr. Brief.
"Just listen to this:

    "The Lawyer is no wooer, yet
       To sue us is his whim.
     The Lawyer is no tailor, but
       We get our suits from him.
     The longest things in all the world--
       They are the Lawyer's briefs,
     And all the joys he gets in life
       Are other people's griefs.
     Yet spite of all the Lawyer's faults
       He's one point rather nice:
     He'll not remain lest you retain
       And _never gives_ advice."

"The author of these valentines," said the Doctor, "is to be spotted,
the way I diagnose the case, by his desire that professional people
should be constantly giving away their services. He objects to the
Doctor's bill and he slaps sarcastically at the Lawyer because he
doesn't _give_ advice. That's why I suspect the Idiot. He's a
professional Idiot, and yet he gives his idiocy away."

"When did I ever give myself away?" demanded the Idiot. "You are talking
wildly, Doctor. The idea of your trying to drag me into this thing is
preposterous. Suppose you show down your valentine and see if it is in
my handwriting."

"Mine is typewritten," said the Doctor.

"So is mine," said the Bibliomaniac.

"Mine, too," said the Poet.

"Same here," said Mr. Brief.

"Well, then," said the Idiot, "I'm willing to write a page in my own
hand without any attempt to disguise it, and let any handwriting expert
decide as to whether there is the slightest resemblance between my
chirography and these typewritten sheets you hold in your hand."

"That's fair enough," said Mr. Whitechoker.

"Besides," persisted the Idiot, "I've received one of the things myself,
and it'll make your hair curl, if you've got any. Typewritten like the
rest of 'em. Shall I read it?"

By common consent the Idiot read the following:

    "Idiot, zany, brain of hare,
     Dolt and noodle past compare,
     Buncombe, bosh, and verbal slosh,
     Mind of nothing, full of josh,
     Madman, donkey, dizzard-pate,
     U. S. Zero Syndicate,
     Dull, depressing, lack of wit,
     Incarnation of the nit.
     Minus, numskull, drivelling baby,
     Greenhorn, dunce, and dotard Gaby;
     All the queer and loony chorus
     Found in old Roget's _Thesaurus_,
     Flat and crazy through and through,
     That, O Idiot--that is you.
     Let me tell you, sir, in fine,
     _I_ won't be your Valentine.

"What do you think of that?" asked the Idiot, when he had finished.
"Wouldn't that jar you?"

"I think it's perfectly horrid," said Mrs. Pedagog. "Mary, pass the
pancakes to the Idiot. Mr. Idiot, let me hand you a full cup of coffee.
John, hand the Idiot the syrup. Why, how a thing like that should be
allowed to go through the mails passes me!"

And the others all agreed that the landlady's indignation was justified,
because they were fond of the Idiot in spite of his faults. They would
not see him abused, at any rate.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Say, old man," said the Poet, later, "I really thought you sent those
other valentines until you read yours."

"I thought you would," said the Idiot. "That's the reason why I worked
up that awful one on myself. That relieves me of all suspicion."




IV

HE DISCUSSES FINANCE


A messenger had just brought a "collect" telegram for the Doctor, and
that gentleman, after going through all his pockets, and finding nothing
but a bunch of keys and a prescription-pad, made the natural inquiry:

"Anybody got a quarter?"

"I have," said the Idiot. "One of the rare mintage of 1903, circulated
for a short time only and warranted good as new."

"I didn't know the 1903 quarter was rare," said the Bibliomaniac, who
prided himself on being a numismatist of rare ability. "Who told you the
1903 quarter was rare?"

"My old friend, Experience," said the Idiot.

"What's rare about it?" demanded the Bibliomaniac.

"Why--it's what they call ready money, spot cash, the real thing with
the water squeezed out, selling at par on sight," explained the Idiot.
"Millions of people never saw one, and under modern conditions it is
very difficult to amass them in any considerable quantity. What is
worse, even if you happen to get one of them it is next to impossible to
hang on to it without unusual effort. If you have a 1903 quarter in your
pocket, somehow or other the idea that it is in your possession seems to
communicate itself to others, and every effort is made to lure it away
from you on some pretext or other."

"Excuse me for interrupting this lecture of yours, Mr. Idiot," said the
Doctor, amiably, "but would you mind lending me that quarter to pay this
messenger? I've left my change in my other clothes."

"What did I tell you?" cried the Idiot, triumphantly. "The words are no
sooner out of my mouth than they are verified. Hardly a minute elapses
from the time Doctor Capsule learns that I have that quarter before he
puts in an application for it."

"Well, I renew the application in spite of its rarity," laughed the
Doctor. "It's even rarer with me than it is with you. Shell out--there's
a good chap."

"I will if you'll put up a dollar for security," said the Idiot,
extracting the coin from his pocket, "and give me a demand note at
thirty days for the quarter."

"I haven't got a dollar," said the Doctor.

"Well, what other collateral have you to offer?" asked the Idiot. "I
won't take buckwheat-cakes, or muffins, or your share of the sausages,
mind you. They come under the head of wild-cat securities--here to-day
and gone to-morrow."

"My, but you're a Shylock!" ejaculated Mr. Brief.

"Not a bit of it," retorted the Idiot. "If I were Shylock I'd be willing
to take a steak for security, but there's none of the pound of flesh
business about me. I simply proceed cautiously, like any modern
financial institution that intends to stay in the ring more than two
weeks. I'm not one of your fortnightly trust companies with an oak
table, an unpaid bill for office rent, and a patent reversible
disappearing president for its assets. I do business on the
national-bank principle: millions for the rich, but not one cent for the
man that needs the money."

"I tell you what I'll do," said the Doctor. "If you'll lend me that
quarter, I won't charge you a cent for my professional services next
time you need them."

"That's a large offer, but I'm afraid of it," replied the Idiot. "It
partakes of the nature of a speculation. It's dealing in futures, which
is not a safe thing for a financial institution to do, I don't care how
solid it is. You don't catch the Chemistry National Bank lending money
to anybody on mere prospects, and, what is more, in my case, I'd have to
get sick to win out. No, Doctor, that proposition does not appeal to
me."

"Looks hopeless, doesn't it," said the Doctor. "Mary, tell the boy to
wait while I run up-stairs--"

"I wouldn't do that," said the Idiot, interrupting. "The matter can be
arranged in another way. I honestly don't like to lend money, believing
with Polonius that it's a bad thing to do. As the Governor of North
Carolina said to the Governor of South Carolina, who owed him a hundred
dollars, 'It's a long time between payments on account,' and that sort
of thing breaks up families, not to mention friendships. But I will
match you for it."

"How can I match when I haven't anything to match with?" said the
Doctor, growing a trifle irritable.

"You can match your credit against my quarter," said the Idiot. "We can
make it a mental match--a sort of Christian Science gamble. What am I
thinking of, heads or tails?"

"Heads," said the Doctor.

"By Jove, that's hard luck!" ejaculated the Idiot. "You lose. I was
thinking of tails."

"Oh, thunder!" cried the Doctor, impatiently.

"Try it again, double or quits. What am I thinking of?" said the Idiot.

"Heads," repeated the Doctor.

"Somebody must have told you. Heads it is. You win. We are quits,
Doctor," said the Idiot.

"But I am still without the quarter," the physician observed.

"Yep," said the Idiot. "But there's one more way out of it. I'll buy the
telegram from you--C.O.D."

"Done," said the Doctor, holding out the message. "Here's your goods."

"And there's your money," said the Idiot, tossing the quarter across the
table. "If you want to buy this message back at any time within the next
sixty days, Doctor, I'll give you the refusal of it without extra
charge."

And he folded the paper up and put it away in his pocketbook.

"Do the banks really ask for so much security when they make a loan?"
asked the Poet.

"Hear him, will you!" cried the Idiot. "There's your lucky man. He's
never had to face a bank president in order to avoid the cold glances of
the grocer. No cashier ever asked him how many times he had been
sentenced to states-prison before he'd discount his note. Do they ask
security? Security isn't the name for it. They demand a blockade,
establish a quarantine. They require the would-be debtor to build up a
wall as high as Chimborazo and as invulnerable as Gibraltar between them
and the loss before they will part with a dime. Why, they wouldn't
discount a note to his own order for Andrew Carnegie for seventeen cents
without his indorsement. Do they ask security!"

"Well, I didn't know," said the Poet. "I never had anything to do with
banks except as a small depositor in the savings-bank."

"Fortunate man," said the Idiot. "I wish I could say as much. I borrowed
five hundred dollars once from a bank, and what the deuce do you suppose
they did?"

"I don't know," said the Poet. "What?"

"They made me pay it back," said the Idiot, mournfully, "although I
needed it just as much when it was due as when I borrowed it. The
cashier was a friend of mine, too. But I got even with 'em. I refused to
borrow another cent from their darned old institution. They lost my
custom then and there. If it hadn't been for that inconsiderate act I
should probably have gone on borrowing from them for years, and instead
of owing them nothing to-day, as I do, I should have been their debtor
to the tune of two or three thousand dollars."

"Don't you take any stock in what the Idiot tells you in that matter,
Mr. Poet," said Mr. Brief. "The national banks are perfectly justified
in protecting themselves as they do. If they didn't demand collateral
security they'd be put out of business in fifteen minutes by people like
the Idiot, who consider it a hardship to have to pay up."

"As the lady said when she was asked the name of her favorite author,
'Pshaw!'" retorted the Idiot. "Likewise fudge--a whole panful of fudges!
I don't object to paying my debts; fact is, I know of no greater
pleasure. What I do object to is the kind of collateral the banks
demand. They always want something a man hasn't got and, in most cases,
hasn't any chance of getting. If I had a thousand-dollar bond I wouldn't
need to borrow five hundred dollars, yet when I go to the bank and ask
for the five hundred the thousand-dollar bond is what they ask for."

"Not always," said Mr. Brief. "If you can get your note indorsed you can
get the money."

"That's true enough, but fellows like myself can't always find a captain
of industry who is willing to take a long-shot to do the indorsing,"
said the Idiot. "Besides, under the indorsement plan you merely ask
another man to be responsible for your debt, and that isn't fair. The
whole system is wrong. Every man to his own collateral, I say. Give me
the bank that will lend money to the chap that needs it on the security
of his own product. Mr. Whitechoker, say, is short on cash and long on
sermons. My style of bank would take one barrel of his sermons and salt
'em down in the safe-deposit company as security for the money he needs.
The Poet here, finding the summer approaching and not a cent in hand to
replenish his wardrobe, should be able to secure an advance of two or
three hundred dollars on his sonnets, rondeaux, and lyrics--one dollar
for each two-and-a-half-dollar sonnet, and so on. The grocer should be
able to borrow money on his dried apples, his vinegar pickles, his
canned asparagus, and other non-perishable assets, such as dog-biscuit,
Roquefort cheese, and California raisins. The tailor seeking an
accommodation of five hundred dollars should not be asked how many times
he has been sentenced to jail for arson, and required to pay in ten
thousand shares of Steel common, in order to get his grip on the
currency, but should be approached appropriately and asked how many
pairs of trousers he is willing to pledge as security for the loan."

"I don't know where I would come in on that proposition," said the
Doctor. "There are times when we physicians need money, too."

"Pooh!" said the Idiot. "You are not a non-producer. It doesn't take a
very smart doctor these days to produce patients, does it? You could
assign your cases to the bank. One little case of hypochondria alone
ought to be a sufficient guarantee of a steady income for years,
properly managed. If you haven't learned how to keep your patients in
such shape that they have to send for you two or three times a week,
you'd better go back to the medical school and fit yourself for your
real work in life. You never knew a plumber to be so careless of his
interests as to clean up a job all at once, and what the plumber is to
the household, the physician should be to the individual. Same way with
Mr. Brief. With the machinery of the law in its present shape there is
absolutely no excuse for a lawyer who settles any case inside of fifteen
years, by which time it is reasonable to suppose his client will get
into some new trouble that will keep him going as a paying concern for
fifteen more. There isn't a field of human endeavor in which a man
applies himself industriously that does not produce something that
should be a negotiable security."

"How about burglars?" queried the Bibliomaniac.

"I stand corrected," said the Idiot. "The burglar is an exception, but
then he is an exception also at the banks. The expert burglar very
seldom leaves any security for what he gets at the banks, and so he
isn't affected by the situation one way or the other."

"Oh, well," said Mr. Brief, rising, "it's only a pipe-dream all the way
through. They might start in on such a proposition, but it would never
last. When you went in to borrow fifteen dollars, putting up your idiocy
as collateral, the emptiness of the whole scheme would reveal itself."

"You never can tell," observed the Idiot. "Even under their present
system the banks have done worse than that."

"Never!" cried the Lawyer.

"Yes, sir," replied the Idiot. "Only the other day I saw in the papers
that a bank out in Oklahoma had loaned a man ten thousand dollars on
sixty thousand shares of Hot Air preferred."

"And is that worse than Idiocy?" demanded Mr. Brief.

"Infinitely," said the Idiot. "If a bank lost fifteen dollars on my
idiocy it would be out ninety-nine hundred and eighty-five dollars less
than that Oklahoma institution is on its hot-air loan."

"Bosh! What's Hot Air worth on the Exchange to-day?"

"As a selling proposition, zero and commissions off," said the Idiot.
"Fact is, they've changed its name. It is now known as International
Nitting."




V

HE SUGGESTS A COMIC OPERA


"There's a harvest for you," said the Idiot, as he perused a recently
published criticism of a comic opera. "There have been thirty-nine new
comic operas produced this year and four of 'em were worth seeing. It is
very evident that the Gilbert and Sullivan industry hasn't gone to the
wall whatever slumps other enterprises have suffered from."

"That is a goodly number," said the Poet. "Thirty-nine, eh? I knew there
was a raft of them, but I had no idea there were as many as that."

"Why don't you go in and do one, Mr. Poet?" suggested the Idiot. "They
tell me it's as easy as rolling off a log. All you've got to do is to
forget all your ideas and remember all the old jokes you ever heard,
slap 'em together around a lot of dances, write two dozen lyrics about
some Googoo Belle, hire a composer, and there you are. Hanged if I
haven't thought of writing one myself."

"I fancy it isn't as easy as it looks," observed the Poet. "It requires
just as much thought to be thoughtless as it does to be thoughtful."

"Nonsense," said the Idiot. "I'd undertake the job cheerfully if some
manager would make it worth my while, and, what's more, if I ever got
into the swing of the business I'll bet I could turn out a libretto a
day for three days of the week for the next two months."

"If I had your confidence I'd try it," laughed the Poet, "but, alas! in
making me Nature did not design a confidence man."

"Nonsense, again," said the Idiot. "Any man who can get the editors to
print sonnets to 'Diana's Eyebrow,' and little lyrics of Madison Square,
Longacre Square, Battery Place, and Boston Common, the way you do, has
a right to consider himself an adept at bunco. I tell you what I'll do
with you: I'll swap off my confidence for your lyrical facility, and see
what I can do. Why can't we collaborate and get up a libretto for next
season? They tell me there's large money in it."

"There certainly is if you catch on," said the Poet. "Vastly more than
in any other kind of writing that I know. I don't know but that I would
like to collaborate with you on something of the sort. What is your
idea?"

"Mind's a blank on the subject," sighed the Idiot. "That's the reason I
think I can turn the trick. As I said before, you don't need ideas.
Better go without 'em. Just sit down and write."

"But you must have some kind of a story," persisted the Poet.

"Not to begin with," said the Idiot. "Just write your choruses and
songs, slap in your jokes, fasten 'em together, and the thing is done.
First act, get your hero and heroine into trouble. Second act, get 'em
out."

"And for the third?" queried the Poet.

"Don't have a third," said the Idiot. "A third is always superfluous;
but, if you must have it, make up some kind of a vaudeville show and
stick it in between the first and second."

"Tush!" said the Bibliomaniac. "That would make a gay comic opera."

"Of course it would, Mr. Bib," the Idiot agreed. "And that's what we
want. If there's anything in this world that I hate more than another it
is a sombre comic opera. I've been to a lot of 'em, and I give you my
word of honor that next to a funeral a comic opera that lacks gayety is
one of the most depressing functions known to modern science. Some of
'em are enough to make an undertaker weep with jealous rage. I went to
one of 'em last week called 'The Skylark,' with an old chum of mine who
is a surgeon. You can imagine what sort of a thing it was when I tell
you that after the first act he suggested we leave the theatre and come
back here and have some fun cutting my leg off. He vowed that if he
ever went to another opera by the same people he'd take ether
beforehand."

"I shouldn't think that would be necessary," sneered the Bibliomaniac.
"If it was as bad as all that, why didn't it put you to sleep?"

"It did," said the Idiot. "But the music kept waking us up again. There
was no escape from it except that of actual physical flight."

"Well, about this collaboration of ours," suggested the Poet. "What do
you think we should do first?"

"Write an opening chorus, of course," said the Idiot. "What did you
suppose? A finale? Something like this:

    "If you want to know who we are,
     Just ask the Evening Star,
       As he smiles on high
       In the deep-blue sky,
     With his tralala-la-la-la.
     We are maidens sweet
     With tripping feet,
     And the googoo eyes
     Of the skippity-hi's,
     And the smile of the fair gazoo;
     And you'll find our names
     'Mongst the wondrous dames
     Of the Who's Who-hoo-hoo-hoo."

"Get that sung with spirit by sixty-five ladies with blond wigs and gold
slippers, otherwise dressed up in the uniform of a troop of Russian
cavalry, and you've got your venture launched."

"Where can you find people like that?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

"New York's full of 'em," replied the Idiot.

"I don't mean the people to act that sort of thing--but where would you
lay your scene?" explained the Bibliomaniac.

"Oh, any old place in the Pacific Ocean," said the Idiot. "Make your own
geography--everybody else does. There's a million islands out there of
one kind or another, and as defenceless as a two-weeks'-old infant. If
you want a real one, fish it out and fire ahead. If you don't, make one
up for yourself and call it 'The Isle of Piccolo,' or something of that
sort. After you've got your chorus going, introduce your villain, who
should be a man with a deep bass voice and a piratical past. He's the
chap who rules the roost and is going to marry the heroine to-morrow.
That will make a bully song:

         "I'm a pirate bold
          With a heart so cold
     That it turns the biggest joys to solemn sorrow;
          And the hero-ine,
          With her eyes so fine,
     I am going to--marry--to-morrow.

    CHORUS

    "He is go-ing to-marry--to-morrow
     The maid with a heart full of sorrow;
          For her we are sorry
          For she weds to-morry--
     She is going to-marry--to-morrow."

"Gee!" added the Idiot, enthusiastically, "can't you almost hear that
already?"

"I am sorry to say," said Mr. Brief, "that I can. You ought to call your
heroine Drivelina."

"Splendid!" cried the Idiot. "Drivelina goes. Well, then, on comes
Drivelina, and this beast of a pirate grabs her by the hand and makes
love to her as if he thought wooing was a game of snap-the-whip. She
sings a soprano solo of protest, and the pirate summons his hirelings to
cast Drivelina into a Donjuan cell, when boom! an American war-ship
appears on the horizon. The crew, under the leadership of a man with a
squeaky tenor voice, named Lieutenant Somebody or Other, comes ashore,
puts Drivelina under the protection of the American flag, while his crew
sing the following:

    "We are jackies, jackies, jackies,
     And we smoke the best tobaccys
       You can find from Zanzibar to Honeyloo.
     And we fight for Uncle Sammy,
     Yes, indeed we do, for damme
       You can bet your life that that's the thing
           to do,
                 Doodle-do!
       You can bet your life that that's the thing to
           doodle--doodle--doodle--doodle-do."

"Eh! What?" demanded the Idiot.

"Well--what yourself?" asked the Lawyer. "This is your job. What next?"

"Well--the pirate gets lively, tries to assassinate the lieutenant, who
kills half the natives with his sword, and is about to slay the pirate
when he discovers that he is his long-lost father," said the Idiot. "The
heroine then sings a pathetic love-song about her baboon baby, in a
green light to the accompaniment of a lot of pink satin monkeys banging
cocoanut-shells together. This drowsy lullaby puts the lieutenant and
his forces to sleep, and the curtain falls on their capture by the
pirate and his followers, with the chorus singing:

    "Hooray for the pirate bold,
     With his pockets full of gold;
       He's going to marry to-morrow.
         To-morrow he'll marry,
         Yes, by the Lord Harry,
       He's go-ing--to-marry--to-mor-row!
     And that's a thing to doodle--doodle-doo."

"There," said the Idiot, after a pause. "How is that for a first act?"

"It's about as lucid as most of them," said the Poet, "but, after all,
you have got a story there, and you said you didn't need one."

"I said you didn't need one to start with," corrected the Idiot. "And
I've proved it. I didn't have that story in mind when I started. That's
where the easiness of the thing comes in. Why, I didn't even have to
think of a name for the heroine. The inspiration for that popped right
out of Mr. Brief's mouth as smoothly as though the name Drivelina had
been written on his heart for centuries. Then the title--'The Isle of
Piccolo'--that's a dandy, and I give you my word of honor, I'd never
even thought of a title for the opera until that revealed itself like a
flash from the blue; and as for the coon song, 'My Baboon Baby,' there's
a chance there for a Zanzibar act that will simply make Richard Wagner
and Reginald de Koven writhe with jealousy. Can't you imagine the lilt
of it:

     "My bab-boon--ba-habee,
      My bab-boon--ba-habee--
      I love you dee-her-lee
      Yes dee-hee-hee-er-lee.
      My baboon--ba-ha-bee,
      My baboon--ba-ha-bee,
    My baboon--ba-hay-hay-hay-hay-hay-hay-bee-bee."

"And all those pink satin monkeys bumping their cocoanut-shells together
in the green moonlight--"

"Well, after the first act, what?" asked the Bibliomaniac.

"The usual intermission," said the Idiot. "You don't have to write that.
The audience generally knows what to do."

"But your second act?" asked the Poet.

"Oh, come off," said the Idiot, rising. "We were to do this thing in
collaboration. So far, I've done the whole blooming business. I'll leave
the second act to you. When you collaborate, Mr. Poet, you've got to do
a little colabbing on your own account. What did you think you were to
do--collect the royalties?"

"I'm told," said the Lawyer, "that that is sometimes the hardest thing
to do in a comic opera."

"Well, I'll be self-sacrificing," said the Idiot, "and bear my full
share of it."

"It seems to me," said the Bibliomaniac, "that that opera produced in
the right place might stand a chance of a run."

"Thank you," said the Idiot. "After all, Mr. Bib, you are a man of some
penetration. How long a run?"

"One consecutive night," said the Bibliomaniac.

"Ah--and where?" demanded the Idiot, with a smile.

"At Bloomingdale," answered the Bibliomaniac, severely.

"That's a very good idea," said the Idiot. "When you go back there, Mr.
Bib, I wish you'd suggest it to the superintendent."




VI

HE DISCUSSES FAME


"Mr. Poet," said the Idiot, the other morning as his friend, the
Rhymster, took his place beside him at the breakfast-table, "tell me:
How long have you been writing poetry?"

"Oh, I don't know," said the Poet, modestly. "I don't know that I've
ever written any. I've turned out a lot of rhymes in my day, and have
managed to make a fair living with them, but poetry is a different
thing. The divine afflatus doesn't come to every one, you know; and I
doubt if anybody will be able to say whether my work has shown an
occasional touch of inspiration, or not until I have been dead fifty or
a hundred years."

"Tut!" exclaimed the Idiot. "That's all nonsense. I am able to say now
whether or not your work shows the occasional touch of inspiration. It
does. In fact, it shows more than that. It shows a semi-occasional touch
of inspiration. How long have you been in the business?"

"Eighteen years," sighed the Poet. "I began when I was twelve with a
limerick. As I remember the thing, it went like this:

    "There was a young man of Cohasset
     Turned on the red-hot water-faucet.
       When asked: 'Is it hot?'
       He answered, 'Well, thot
     Is a pretty mild way for to class it.'"

"Good!" said the Idiot. "That wasn't a bad beginning for a boy of
twelve."

"So my family thought," said the Poet. "My mother sent it to the Under
the Evening Lamp Department of our town paper, and three weeks later I
was launched. I've had the _cacoethes scribendi_ ever since--but, alas!
I got more fame in that brief hour of success than I have ever been able
to win since. It is a mighty hard job, Mr. Idiot, making a name for
yourself these days."

"That's the point I was getting at," said the Idiot, "and I wanted to
have a talk with you on the subject. I've read a lot of your stuff in
the past eight or ten years, and, in my humble judgment, it is better
than any of that rhymed nonsense of Henry Wintergreen Boggs, whose name
appears in the newspapers every day in the year; of Susan Aldershot
Spinks, whose portrait is almost as common an occurrence in the papers
as that of Lydia Squinkham; of Circumflex Jones, the eminent
sweet-singer of Arizona; or of Henderson Hartley MacFadd, the Canadian
Browning, of whom the world is constantly hearing so much. I have
wondered if you were going about it in the right way. What is your plan
for winning fame?"

"Oh, I keep plodding away, doing the best I can all the while," said the
Poet. "If there's any good in my stuff, or any stuff in my goods, I'll
get my reward some day."

"Fifty or a hundred years after you're dead, eh?" said the Idiot.

"Yes," smiled the Poet.

"Well--your board-bills won't be high then, anyhow," said the Idiot.
"That's one satisfaction, I presume. They tell me Homer hasn't eaten a
thing for over twenty centuries. Seems to me, though, that if I were a
poet I'd go in for a little fame while I was alive. It's all very nice
to work the skin off your knuckles, and to twist your gray matter inside
out until it crocks and fades, so that your great-grandchildren can
swell around the country sporting a name that has become a household
word, but I'm blessed if I care for that sort of thing. I don't believe
in storing up caramels for some twenty-first-century baby that bears my
name to cut his teeth on, when I have a sweet tooth of my own that is
pining away for the lack of nourishment; and, if I were you, I'd go in
for the new method. What if Browning and Tennyson and Longfellow and Poe
did have to labor for years to win the laurel crown, that's no reason
why you should do it. You might just as well reason that because your
forefathers went from one city to another in a stage-coach you should
eschew railways."

"I quite agree with you," replied the Poet. "But in literature there is
no royal road to fame that I know of."

"What!" cried the Idiot. "No royal road to fame in letters! Why, where
have you been living all these years, Mr. Poet? This is the age of the
Get Fame-Quick Scheme. You can make a reputation in five minutes, if you
only know the ropes. I know of at least two department stores where you
can go and buy all you want of it, and in all its grades--from notoriety
down to the straight goods."

"Fame? At a department store!" put in Mr. Whitechoker, incredulously.

"Certainly," said the Idiot. "Ready-made laurels on demand. Why not?
It's the easiest thing in the world. Fact is, between you and me, I am
considering a plan now for the promoting of a corporation to be called
the United States Fame Company, Limited, the main purpose of which
shall be to earn money for its stockholders by making its customers
famous at so much per head. It won't make any difference whether the
customer wishes to be famous as an actor, a novelist, or a poet, or any
other old thing. We'll turn the trick for him, and guarantee him more
than a taste of immortality."

"You may put me down for four dollars' worth of notoriety," said Mr.
Brief, with a laugh.

"All right," said the Idiot, dryly. "There's a lot in your profession
who like the cheap sort. But I warn you in advance that if you go in for
cheap notoriety, you'll find it a pretty hard job getting anybody to
sell you any eighteen-karat distinction later."

"Well," said the Poet, "I don't know that I can promise to be one of
your customers until I know something of the quality of the fame you
have to sell. Tell me of somebody you've made a name for, and I'll take
the matter into consideration if I like the style of laurel you have
placed on his brow."

"Lean over here and I'll whisper," said the Idiot. "I don't mind telling
you, but I don't believe in giving away the secrets of the trade to the
rest of these gentlemen."

The Poet did as he was bade, and the Idiot whispered a certain great
name in his ear.

"No!" cried the Poet, incredulously.

"Yes, sir. Fact!" said the Idiot. "He was made famous in a night. The
first thing we did was to get him to elongate his signature. He was
writing as--P. K. Dubbins we'll call him, for the sake of the argument.
Now a name like that couldn't be made great under any circumstances
whatsoever, so we made him write it out in full: Philander Kenilworth
Dubbins--regular broadside, you see. P. K. Dubbins was a pop-shot, but
Philander Kenilworth Dubbins spreads out like a dum-dum bullet or hits
you like a blast from a Gatling gun. Printed, it takes up a whole line
of a newspaper column; put at the top of an advertisement, it strikes
the eye with the convincing force of a circus-poster. You can't help
seeing it, and it makes, when spoken, a mouthful that is nothing short
of impressive and sonorous."

"Still," suggested Mr. Brief, with a wink at the Bibliomaniac, "you have
only multiplied your difficulties by three. If it was hard for your
friend Dubbins to make one name famous, I can't see that he improves
matters by trying to make three names famous."

"On the modern business principle that to accomplish anything you must
work on a large scale," said the Idiot. "Philander Kenilworth Dubbins
was a better proposition than P. K. Dubbins. The difference between them
in the mere matter of potentialities is the difference between a corner
grocery and a department store, or a kite with a tail and one without.
Well, having created the name, the next thing to do was to exploit it,
and we advertised Dubbins for all there was in him. We got Mr. William
Jones Brickbat, the eminent novelist, to say that he had read Dubbins's
poems, and had not yet died; we got Edward Pinkham, the author of "The
Man with the Watering-pot," to send us a type-written letter, saying
that Dubbins was a coming man, and that his latest book, _Howls from
Helicon_, contained many inspired lines. But, best of all, we prevailed
upon the manufacturers of celluloid soap to print a testimonial from
Dubbins himself, saying that there was no other soap like it in the
market. That brought his name prominently before every magazine-reader
in the country, because the celluloid-soap people are among the biggest
advertisers of the day, and everywhere that soap ad went, why, Dubbins's
testimonial went also, as faithfully as Mary's Little Lamb. After that
we paid a shirt-making concern down-town to put out a new collar called
"The Helicon," which they advertised widely with a picture of Dubbins's
head sticking up out of the middle of it; and, finally, as a crowning
achievement, we leased Dubbins for a year to a five-cent cigar company,
who have placarded the fences, barns, and chicken-coops from Maine to
California with the name of Dubbins--'Flora Dubbins: The Best Five-Cent
Smoke in the Market.'"

"And thus you made the name of Dubbins famous in letters!" sneered the
Doctor.

"That was only the preliminary canter," replied the Idiot. "So far,
Dubbins's greatness was confined to fences, barns, chicken-coops, and
the advertising columns of the magazines. The next thing was to get him
written up in the newspapers. That sort of thing can't be bought, but
you can acquire it by subtlety. Plan one was to make an after-dinner
speaker out of Dubbins. This was easy. There are a million public
dinners every year, but a limited supply of good speakers; so, with a
little effort, we got Dubbins on five toast-cards, hired a humorist out
in Wisconsin to write five breezy speeches for him, Dubbins committed
them to memory, and they went off like hot-cakes. Morning papers would
come out with Dubbins's picture printed in between that of Bishop Potter
and a member of the cabinet, who also spoke. Copies of Dubbins's
speeches were handed to the reporters before the dinner began, so that
it didn't make any difference whether Dubbins spoke them or not--the
papers had 'em next morning just the same, and inside of six months you
couldn't read an account of any public banquet without running up
against the name of Philander Kenilworth Dubbins."

"Well, I declare!" ejaculated Mr. Whitechoker. "What a strange affair!"

"Then we got Dubbins's publishers to take a hand," said the Idiot. "They
issued a monthly budget of gossip concerning their authors, which
newspaper editors all over quoted in their interesting items of the day.
From these paragraphs the public learned that Dubbins wrote between
4 A.M. and breakfast-time; that Dubbins never penned a line
without having a tame rabbit, named Romola, sitting alongside of his
ink-pot; that Dubbins got his ideas for his wonderful poem, 'The Mystery
of Life,' from hearing a canary inadvertently whistle a bar of
'Hiawatha;' that Dubbins was the best-dressed author in the State of New
York, affecting green plaid waistcoats, pink shirts, and red neckties;
witty things that Dubbins's boy had said about Dubbins's work to
Dubbins himself were also spread all over the land, until finally
Philander Kenilworth Dubbins became a select series of household words
in every town, city, and hamlet in the United States. And there he is
to-day--a great man, bearing a great name, made for him by his friends.
_Howls from Helicon_ is full of bad poems, but Dubbins is a son of
Parnassus just the same. Now we propose to do it for others. For five
dollars down, Mr. Poet, I'll make you conspicuous; for ten, I'll make
you notorious; for fifty, I'll make you famous; for a hundred, I'll give
you immortality."

"Good!" cried the Poet. "Immortality for a hundred dollars is cheap.
I'll take that."

"You will?" said the Idiot, joyfully. "Put up your money."

"All right," laughed the Poet. "I'll pay--C. O. D."

"Another hundred gone!" moaned the Idiot, as the party broke up and its
members went their several ways. "I think it's abominable that this
commercial spirit of the age should have affected even you poets. You
ought to have gone into business, old man, and left the Muses alone.
You've got too good a head for poetry."




VII

ON THE DECADENCE OF APRIL-FOOL'S-DAY


"I am sorry to observe," said the Idiot, as he sat down at the
breakfast-table yesterday morning, "that the good old customs of my
youthful days are dying out by slow degrees, and the celebrations that
once filled my childish soul with glee are no longer a part of the
pleasures of the young. Actually, Mr. Whitechoker, I got through the
whole day yesterday without sitting on a single pin or smashing my toes
against a brickbat hid beneath a hat. What on earth can be coming over
the boys of the land that they no longer avail themselves of the
privileges of the fool-tide?"

"Fool-tide's good," said Mr. Brief. "Where did you get that?"

"Oh, I pried it out of my gray-matter 'way back in the last century,"
said the Idiot. "It grew out of a simple little prank I played one April
1st upon an uncle of mine. I bored a hole in the middle of a pine log
and filled it with powder. We had it that night on the hearth, and a
moment later there wasn't any hearth. In talking the matter over later
with my father and mother and the old gentleman, in order to turn the
discussion into more genial channels, I asked why, if the Yule-log was
appropriate for the Yule-tide, the Fool-log wasn't appropriate for the
Fool-tide."

"I hope you got the answer you deserved," said the Bibliomaniac.

"I did," sighed the Idiot. "I got all there was coming to me--slippers,
trunk-strap, hair-brush, and plain hand; but it was worth it. All the
glories of Vesuvius, Etna, Popocatepetl, and Pelée rolled into one could
never thereafter induce in me anything approaching that joyous sensation
that I derived from the spectacle of that fool-log and that happy hearth
soaring up through the chimney together, hand in hand, and taking with
them such portions of the flues, andirons, and other articles of
fireplace vertu as cared to join them in their upward flight."

"You must have been a holy terror as a boy," said the Doctor. "I should
not have cared to live on your block."

"Oh, I wasn't so bad," observed the Idiot. "I never was vicious or
malicious in what I did. If I poured vitriol into the coffee-pot at
breakfast my father and mother knew that I didn't do it to give pain to
anybody. If I hid under my maiden aunt's bed and barked like a bull-dog
after she had retired, dear old Tabitha knew that it was all done in a
spirit of pleasantry. When I glued my grandfather's new teeth together
with stratina, that splendid old man was perfectly aware that I had no
grudge I was trying thus to repay; and certainly the French teacher at
school, when he sat down on an iron bear-trap I had set for him in his
chair, never entertained the notion that there was the slightest
animosity in my act."

"By jingo!" cried the Bibliomaniac. "I'd have spanked you good and hard
if I'd been your mother."

"Don't you fret--she did it; that is, she did up to the time I was ten
years old, and then she had such a shock she gave up corporeal
punishment altogether," said the Idiot.

"Had a shock, eh?" smiled the Lawyer. "Nearly killed you, I suppose,
giving you what you deserved?"

"No," said the Idiot. "Spanked me with a hair-brush without having
removed a couple of Excelsior torpedoes from my pistol-pocket. On the
second whack I appeared to explode. Poor woman! She didn't know I was
loaded, and from that time on she was as afraid of me as most other
women are of a gun."

"I'd have turned you over to your father," said the Bibliomaniac,
indignantly.

"She did," said the Idiot, sadly. "I never used explosives again. In
later years I took up the milder April-fool diversions, such as filling
the mucilage-pot with ink and the ink-pot with mucilage; mixing the
granulated sugar with white sand; putting powdered brick into the
red-pepper pot; inserting kerosene-oil into the sweet-oil bottle, and
little things like that. I squandered a whole dollar one
April-fool's-day sending telegrams to my uncles and aunts, telling them
to come and dine with us that night; and they all came, too, although my
father and mother were dining out that evening, and--oh dear,
April-fool's-day is not what it used to be. The boys and girls of the
present generation are little old men and women with no pranks left in
them. Why, I don't believe that nine out of ten boys, who are about to
enter college this spring, could rig up a successful tick-tack on a
window to save their lives; and the joy of carrying a piece of twine
across the sidewalk from a front-door knob to a lamp-post, hat-high, and
then sitting back in the seclusion of a convenient area and watching the
plug-hats of the people go down before it--that is a joy that seems to
be wholly untasted of the present generation of infantile dignitaries
that we call the youth of the land. What is the matter with 'em, do you
suppose?"

"I guess we're getting civilized," said Mr. Brief. "That seems to me to
be the most likely explanation of this deplorable situation, as you
appear to think it. For my part, I'm glad if what you say is true. Of
all rotten things in the world the practical jokes of April-fool's-day
bear away the palm. There was a time, ten years ago, when I hardly dared
eat anything on the first of April. I was afraid to find my coffee made
of ink, my muffin stuffed with cotton, cod-liver oil in my
salad-dressing, and mayonnaise in my cream-puffs. Such tricks are the
tricks of barbarians, and I shall rejoice when April 1st as a day of
special privilege for idiots and savages has been removed from the
calendar."

"I am afraid," said Mr. Whitechoker, "that I, too, must join the ranks
of those who rejoice if the old-time customs of the day are now honored
more in the breach than in the observance. Ever since that unhappy
Sunday morning some years ago when somebody substituted a breakfast
bill-of-fare for the card containing the notes for my sermon, I have
mistrusted the humor of the April-fool joke. Instead of my text, as I
glanced at what I supposed was my note-card, my eyes fell upon the
statement that fruit taken from the table would be charged for; instead
of my firstly, secondly, thirdly, and fourthly, my eyes were confronted
by Fish, Eggs, Hot Bread, and To Order. And, finally, in place of the
key-line of my peroration, what should obtrude itself upon my vision but
that coarse and vulgar legend: Corkage, one dollar. I never found out
who did it, and, as a Christian man, I hope I never shall, for I should
much deprecate the spirit of animosity with which I should inevitably
regard the person who had so offended."

"I'll bet you preached a bully good sermon, allee samee," said the
Idiot.

"Well," smiled Mr. Whitechoker, "the congregation did seem to think that
it held more fire than usual; but I can assure you, my young friend, it
was more the fire of external wrath than of an inward spiritual grace."

"Well," said the Bibliomaniac, "we ought to be thankful the old tricks
are going out. As Mr. Brief suggests, we are beginning to be
civilized--"

"I don't think it's civilization," said the Idiot. "I think the kids are
just discouraged, that's all. They're clever, these youngsters, but when
it comes to putting up games, they're not in it with their far more foxy
fathers. What's the use of playing April-fool jokes on your daddy, when
your daddy is playing April-fool jokes on the public all the year round?
That's the way they reason. No son of George W. Midas, the financier, is
going to get any satisfaction out of handing his father a loaded cigar,
when he knows that the old man is handling that sort of thing every day
in his business as a promoter of the United States Hot Air Company. What
fun is there in giving your sister a caramel filled with tabasco-sauce
when you can watch your father selling eleven dollars' worth of
Amalgamated Licorice stock to the dear public for forty-seven fifty?
The gum-drop filled with cotton loses its charm when you contrast it
with Consolidated Radium containing one part of radium and ninety-nine
parts of water. Who cares to hide a clay brick under a hat for somebody
to kick, when there are concerns in palatial offices all over town
selling gold bricks to a public that doesn't seem to have any kick left
in it? I tell you it has discouraged the kid to see to what scientific
heights the April-fool industry has been developed, and as a result he
has abandoned the field. He knows he can't compete."

"That's all right as an explanation of the youngster whose parent is
engaged in that sort of business," said the Doctor. "But there are
others."

"True," said the Idiot. "The others stay out of it out of sheer pity.
When they are tempted to sew up the legs of their daddy's trousers in
order to fitly celebrate the day, or to fill his collar-box with collars
five sizes too small for him, they say, 'No. Let us refrain. The
governor has had trouble enough with his International Yukon
Anticipated Brass shares this year. He's had all the fooling he can
stand. We will give the old gentleman a rest!' Fact is, come to look at
it, the decadence of April 1st as a day of foolery for the young is no
mystery, after all. The youngsters are not more civilized than we used
to be, but they have had the intelligence to perceive the exact truth of
the situation."

"Which is?" asked Mr. Brief.

"That the ancient art of practical joking has become a business.
April-fool's-day has been incorporated by the leading financiers of the
age, and is doing a profitable trade all over the world all the year
round. Private enterprise is simply unable to compete."

"I am rather surprised, nevertheless," said Mr. Brief, "that you
yourself have abandoned the field. You are just the sort of person who
would keep on in that kind of thing, despite the discouragements."

"Oh, I haven't abandoned the field," said the Idiot. "I did play an
April-fool joke last Friday."

"What was that?" asked Mr. Whitechoker, interested.

"I told Mrs. Pedagog that I would pay my bill to-morrow," replied the
Idiot, as he rose from the table and left the room.




VIII

SPRING AND ITS POETRY


"Well, Mr. Idiot," said Mrs. Pedagog, genially, as the Idiot entered the
breakfast-room, "what can I do for you this fine spring morning? Will
you have tea or coffee?"

"I think I'd like a cup of boiled iron, with two lumps of quinine and a
spoonful of condensed nerve-milk in it," replied the Idiot, wearily.
"Somehow or other I have managed to mislay my spine this morning.
Ethereal mildness has taken the place of my backbone."

"Those tired feelings, eh?" said Mr. Brief.

"Yeppy," replied the Idiot. "Regular thing with me. Every year along
about the middle of April I have to fasten a poker on my back with
straps, in order to stand up straight; and as for my knees--well, I
never know where they are in the merry, merry spring-time. I'm quite
sure that if I didn't wear brass caps on them my legs would bend
backward. I wonder if this neighborhood is malarious."

"Not in the slightest degree," observed the Doctor. "This is the
healthiest neighborhood in town. The trouble with you is that you have a
swampy mind, and it is the miasmatic oozings of your intellect that
reduce you to the condition of physical flabbiness of which you
complain. You might swallow the United States Steel Trust, and it
wouldn't help you a bit, and ten thousand bottles of nerve-milk, or any
other tonic known to science, would be powerless to reach the seat of
your disorder. What you need to stiffen you up is a pair of those
armored trousers the Crusaders used to wear in the days of chivalry, to
bolster up your legs, and a strait-jacket to keep your back up."

"Thank you, kindly," said the Idiot. "If you'll give me a prescription,
which I can have made up at your tailor's, I'll have it filled, unless
you'll add to my ever-increasing obligation to you by lending me your
own strait-jacket. I promise to keep it straight and to return it the
moment you feel one of your fits coming on."

The Doctor's response was merely a scornful gesture, and the Idiot went
on:

"It's always seemed a very queer thing to me that this season of the
year should be so popular with everybody," he said. "To me it's the
mushiest of times. Mushy bones; mushy poetry; mush for breakfast, fried,
stewed, and boiled. The roads are mushy; lovers thaw out and get mushier
than ever.

    "In the spring the blasts of winter all are stilled in
         solemn hush.
     In the spring the young man's fancy lightly turns to thoughts
         of mush.
     In the spring--"

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself to trifle with so beautiful a
poem," interrupted the Bibliomaniac, indignantly.

"Who's trifling with a beautiful poem?" demanded the Idiot.

"You are--'Locksley Hall'--and you know it," retorted the Bibliomaniac.

"Locksley nothing," said the Idiot. "What I was reciting is not from
'Locksley Hall' at all. It's a little thing of my own that I wrote six
years ago called 'Spring Unsprung.' It may not contain much delicate
sentiment, but it's got more solid information in it of a valuable kind
than you'll find in ten 'Locksley Halls' or a dozen Etiquette Columns in
the _Lady's Away From Home Magazine_. It has saved a lot of people from
pneumonia and other disorders of early spring, I am quite certain, and
the only person I ever heard criticise it unfavorably was a doctor I
know who said it spoiled his business."

"I should admire to hear it," said the Poet. "Can't you let us have it?"

"Certainly," replied the Idiot. "It goes on like this:

    "In the spring I'll take you driving, take you driving, Maudy dear,
     But I beg of you be careful at this season of the year.
     It is true the birds are singing, singing sweetly all their notes,
     But you'll later find them wearing canton-flannel 'round their
         throats.
     It is true the lark doth warble, 'Spring is here,' with bird-like
         fire,
     'All is warmth and all is genial,' but I fear the lark's a liar.
     All is warmth for fifteen minutes, that is true; but wait awhile,
     And you'll find that April's weather has not ever changed its
         style;
     And beware of April's weather, it is pleasant for a spell,
     But, like little Johnny's future, you can't always sometimes tell.
     Often modest little violets, peeping up from out their beds
     In the balmy morn by night-time have bad colds within their heads;
     And the buttercup and daisy twinkling gayly on the lawn,
     Sing by night a different story from their carollings at dawn;
     And the blossoms of the morning, hailing spring with joyous frenzy,
     When the twilight falls upon them often droop with influenzy.
     So, dear Maudy, when we're driving, put your linen duster on,
     And your lovely Easter bonnet, if you wish to, you may don;
     But be careful to have with you sundry garments warm and thick:
     Woollen gloves, a muff, and ear-tabs, from the ice-box get the
         pick;
     There's no telling what may happen ere we've driven twenty miles,
     April flirts with chill December, and is full of other wiles.
     Bring your parasol, O Maudy--it is good for _tête-à-têtes_;
     At the same time you would better also bring your hockey skates.
     There's no telling from the noon-tide, with the sun a-shining
         bright,
     Just what kind of winter weather we'll be up against by night."

"Referring to the advice," said Mr. Brief, "that's good. I don't think
much of the poetry."

"There was a lot more of it," said the Idiot, "but it escapes me at the
moment. Four lines I do remember, however:

    "Pin no faith to weather prophets--all their prophecies are fakes,
     Roulette-wheels are plain and simple to the notions April takes.
     Keep your children in the nursery--never mind it if they pout--
     And, above all, do not let your furnace take an evening out."

"Well," said the Poet, "if you're going to the poets for advice, I
presume your rhymes are all right. But I don't think it is the mission
of the poet to teach people common-sense."

"That's the trouble with the whole tribe of poets," said the Idiot.
"They think they are licensed to do and say all sorts of things that
other people can't do and say. In a way I agree with you that a poem
shouldn't necessarily be a treatise on etiquette or a sequence of health
hints, but it should avoid misleading its readers. Take that fellow who
wrote

    "'Sweet primrose time! When thou art here
       I go by grassy ledges
     Of long lane-side, and pasture mead,
       And moss-entangled hedges.'

That's very lovely, and, as far as it goes, it is all right. There's no
harm in doing what the poet so delicately suggests, but I think there
should have been other stanzas for the protection of the reader like
this:

    "But have a care, oh, readers fair,
       To take your mackintoshes,
     And on your feet be sure to wear
       A pair of stanch galoshes.

    "Nor should you fail when seeking out
       The primrose, golden yeller,
     To have at hand somewhere about
       A competent umbrella.

Thousands of people are inspired by lines like the original to go
gallivanting all over the country in primrose time, to return at dewy
eve with all the incipient symptoms of pneumonia. Then there's the case
of Wordsworth. He was one of the loveliest of the Nature poets, but he's
eternally advising people to go out in the early spring and lie on the
grass somewhere, listening to cuckoos doing their cooking, watching the
daffodils at their daily dill, and hearing the crocus cuss; and some
sentimental reader out in New Jersey thinks that if Wordsworth could do
that sort of thing, and live to be eighty years old, there's no reason
why he shouldn't do the same thing. What's the result? He lies on the
grass for two hours and suffers from rheumatism for the next ten years."

"Tut!" said the Poet. "I am surprised at you. You can't blame Wordsworth
because some New Jerseyman makes a jackass of himself."

"In a way all writers should be responsible for the effect of what they
write on their readers," said the Idiot. "When a poet of Wordsworth's
eminence, directly or indirectly, advises people to go out and lie on
the grass in early spring, he owes it to his public to caution them that
in some localities it is not a good thing to do. A rhymed foot-note--

    "This habit, by-the-way, is good
       In climes south of the Mersey;
     But, I would have it understood,
       It's risky in New Jersey--

would fulfil all the requirements of the special individual to whom I
have referred, and would have shown that the poet himself was ever
mindful of the welfare of his readers."

The Poet was apparently unconvinced, so the Idiot continued:

"Mind you, old man, I think all this poetry is beautiful," he said; "but
you poets are too prone to confine your attention to the pleasant
aspects of the season. Here, for instance, is a poet who asks

    'What are the dearest treasures of spring?'

and then goes on to name the cheapest as an answer to his question. The
primrose, the daffodil, the rosy haze that veils the forest bare, the
sparkle of the myriad-dimpled sea, a kissing-match between the sunbeams
and the rain-drops, reluctant hopes, the twitter of swallows on the
wing, and all that sort of thing. You'd think spring was an iridescent
dream of ecstatic things; but of the tired feeling that comes over you,
the spine of jelly, the wabbling knee, the chills and fever that come
from sniffing 'the scented breath of dewy April's eve,' the doctor's
bills, and such like things are never mentioned. It isn't fair. It's all
right to tell about the other things, but don't forget the drawbacks. If
I were writing that poem I'd have at least two stanzas like this:

    "And other dearest treasures of spring
       Are daily draughts of withering, blithering squills,
       To cure my aching bones of darksome chills;
     And at the door my loved physician's ring;

    "The tender sneezes of the early day;
       The sudden drop of Mr. Mercury;
       The veering winds from S. to N. by E.--
     And hunting flats to move to in the May.

You see, that makes not only a more comprehensive picture, but does not
mislead anybody into the belief the spring is all velvet, which it isn't
by any means."

"Oh, bosh!" cried the Poet, very much nettled, as he rose from the
table. "I suppose if you had your way you'd have all poetry submitted
first to a censor, the way they do with plays in London."

"No, I wouldn't have a censor; he'd only increase taxes unnecessarily,"
said the Idiot, folding up his napkin, and also rising to leave. "I'd
just let the Board of Health pass on them; it isn't a question of morals
so much as of sanitation."




IX

ON FLAT-HUNTING


"Aha!" cried the Poet, briskly rubbing his hands together, and drawing a
deep breath of satisfaction, "these be great days for people who are
fond of the chase, who love the open, and who would commune with Nature
in her most lovely mood. Just look out of that window, Mr. Idiot, and
drink in the joyous sunshine. Egad! sir, even the asphalted pavement and
the brick-and-mortar façade of the houses opposite, bathed in that
golden light, seem glorified."

"Thanks," said the Idiot, wearily, "but I guess I won't. I'm afraid that
while I was drinking in those glorified flats opposite and digesting the
golden-mellow asphalt, you would fasten that poetic grip of yours upon
my share of the blossoming buckwheats. Furthermore, I've been enjoying
the chase for two weeks now, and, to tell you the honest truth, I am
long on it. There is such a thing as chasing too much, so if you don't
mind I'll sublet my part of the contract for gazing out of the window at
gilt-edged Nature as she appears in the city to you. Mary, move Mr.
Poet's chair over to the window so that he may drink in the sunshine
comfortably, and pass his share of the sausages to me."

"What have you been chasing, Mr. Idiot?" asked the Doctor. "Birds or the
fast-flitting dollar?"

"Flats," said the Idiot.

"I didn't know you Wall Street people needed to hunt flats," said the
Bibliomaniac. "I thought they just walked into your offices and
presented themselves for skinning."

"I don't mean the flats we live on," explained the Idiot. "It's the
flats we live in that I have been after."

The landlady looked up inquiringly. Mr. Idiot's announcement sounded
ominous.

"To my mind, flat-hunting," the Idiot continued, "is one of the most
interesting branches of sport. It involves quite as much uncertainty as
the pursuit of the whirring partridge; your game is quite as difficult
to lure as the speckled trout darting hither and yon in the grassy pool;
it involves no shedding of innocent blood, as in the case of a ride
across-country with a pack in full pursuit of the fox; and strikes me
as possessing greater dignity than running forty miles through the
cabbage-patches of Long Island in search of a bag of ainse seed.
When the sporting instinct arises in my soul and reaches that full-tide
where nothing short of action will hold it in control, I never think of
starting for Maine to shoot the festive moose, nor do I squander my
limited resources on a foggy hunt for the elusive canvasback in the
Maryland marshes. I just go to the nearest cab-stand, strike a bargain
with Mr. Jehu for an afternoon's use of his hansom, and go around the
town hunting flats. It requires very little previous preparation; it
involves no prolonged absences from home; you do not need rubber boots
unless you propose to investigate the cellars or intend to go far
afield into the suburban boroughs of this great city; and is in all
ways pleasant, interesting, and, I may say, educational."

"Educational, eh?" laughed the Bibliomaniac. "Some people have queer
ideas of what is educational. I must say I fail to see anything
particularly instructive in flat-hunting."

"That's because you never approached it in a proper spirit," said the
Idiot. "Anybody who is at all interested in sociology, however, cannot
help but find instruction in a contemplation of how people are housed.
You can't get any idea of how the other halves live by reading the
society news in the Sunday newspapers or peeping in at the second story
of the tenement-houses as you go down-town on the elevated railroads.
You've got to go out and investigate for yourself, and that's where
flat-hunting comes in as an educational diversion. Of course, all men
are not interested in the same line of investigation. You, as a
bibliomaniac, prefer to go hunting rare first editions; Dr. Pellet,
armed to the teeth with capsules, lies in wait for a pot-shot at some
new kind of human ailment, and rejoices as loudly over the discovery of
a new disease as you do over finding a copy of the rare first edition of
the _Telephone Book for 1899_; another man goes to Africa to investigate
the condition of our gorillan cousin of the jungle; Lieutenant Peary
goes and hides behind a snow-ball up North, so that his fellows of the
Arctic Exploration Society may have something to look for every other
summer; and I--I go hunting for flats. I don't sneer at you and the
others for liking the things you do. You shouldn't sneer at me for
liking the things I do. It is, after all, the diversity of our tastes
that makes our human race interesting."

"But the rest of us generally bag something," said the Lawyer. "What the
dickens do you get beyond sheer physical weariness for your pains?"

"The best of all the prizes of the hunt," said the Idiot; "the spirit
of content with my lot as a boarder. I've been through twenty-eight
flats in the last three weeks, and I know whereof I speak. I have seen
the gorgeous apartments of the Redmere, where you can get a Louis Quinze
drawing-room, a Renaissance library, a superb Grecian dining-room, and a
cold-storage box to keep your high-balls in for four thousand dollars
per annum."

"Weren't there any bedrooms?" asked Mr. Whitechoker.

"Oh yes," said the Idiot. "Three, automatically ventilated from holes in
the ceiling leading to an air-shaft, size six by nine, and brilliantly
lighted by electricity. There was also a small pigeon-hole in a
corrugated iron shack on the roof for the cook; a laundry next to the
coal-bin in the cellar; and a kitchen about four feet square connecting
with the library."

"Mercy!" cried Mrs. Pedagog. "Do they expect children to live in such a
place as that?"

"No," said the Idiot. "You have to give bonds as security against
children of any kind at the Redmere. If you happen to have any, you are
required by the terms of your lease to send them to boarding-school; and
if you haven't any, the lease requires that you shall promise to have
none during your tenancy. The owners of such properties have a lot of
heart about them, and they take good care to protect the children
against the apartments they put up."

"And what kind of people, pray, live in such places as that?" demanded
the Bibliomaniac.

"Very nice people," said the Idiot. "People, for the most part, who
spend their winters at Palm Beach, their springs in London, their
summers at Newport or on the Continent, and their autumns in the
Berkshires."

"I don't see why they need a home at all if that's the way they do,"
said Mrs. Pedagog.

"It's very simple," said the Idiot. "You've got to have an address to
get your name in the _Social Register_."

"Four thousand dollars is pretty steep for an address," commented the
Bibliomaniac.

"It would be for me," said the Idiot. "But it is cheap for them.
Moreover, in the case of the Redmere it's the swellest address in town.
Three of the most important divorces of the last social season took
place at the Redmere. Social position comes high, Mr. Bib, but there are
people who must have it. It is to them what baked beans are to the
Bostonian's Sunday breakfast--a _sine qua non_."

"May I ask whatever induced you to look for a four-thousand-dollar
apartment?" asked Mr. Pedagog. "You have frequently stated that your
income barely equalled twenty-four hundred dollars a year."

"Why shouldn't I?" asked the Idiot. "It doesn't cost any more to look
for a four-thousand-dollar apartment than it does to go chasing after a
two-dollar-a-week hall-bedroom, and it impresses the cab-driver with a
sense of responsibility. But bagging these gorgeous apartments does not
constitute the real joy of flat-hunting. For solid satisfaction and
real sport the chase for a fifteen-hundred-dollar apartment in a decent
neighborhood bears away the palm. You can get plenty of roomy suites in
the neighborhood of a boiler-factory, or next door to a distillery, or
back of a fire-engine house, at reasonable rents, and along the elevated
railway lines much that is impressive is to be found by those who can
sleep with trains running alongside of their pillows all night; but when
you get away from these, the real thing at that figure is elusive. Over
by the Park you can get two pigeon-holes and a bath, with a southern
exposure, for nineteen hundred dollars a year; if you are willing to
dispense with the southern exposure you can get three Black Holes of
Calcutta and a butler's pantry, in the same neighborhood, for sixteen
hundred dollars, but you have to provide your own air. Farther down-town
you will occasionally find the thing you want with a few extras in the
shape of cornet-players, pianola-bangers, and peroxide sopranos on
either side of you, and an osteopathic veterinary surgeon on the ground
floor thrown in. Then there are paper flats that can be had for twelve
hundred dollars, but you can't have any pictures in them, because the
walls won't stand the weight, and any nail of reasonable length would
stick through into the next apartment. A friend of mine lived in one of
these affairs once, and when he inadvertently leaned against the wall
one night he fell through into his neighbor's bath-tub. Of course, that
sort of thing promotes sociability; but for a home most people want just
a little privacy. And so the list runs on. You would really be
astonished at the great variety of discomfortable dwelling-places that
people build. Such high-art decorations as you encounter--purple friezes
surmounting yellow dadoes; dragons peeping out of fruit-baskets;
idealized tomatoes in full bloom chasing one another all around the
bedroom walls. Then the architectural inconveniences they present with
their best bedrooms opening into the kitchen; their parlors with marble
wash-stands with running water in the corner; their libraries fitted up
with marvellous steam-radiators and china-closets, and their kitchens
so small that the fire in the range scorches the wall opposite, and over
which nothing but an asbestos cook, with a figure like a third rail,
could preside. And, best of all, there are the janitors! Why, Mr. Bib,
the study of the janitor and his habits alone is worthy of the life-long
attention of the best entomologist that ever lived--and yet you say
there is nothing educational in flat-hunting."

"Oh, well," said the Bibliomaniac, "I meant for me. There are a lot of
things that would be educational to you that I should regard as
symptomatic of profound ignorance. Everything is relative in this
world."

"That is true," said the Idiot; "and that is why every April 1st I go
out and gloat over the miseries of the flat-dwellers. As long as I can
do that I am happy in my little cubby-hole under Mrs. Pedagog's
hospitable roof."

"Ah! I am glad to hear you say that," said Mrs. Pedagog. "I was a bit
fearful, Mr. Idiot, that you had it in mind to move away from us."

"No indeed, Mrs. Pedagog," replied the Idiot, rising from the table.
"You need have no fear of that. You couldn't get me out of here with a
crow-bar. If I did not have entire confidence in your lovely house and
yourself, you don't suppose I would permit myself to get three months
behind in my board, do you?"




X

THE HOUSEMAID'S UNION


"Potatoes, sir?" said Mary, the waitress at Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog's
High-Class Home for Single Gentlemen, stopping behind the Idiot's chair
and addressing the back of his neck in the usual boarding-house fashion.

"Yes, I want some potatoes, Mary; but before I take them," the Idiot
replied, "I must first ascertain whether or not you wear the union
label, and what is the exact status also of the potatoes. My principles
are such that I cannot permit a non-union housemaid to help me to a scab
potato, whereas, if you belong to the sisterhood, and our stewed friend
Murphy here has been raised upon a union farm, then, indeed, do I wish
not only one potato but many."

Mary's reply was a giggle.

"Ah!" said the Idiot. "The merry ha-ha, eh? All right, Mary. That is for
the present sufficient evidence that your conscience is clear on this
very important matter. As for the potatoes, we will eat them not exactly
under protest, but with a distinctly announced proviso in advance that
we assume that they have qualified themselves for admission into a union
stomach. I hesitate to think of what will happen in my interior
department if Murphy is deceiving us."

Whereupon the Idiot came into possession of a goodly portion of the
stewed potatoes, and Mary fled to the kitchen, where she informed the
presiding genius of the range that the young gentleman was crazier than
ever.

"He's talkin' about the unions, now, Bridget," said she.

"Is he agin 'em?" demanded Bridget, with a glitter in her eye.

"No, he's for 'em; he wouldn't even drink milk from a non-union cow,"
said Mary.

"He's a foine gintleman," said Bridget. "Oi'll make his waffles a soize
larger."

Meanwhile the Bibliomaniac had chosen to reflect seriously upon the
Idiot's intelligence for his approval of unions.

"They are responsible for pretty nearly all the trouble there is at the
present moment," he snapped out, angrily.

"Oh, go along with you," retorted the Idiot. "The trouble we have these
days, like all the rest of the troubles of the past, go right back to
that old original non-union apple that Eve ate and Adam got the core of.
You know that as well as I do. Even Adam and Eve, untutored children of
nature though they were, saw it right off, and organized a union on the
spot, which has in the course of centuries proven the most beneficent
institution of the ages. With all due respect to the character of this
dwelling-place of ours--a home for single gentlemen--the union is the
thing. If you don't belong to one you may be tremendously independent,
but you're blooming lonesome."

"The matrimonial union," smiled Mrs. Pedagog, "is indeed a blessed
institution, and, having been married twice, I can testify from
experience; but, truly, Mr. Idiot, I wish you wouldn't put notions into
Mary's head about the other kind. I should be sorry if she were to join
that housemaid's union we hear so much about. I have trouble enough now
with my domestic help without having a walking delegate on my hands as
well."

"No doubt," acquiesced the Idiot. "In their beginnings all great
movements have their inconveniences, but in the end, properly developed,
a housemaid's union wouldn't be a bad thing for employers, and I rather
think it might prove a good thing. Suppose one of your servants
misbehaves herself, for instance--I remember one occasion in this very
house when it required the united efforts of yourself, Mr. Pedagog,
three policemen, and your humble servant to effectively discharge a
three-hundred-pound queen of the kitchen, who had looked not wisely but
too often on the cooking sherry. Now suppose that highly cultivated
inebriate had belonged to a self-respecting union? You wouldn't have
had to discharge her at all. A telephone message to the union
headquarters, despatched while the lady was indulging in one of her
tantrums, would have brought an inspector to the house, the queen would
have been caught with the goods on, and her card would have been taken
from her, so that by the mere automatic operation of the rules of her
own organization she could no longer work for you. Thus you would have
been spared some highly seasoned language which I have for years tried
to forget; Mr. Pedagog's eye would not have been punched so that you
could not tell your blue-eyed boy from your black-eyed babe; I should
never have lost the only really satisfactory red necktie I ever owned;
and three sturdy policemen, one of whom had often previously acted as
the lady's brother on her evenings at home, and the others, of whom we
had reason to believe were cousins not many times removed, would not
have been confronted by the ungrateful duty of clubbing one who had
frequently fed them generously upon your cold mutton and my beer."

"Is that one of the things the union would do?" queried Mrs. Pedagog,
brightening.

"It is one of the things the union _should_ do," said the Idiot.
"Similarly with your up-stairs girl, if perchance you have one. Suppose
she got into the habit, which I understand is not all an uncommon case,
of sweeping the dust under the bureau of your bedroom or under the piano
in the drawing-room. Suppose she is really an adept in the art of dust
concealment, having a full comprehension of all sixty methods--hiding it
under tables, sofas, bookcases, and rugs, in order to save her back? You
wouldn't have to bother with her at all under a properly equipped union.
Upon the discovery of her delinquencies you would merely have to send
for the union inspector, lift up the rug and show her the various
vintages of sweepings the maid has left there: November ashes; December
match-ends; threads, needles, and pins left over from the February
meeting of the Ibsen Sewing-Circle at your house; your missing
tortoise-shell hair-pin that you hadn't laid eyes on since September;
the grocer's bill for October that you told the grocer you never
received--all this in March. Do you suppose that that inspector, with
all this evidence before her eyes, could do otherwise than prefer
charges against the offender at the next meeting of the Committee on
Discipline? Not on your life, madam. And, what is more, have you the
slightest doubt that one word of reprimand from that same Committee on
Discipline would prove far more effective in reforming that particular
offender than anything you could say backed by the eloquence of Burke
and the thunderbolts of Jove?"

"You paint a beautiful picture," said the Doctor. "But suppose you
happened to draw a rotten cook in the domestic lottery--a good woman,
but a regular scorcher. Where does your inspector come in there? Going
to invite her to dine with you so as to demonstrate the girl's
incompetence?"

"Not at all," said the Idiot. "That would make trouble right away. The
cook very properly would say that the inspector was influenced by the
social attention she was receiving from the head of the house, and the
woman's effectiveness as a disciplinarian would be immediately
destroyed. I'd put half portions of the burned food in a sealed package
and send it to the Committee on Culinary Improvement for their
inspection. A better method which time would probably bring into
practice would be for the union itself to establish a system of
domiciliary visits, by which the cook's work should be subjected to a
constant inspection by the union--the object being, of course, to
prevent trouble rather than to punish after the event. The inspector's
position would be something like that of the bank examiner, who turns up
at our financial institutions at unexpected moments, and sees that
everything is going right."

"Oh, bosh!" said the Doctor. "You are talking of ideals."

"Certainly I am," returned the Idiot. "Why shouldn't I? What's the use
of wasting one's breath on anything else?"

"Well, it's all rot!" put in Mr. Brief. "There never was any such union
as that, and there never will be."

"You are the last person in the world to say a thing like that, Mr.
Brief," said the Idiot--"you, who belong to the nearest approach to the
ideal union that the world has ever known!"

"What! Me?" demanded the Lawyer. "Me? I belong to a union?"

"Of course you do--or at least you told me you did," said the Idiot.

"Well, you are the worst!" retorted Mr. Brief, angrily. "When did I ever
tell you that I belonged to a union?"

"Last Friday night at dinner, and in the presence of this goodly
company," said the Idiot. "You were bragging about it, too--said that no
institution in existence had done more to uplift the moral tone of the
legal profession; that through its efforts the corrupt practitioner and
the shyster were gradually being driven to the wall--"

"Well, this beats me," said Mr. Brief. "I recall telling at dinner on
Friday night about the Bar Association--"

"Precisely," said the Idiot. "That's what I referred to. If the Bar
Association isn't a Lawyer's Union Number Six of the highest type, I
don't know what is. It is conducted by the most brilliant minds in the
profession; its honors are eagerly sought after by the brainiest
laborers in the field of Coke and Blackstone; its stern, relentless eye
is fixed upon the evil-doer, and it is an effective instrument for
reform not only in its own profession, but in the State as well. What I
would have the Housemaid's Union do for domestic servants and for the
home, the Bar Association does for the legal profession and for the
State, and if the lawyers can do this thing there is no earthly reason
why the housemaids shouldn't."

"Pah!" ejaculated Mr. Brief. "You place the bar and domestic service on
the same plane of importance, do you?"

"No, I don't," said the Idiot. "Shouldn't think of doing so. Twenty
people need housemaids, where one requires a lawyer; therefore the
domestic is the more important of the two."

"Humph!" said Mr. Brief, with an angry laugh. "Intellectual
qualifications, I suppose, go for nothing in the matter."

"Well, I don't know about that," said the Idiot. "I guess, however, that
there are more housemaids earning a living to-day than lawyers--and,
besides--oh, well, never mind--What's the use? I don't wish to quarrel
about it."

"Go on--don't mind me--I'm really interested to know what further you
can say," snapped Mr. Brief. "Besides--what?"

"Only this, that when it comes to the intellectuals--Well, really, Mr.
Brief," asked the Idiot, "really now, did you ever hear of anybody going
to an intelligence office for a lawyer?"

Mr. Brief's reply was not inaudible, for just at that moment he
swallowed his coffee the wrong way, and in the effort to bring him to,
the thread of the argument snapped, and up to the hour of going to press
had not been tied together again.




XI

THE GENTLE ART OF BOOSTING


The Idiot was very late at breakfast--so extremely late, in fact, that
some apprehension was expressed by his fellow-boarders as to the state
of his health.

"I hope he isn't ill," said Mr. Whitechoker. "He is usually so prompt at
his meals that I fear something is the matter with him."

"He's all right," said the Doctor, whose room adjoins that of the Idiot
in Mrs. Smithers-Pedagog's Select Home for Single Gentlemen. "He'll be
down in a minute. He's suffering from an overdose of vacation--rested
too hard."

Just then the subject of the conversation appeared in the doorway, pale
and haggard, but with an eye that boded ill for the larder.

"Quick!" he cried, as he entered. "Lead me to a square meal. Mary,
please give me four bowls of mush, ten medium soft-boiled eggs, a barrel
of saute potatoes, and eighteen dollars' worth of corned-beef hash. I'll
have two pots of coffee, Mrs. Pedagog, please, four pounds of sugar, and
a can of condensed milk. If there is any extra charge you may put it on
the bill, and some day, when the common stock of the Continental Hen
Trust goes up thirty or forty points, I'll pay."

"What's the matter with you, Mr. Idiot?" asked Mr. Brief. "Been fasting
for a week?"

"No," replied the Idiot. "I've just taken my first week's vacation, and,
between you and me, I've come back to business so as to get rested for
the second."

"Doesn't look as though vacation agreed with you," said the
Bibliomaniac.

"It doesn't," said the Idiot. "Hereafter I am an advocate of the
rest-while-you-work system. Never take a day off if you can help it.
There's nothing so restful as paying attention to business, and no
greater promoter of weariness of spirit and vexation of your digestion
than the modern style of vacating. No more for mine, if you please."

"Humph!" sneered the Bibliomaniac. "I suppose you went to Coney Island
to get rested up, bumping the bump and looping the loop, and doing a lot
of other crazy things."

"Not I," quoth the Idiot. "I didn't have sense enough to go to some
quiet place like Coney Island, where you can get seven square meals a
day, and then climb into a Ferris-wheel and be twirled around in the air
until they have been properly shaken down. I took one of the Four
Hundred vacations. Know what that is?"

"No," said Mr. Brief. "I didn't know there were four hundred vacations
with only three hundred and sixty-five days in the year. What do you
mean?"

"I mean the kind of vacation the people in the Four Hundred take,"
explained the Idiot. "I've been to a house-party up in Newport with some
friends of mine who're 'in the swim,' and I tell you it's hard swimming.
You'll never hear me talking about a leisure class in this country
again. Those people don't know what leisure is. I don't wonder they're
always such a tired-looking lot."

"I was not aware that you were in with the Smart Set," said the
Bibliomaniac.

"Oh yes," said the Idiot. "I'm in with several of 'em--'way in; so far
in that I'm sometimes afraid I'll never get out. We're carrying a whole
lot of wild-cats on margin for Billie Van Gelder, the cotillon leader.
Tommy de Cahoots, the famous yachtsman, owes us about eight thousand
dollars more than he can spare from his living expenses on one of his
plunges into Copper, and altogether we are pretty long on swells in our
office."

"And do you mean to say those people invite you out?" asked the
Bibliomaniac.

"All the time," said the Idiot. "Just as soon as one of our swell
customers finds he can't pay his margins he comes down to the office and
gets very chummy with all of us. The deeper he is in it the more affable
he becomes. The result is there are house-parties and yacht-cruises and
all that sort of thing galore on tap for us every summer."

"And you accept them, eh?" said the Bibliomaniac, scornfully.

"As a matter of business, of course," replied the Idiot. "We've got to
get something out of it. If one of our customers can't pay cash, why, we
get what we can. In this particular case Mr. Reginald Squandercash had
me down at Newport for five full days, and I know now why he can't pay
up his little shortage of eight hundred dollars. He's got the money, but
he needs it for other things, and, now that I know it, I shall recommend
the firm to give him an extension of thirty days. By that time he will
have collected from the De Boodles, whom he is launching in society, C.
O. D., and will be able to square matters with us."

"Your conversation is Greek to me," said the Bibliomaniac. "Who are the
De Boodles, and for what do they owe your friend Reginald Squandercash
money?"

"The De Boodles," explained the Idiot, "are what are known as climbers,
and Reginald Squandercash is a booster."

"A what?" cried the Bibliomaniac.

"A booster," said the Idiot. "There are several boosters in the Four
Hundred. For a consideration they will boost wealthy climbers into
society. The climbers are people like the De Boodles, who have suddenly
come into great wealth, and who wish to be in it with others of great
wealth who are also of high social position. They don't know how to do
the trick, so they seek out some booster like Reggie, strike a bargain
with him, and he steers 'em up against the 'Among-Those-Present' game
until finally you find the De Boodles have a social cinch."

"Do you mean to say that society tolerates such a business as that?"
demanded the Bibliomaniac.

"Tolerates?" laughed the Idiot. "What a word to use! Tolerate? Why,
society encourages, because society shares the benefits. Take this
especial vacation of mine. Society had two five-o'clock teas, four of
the swellest dinners you ever sat down to, a cotillon where the favors
were of solid silver and real ostrich feathers, a whole day's clam-bake
on Reggie's steam-yacht, with automobile-runs and coaching-trips galore.
Nobody ever declines one of Reggie's invitations, because what he has
from a society point of view is the best the market affords. Why, the
floral decorations alone at the _fête champêtre_ he gave in honor of the
De Boodles at his villa last Thursday night must have cost five thousand
dollars, and everything was on the same scale. I don't believe a cent
less than seventy-five hundred dollars was burned up in the fire-works,
and every lady present received a souvenir of the occasion that cost at
least one hundred dollars."

"Your story doesn't quite hold together," said Mr. Brief. "If your
friend Reggie has a villa and a steam-yacht, and automobiles and
coaches, and gives _fêtes champêtres_ that cost fifteen or twenty
thousand dollars, I don't see why he has to make himself a booster of
inferior people who want to get into society. What does he gain by it?
It surely isn't sport to do a thing like that, and I should think he'd
find it a dreadful bore."

"The man must live," said the Idiot. "He boosts for a living."

"When he has the wealth of Monte Cristo at his command?" demanded Mr.
Brief.

"Reggie hasn't a cent to his name," said the Idiot. "I've already told
you he owes us eight hundred dollars he can't pay."

"Then who in thunder pays for the villa and the lot and all those
hundred-dollar souvenirs?" asked the Doctor.

"Why, this year, the De Boodles," said the Idiot. "Last year it was
Colonel and Mrs. Moneybags, whose daughter, Miss Fayette Moneybags, is
now clinching the position Reggie sold her at Newport over in London,
whither Reggie has consigned her to his sister, an impecunious American
duchess--the Duchess of Nocash--who is also in the boosting business.
The chances are Miss Moneybags will land one of England's most deeply
indebted peers, and, if she does, Reggie will receive a handsome check
for steering the family up against so attractive a proposition."

"And you mean to tell us that a plain man like old John De Boodle, of
Nevada, is putting out his hard-earned wealth in that way?" demanded Mr.
Brief.

"I didn't mean to mention any names," said the Idiot. "But you've
spotted the victim. Old John De Boodle, who made his sixty million
dollars in six months, after having kept a saloon on the frontier for
forty years, is the man. His family wants to get in the swim, and Reggie
is turning the trick for them; and, after all, what better way is there
for De Boodle to get in? He might take sixty villas at Newport and not
get even a peep at the divorce colony there, much less a glimpse of the
monogamous set acting independently. Not a monkey in the Zoo would dine
with the De Boodles, and in his most eccentric moment I doubt if Tommy
Dare would take them up, unless there was somebody to stand sponsor for
them. A cool million might easily be expended without results by the De
Boodles themselves; but hand that money over to Reggie Squandercash,
whose blood is as blue as his creditors' sometimes get, and you can look
for results. What the Frohman's are to the stage, Reggie Squandercash is
to society. He's right in it; popular as all spenders are; lavish as all
people spending other people's money are apt to be. Old De Boodle, egged
on by Mrs. De Boodle and Miss Mary Ann De Boodle (now known as Miss
Marianne De Boodle), goes to Reggie and says: 'The old lady and my girl
are nutty on society. Can you land 'em?' 'Certainly,' says Reggie, 'if
your pocket is long enough.' 'How long is that?' asks De Boodle, wincing
a bit. 'A hundred thousand a month, and no extras, until you're in,'
says Reggie. 'No reduction for families?' asks De Boodle, anxiously.
'No,' says Reggie. 'Harder job.' 'All right,' says De Boodle, 'here's my
check for the first month.' That's how Reggie gets his Newport villa,
his servants, his horses, yacht, automobiles, and coaches. Then he
invites the De Boodles up to visit him. They accept, and the fun
begins. First it's a little dinner to meet my friends Mr. and Mrs. De
Boodle, of Nevada. Everybody there, hungry, dinner from Sherry's, best
wines in the market. De Boodles covered with diamonds, a great success,
especially old John De Boodle, who tells racy stories over the
_demi-tasse_ when the ladies have gone into the drawing-room. De Boodle
voted a character. Next thing, bridge-whist party. Everybody there.
Society a good winner. The De Boodles magnificent losers. Popularity
cinched. Next, yachting-party. Everybody on board. De Boodle on deck in
fine shape. Champagne flows like Niagara. Poker game in main cabin. Food
everywhere. De Boodles much easier. Stiffness wearing off, and so on and
so on, until finally Miss De Boodle's portrait is printed in nineteen
Sunday newspapers all over the country. They're launched, and Reggie
comes into his own with a profit for the season in a cash balance of
fifty thousand dollars. He's had a bully time all summer, entertained
like a prince, and comes to the rainy season with a tidy little
umbrella to keep him out of the wet."

"And can he count on that as a permanent business?" asked Mr.
Whitechoker.

"My dear sir, the rock of Gibraltar is no solider and no more
permanent," said the Idiot. "For as long as there is a Four Hundred in
existence, human nature is such that there will also be a million who
will want to get into it."

"At such a cost?" demanded the Bibliomaniac.

"At any cost," replied the Idiot. "Even people who know they cannot swim
want to get in it."




XII

HE MAKES A SUGGESTION TO THE POET


"Good-morning, Homer, my boy," said the Idiot, genially, as the Poet
entered the breakfast-room. "All hail to thee. Thou art the bright
particular bird of plumage I most hoped to see this rare and beauteous
summer morning. No sweet-singing robin-redbreast or soft-honking
canvasback for yours truly this A.M., when a living, breathing,
palpitating son of the Muses lurks near at hand. I fain would make thee
a proposition, Shakespeare dear!"

"Back pedal there! Avaunt with your flowery speech, oh Idiot!" cried the
Doctor. "Else will I call an ambulance."

"No ambulance for mine," chortled the Idiot.

"Nay, Sweet Gas-bags," quoth the Doctor. "But for once I fear me we may
be scorched by this Pelée of words that thou spoutest forth."

"What's the proposition, Mr. Idiot?" asked the Poet. "I'm always open to
anything of the kind, as the Subway said when an automobile fell into
it.'"

"I thirst for laurels," said the Idiot, "and I propose that you and I
collaborate on a book of poems for early publication. With your name on
the title-page and my poems in the book I think we can make a go of it."

"What's the lay?" asked the Poet, amused, but wary. "Sonnets, or French
forms, or just plain snatches of song?"

"Any old thing as long as it runs smoothly," replied the Idiot. "Only
the poems must fit the title of the book, which is to be _Now_."

"_Now?_" said the Poet.

"_Now!_" repeated the Idiot. "I find in reading over the verse of the
day that the 'Now' poem always finds a ready market. Therefore, there
must be money in it, and where the money goes there the laurels are.
You know what Browning Robinson, the Laureate of Wall Street, wrote in
his 'Message to Posterity':

    "'Oh, when you come to crown my brow,
       Bring me no bay nor sorrel;
     Give me no parsley wreath, but just
       The legal long green laurel.'"

"I never heard that poem before," laughed the Poet, "though the
sentiment in these commercial days is not unfamiliar."

"True," said the Idiot. "Alfred Austin Biggs, of Texas, voiced the same
idea when he said:

    "'Crown me not with spinach,
     Wreathe me not with hay;
     Place no salad on my head
     When you bring the bay.
     Give me not the water-cresses
     To adorn my flowing tresses,
     But at e'en
     Crown my pockets good and strong
     With the green--
     The green that's long.'"

"Do you remember that?" asked the Idiot.

"Only faintly," said the Poet. "I think you read it to me once before,
just after you--er--ah--rather just after Alfred Austin Biggs, of
Texas--wrote it."

The Idiot laughed. "I see you're on," he said. "Anyhow, it's good
sentiment, whether I wrote it or Biggs. Fact is, in my judgment, what
the poet of to-day ought to do is to collect the long green from the
present and the laurel from posterity. That's a fair division. But what
do you say to my proposition?"

"Well, it's certainly--er--cheeky enough," said the Poet. "Do I
understand it?--you want me to father your poems. To tell the truth,
until I hear some of them, I can't promise to be more than an uncle to
them."

"That's all right," said the Idiot. "You ought to be cautious, as a
matter of protection to your own name. I've got some of the goods right
here. Here's a little thing called 'Summer-tide!' It shows the whole
'Now' principle in a nutshell. Listen to this:

    "Now the festive frog is croaking in the mere,
       And the canvasback is honking in the bay,
     And the summer-girl is smiling full of cheer
       On the willieboys that chance along her way.

    "Now the skeeter sings his carols to the dawn,
       And bewails the early closing of the bar
     That prevents the little nips he seeks each morn
       On the sea-shore where the fatling boarders are.

    "Now the landlord of the pastoral hotel
       Spends his mornings, nights, and eke his afternoons,
     Scheming plans to get more milk from out the well,
       And a hundred novel ways of cooking prunes.

    "Now the pumpkin goes a pumpking through the fields,
       And the merry visaged cows are chewing cud;
     And the profits that the plumber's business yields
       Come a-tumbling to the earth with deadly thud.

    "And from all of this we learn the lesson sweet,
       The soft message of Dame Nature, grand and clear,
     That the winter-time is gone with storm and sleet,
       And the soft and jolly summer-tide is here.

How's that? Pretty fair?"

"Well, I might consent to be a cousin to a poem of that kind. I've read
worse and written some that are quite as bad. But you know, Mr. Idiot,
even so great a masterpiece as that won't make a book," said the Poet.

"Of course it won't," retorted the Idiot. "That's only for the summer.
Here's another one on winter. Just listen:

    "Now the man who deals in mittens and in tabs
       Is a-smiling broadly--aye, from ear to ear--
     As he reaches out his hand and fondly grabs
       All the shining, golden shekels falling near.

    "Now the snow lies on the hill-side and the roof,
       And the birdling to the sunny southland flies;
     While the frowning summer landlord stands aloof,
       And to solemncholy meditation hies.

    "Now the tinkling of the sleigh-bells tinge the air,
       And the coal-man is as happy as can be;
     While the hulking, sulking, grizzly seeks his lair,
       And the ice-man's soul is filled with misery.

    "Clad in frost are all the distant mountain-peaks,
       And the furnace is as hungry as a boy;
     While the plumber, as he gloats upon the leaks,
       Is the model that the painter takes for 'Joy.'

    "And from all of this we learn the lesson sweet--
       The glad message of Dame Nature, grand and clear:
     That the summer-time has gone with all its heat,
       And the crisp and frosty winter days are here.

You see, Mr. Poet, that out of that one idea alone--that cataloguing of
the things of the four seasons--you can get four poems that are really
worth reading," said the Idiot. "We could call that section 'The
Seasons,' and make it the first part of the book. In the second part we
could do the same thing, only in greater detail, for each one of the
months. Just as a sample, take the month of February. We could run
something like this in on February:

    "Now o'er the pavement comes a hush
     As pattering feet wade deep in slush
     That every Feb.
     Doth flow and ebb."

"I see," said the Poet. "It wouldn't take long to fill up a book with
stuff like that."

"To make the appeal stronger, let me take the month of July, which is
now on," resumed the Idiot. "You may find it even more convincing:

    "Now the fly--
     The rhubarb-pie--
     The lightning in the sky--
     Thermometers so spry--
     That leap up high--
     The roads all dry,
     The hoboes nigh,
     The town a-fry,
     The mad ki-yi
     A-snarling by,
     The crickets cry--
     All tell us that it is July.

Eh?"

"I don't believe anybody would believe I wrote it, that's all," said
the Poet, shaking his head dubiously. "They'd find out, sooner or later,
that you did it, just as they discovered that Will Carleton wrote
'Paradise Lost,' and Dick Davis was the real author of Shakespeare. Why
don't you publish the thing over your own name?"

"Too modest," said the Idiot. "What do you think of this:

     "Now the festive candidate
      Goes a-sporting through the State,
    And he kisses babes from Quogue to Kalamazoo;
      For he really wants to win
      Without spending any tin,
    And he thinks he has a chance to kiss it through."

"That's fair, only I don't think you'll find many candidates doing that
sort of thing nowadays," said the Poet. "Most public men I know of would
rather spend their money than kiss the babies. That style of campaigning
has gone out."

"It has in the cities," said the Idiot. "But back in the country it is
still done, and the candidate who turns his back on the infant might as
well give up the race. I know, because a cousin of mine ran for
supervisor once, and he was licked out of his boots because he tried to
do his kissing by proxy--said he'd give the kisses in a bunch to a
committee of young ladies, who could distribute them for him. Result was
everybody was down on him--even the young ladies."

"I guess he was a cousin of yours, all right," laughed the Doctor; "that
scheme bears the Idiot brand."

"Here's one on the opening of the opera season," said the Idiot:

     "Now the fiddlers tune their fiddles
      To the lovely taradiddles
    Of old Wagner, Mozart, Bizet, and the rest.
      Now the trombone is a-tooting
      Out its scaley shute-the-chuteing
    And the oboe is hoboing with a zest.

     "Now the dressmakers are working--
      Not a single minute shirking--
    Making gowns with frills and fal-lals mighty queer,
      For the Autumn days are flying,
      And there's really no denying
    That the season of the opera is near."

Mr. Brief took a hand in the discussion at this moment.

"Then you can have a blanket verse," he said, scribbling with his pencil
on a piece of paper in front of him. "Something like this:

     "And as Time goes on a-stalking,
      And the Idiot still is talking
    In his usual blatant manner, loud and free,
      With his silly jokes and rhyme,
      It is--well it's any time
    From Creation to the jumping-off place that you'll find at the far
          end of Eterni-tie."

"That settles it," said the Idiot, rising. "I withdraw my proposition.
Let's call it off, Mr. Poet."

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Brief. "Isn't my verse good?"

"Yes," said the Idiot. "Just as good as mine, and that being the case it
isn't worth doing. When lawyers can write as good poetry as real poets,
it doesn't pay to be a real poet. I'm going in for something else. I
guess I'll apply for a job as a motorman, and make a name for myself
there."

"Can a motorman make a name for himself?" asked the Doctor.

"Oh yes," said the Idiot. "Easily. By being civil. A civil motorman
would be unique."

"But he wouldn't make a fortune," suggested the Poet.

"Yes he would, too," said the Idiot. "If he could prove he really was
civil, the vaudeville people would pay him a thousand dollars a week and
tour the country with him. He'd draw mobs."

With which the Idiot left the dining-room.

"I think his poems would sell," smiled Mrs. Pedagog.

"Yes," said Mr. Pedagog. "Chopped up fine and properly advertised, they
might make a very successful new kind of breakfast food--provided the
paper on which they were written was not too indigestible."




XIII

HE DISCUSSES THE MUSIC CURE


"Good-morning, Doctor," said the Idiot, as Capsule, M.D., entered the
dining-room, "I am mighty glad you've come. I've wanted for a long time
to ask you about this music cure that everybody is talking about, and
get you, if possible, to write me out a list of musical nostrums for
every-day use. I noticed last night, before going to bed, that my
medicine-chest was about run out. There's nothing but one quinine pill
and a soda-mint drop left in it, and if there's anything in the music
cure, I don't think I'll have it filled again. I prefer Wagner to
squills, and, compared to the delights of Mozart, Hayden, and Offenbach,
those of paregoric are nit."

"Still rambling, eh?" vouchsafed the Doctor. "You ought to submit your
tongue to some scientific student of dynamics. I am inclined to think,
from my own observation of its ways, that it contains the germ of
perpetual motion."

"I will consider your suggestion," replied the Idiot. "Meanwhile, let us
consult harmoniously together on the original point. Is there anything
in this music cure, and is it true that our medical schools are
hereafter to have conservatories attached to them, in which aspiring
young M.D.'s are to be taught the _materia musica_ in addition to the
_materia medica_?"

"I had heard of no such idiotic proposition," returned the Doctor. "And
as for the music cure, I don't know anything about it; haven't heard
everybody talking about it; and doubt the existence of any such thing
outside of that mysterious realm which is bounded by the four corners of
your own bright particular cerebellum. What do you mean by the music
cure?"

"Why, the papers have been full of it lately," explained the Idiot.
"The claim is made that in music lies the panacea for all human ills. It
may not be able to perform a surgical operation like that which is
required for the removal of a leg, and I don't believe even Wagner ever
composed a measure that could be counted on successfully to eliminate
one's vermiform appendix from its chief sphere of usefulness; but for
other things, like measles, mumps, the snuffles, or indigestion, it is
said to be wonderfully efficacious. What I wanted to find out from you
was just what composers were best for which specific troubles."

"You'll have to go to somebody else for the information," said the
Doctor. "I never heard of the theory, and, as I said before, I don't
believe anybody else has, barring your own sweet self."

"I have seen a reference to it somewhere," put in Mr. Whitechoker,
coming to the Idiot's rescue. "As I recall the matter, some lady had
been cured of a nervous affection by a scientific application of some
musical poultice or other, and the general expectation seems to be that
some day we shall find in music a cure for all our human ills, as the
Idiot suggests."

"Thank you, Mr. Whitechoker," said the Idiot, gratefully. "I saw that
same item and several others besides, and I have only told the truth
when I say that a large number of people are considering the
possibilities of music as a substitute for drugs. I am surprised that
Dr. Capsule has neither heard nor thought about it, for I should think
it would prove to be a pleasant and profitable field for speculation.
Even I, who am only a dabbler in medicine and know no more about it than
the effects of certain remedies upon my own symptoms, have noticed that
music of a certain sort is a sure emollient for nervous conditions."

"For example?" said the Doctor. "Of course, we don't doubt your word;
but when a man makes a statement based upon personal observation it is
profitable to ask him what his precise experience has been, merely for
the purpose of adding to our own knowledge."

"Well," said the Idiot, "the first instance that I can recall is that of
a Wagner opera and its effects upon me. For a number of years I suffered
a great deal from insomnia. I could not get two hours of consecutive
sleep, and the effect of my sufferings was to make me nervous and
irritable. Suddenly somebody presented me with a couple of tickets for a
performance of 'Parsifal,' and I went. It began at five o'clock in the
afternoon. For twenty minutes all went serenely, and then the music
began to work. I fell into a deep and refreshing slumber. The
intermission came, and still I slept on. Everybody else went home,
dressed for the evening part of the performance, had their dinner, and
returned. Still I slept, and continued so to do until midnight, when one
of the gentlemanly ushers came and waked me up, and told me that the
performance was over. I rubbed my eyes, and looked about me. It was
true--the great auditorium was empty, and was gradually darkening. I put
on my hat and walked out refreshed, having slept from five-twenty until
twelve, or six hours and forty minutes straight. That was one instance.
Two weeks later I went again, this time to hear 'Götterdämmerung.' The
results were the same, only the effect was instantaneous. The curtain
had hardly risen before I retired to the little ante-room of the box our
party occupied and dozed off into a fathomless sleep. I didn't wake up
this time until nine o'clock the next day, the rest of the party having
gone off without awakening me as a sort of joke. Clearly Wagner,
according to my way of thinking, then, deserves to rank among the most
effective narcotics known to modern science. I have tried all sorts of
other things--sulfonal, trionel, bromide powders, and all the rest, and
not one of them produced anything like the soporific results that two
doses of Wagner brought about in one instant. And, best of all, there
was no reaction: no splitting headache or shaky hand the next day, but
just the calm, quiet, contented feeling that goes with the sense of
having got completely rested up."

"You run a dreadful risk, however," said the Doctor, with a sarcastic
smile. "The Wagner habit is a terrible thing to acquire, Mr. Idiot."

"That may be," said the Idiot; "worse than the sulfonal habit by a great
deal, I am told; but I am in no danger of becoming a victim to it while
it costs from five to seven dollars a dose. In addition to this
experience, I have also the testimony of a friend of mine who was cured
of a frightful attack of the colic by Sullivan's 'Lost Chord,' played on
a cornet. He had spent the day down at Asbury Park, and had eaten not
wisely but too copiously. Among other things that he turned loose in his
inner man were two plates of lobster salad, a glass of fresh cider, and
a saucerful of pistache ice-cream. He was a painter by profession, and
the color scheme he thus introduced into his digestive apparatus was too
much for his artistic soul. He was not fitted by temperament to
assimilate anything quite so strenuously chromatic as that, and, as a
consequence, shortly after he had retired to his studio for the night,
the conflicting tints began to get in their deadly work, and within two
hours he was completely doubled up. The pain he suffered was awful.
Agony was bliss alongside of the pangs that now afflicted him, and all
the palliatives and pain-killers known to man were tried without avail,
and then, just as he was about to give himself up for lost, an amateur
cornetist who occupied a studio on the floor above began to play the
'Lost Chord.' A counter-pain set in immediately. At the second bar of
the 'Lost Chord' the awful pain that was gradually gnawing away at his
vitals seemed to lose its poignancy in the face of the greater
suffering, and physical relief was instant. As the musician proceeded,
the internal disorder yielded gradually to the external and finally
passed away, entirely leaving him so far from prostrate that by 1 A. M.
he was out of bed and actually girding himself with a shot-gun and
an Indian club to go up-stairs for a physical encounter with the
cornetist."

"And you reason from this that Sullivan's 'Lost Chord' is a cure for
cholera morbus, eh?" sneered the Doctor.

"It would seem so," said the Idiot. "While the music continued my friend
was a well man, ready to go out and fight like a warrior; but when the
cornetist stopped the colic returned, and he had to fight it out in the
old way. In these incidents in my own experience I find ample
justification for my belief, and that of others, that some day the music
cure for human ailments will be recognized and developed to the full.
Families going off to the country for the summer, instead of taking a
medicine-chest along with them, will be provided with a music-box with
cylinders for mumps, measles, summer complaint, whooping-cough,
chicken-pox, chills and fever, and all the other ills the flesh is heir
to. Scientific experiment will demonstrate before long just what
composition will cure specific ills. If a baby has whooping-cough, an
anxious mother, instead of ringing up the doctor, will go to the piano
and give the child a dose of 'Hiawatha.' If a small boy goes swimming
and catches a cold in his head and is down with a fever, his nurse, an
expert on the accordion, can bring him back to health again with three
bars of 'Under the Bamboo Tree' after each meal. Instead of dosing the
kids with cod-liver oil when they need a tonic, they will be set to work
at a mechanical piano and braced up on 'Narcissus.' 'There'll Be a Hot
Time in the Old Town To-night' will become an effective remedy for a
sudden chill. People suffering from sleeplessness can dose themselves
back to normal conditions with Wagner the way I did. Tchaikowsky, to be
well shaken before taken, will be an effective remedy for a torpid
liver, and the man or woman who suffers from lassitude will doubtless
find in the lively airs of our two-step composers an efficient tonic to
bring their vitality up to a high standard of activity. Nothing in it?
Why, Doctor, there's more in it that's in sight to-day that is promising
and suggestive of great things in the future than there was of the
principle of gravitation in the rude act of that historic pippin that
left the parent tree and swatted Sir Isaac Newton on the nose."

"And the drug stores will be driven out of business, I presume," said
the Doctor.

"No," said the Idiot. "They will substitute music for drugs, that is
all. Every man who can afford it will have his own medical phonograph,
or music-box, and the drug stores will sell cylinders and records for
them instead of quinine, carbonate of soda, squills, paregoric, and
other nasty-tasting things they have now. This alone will serve to
popularize sickness, and, instead of being driven out of business, their
trade will pick up."

"And the doctor, and the doctor's gig, and all the appurtenances of his
profession--what becomes of them?" demanded the Doctor.

"We'll have to have the doctor just the same to prescribe for us, only
he will have to be a musician, but the gig--I'm afraid that will have to
go," said the Idiot.

"And why, pray?" asked the Doctor. "Because there are no more drugs,
must the physician walk?"

"Not at all," said the Idiot. "But he'd be better equipped if he drove
about in a piano-organ or, if he preferred, an auto on a
steam-calliope."




XIV

HE DEFENDS CAMPAIGN METHODS


"Good-morning, gentlemen," said the Idiot, cheerily, as he entered the
breakfast-room. "This is a fine Sunday morning in spite of the gloom
into which the approaching death of the campaign should plunge us all."

"You think that, do you?" observed the Bibliomaniac. "Well, I don't
agree with you. I for one am sick and tired of politics, and it will be
a great relief to me when it is all over."

"Dear me, what a blasé old customer you are, Mr. Bib," returned the
Idiot. "Do you mean to say that a Presidential campaign does not keep
your nerve-centres in a constant state of pleasurable titillation? Why,
to me it is what a bag full of nuts must be to a squirrel. I fairly
gloat over these quadrennial political campaigns of ours. They are to me
among the most exhilarating institutions of modern life. They satisfy
all one's zest for warfare without the distressing shedding of blood
which attends real war, and regarded from the standpoint of humor, I
know of nothing that, to the eye of an ordinarily keen observer, is more
provocative of good, honest, wholesome mirth."

"I don't see it," said Mr. Bib. "To my mind, the average political
campaign is just a vulgar scrap in which men who ought to know better
descend to all sorts of despicable trickery merely to gain the
emoluments of office. This quest for the flesh-pots of politics, so far
from being diverting, is, to my notion, one of the most deplorable
exhibitions of human weakness that modern civilization, so called, has
produced. A couple of men are put up for the most dignified office known
to the world--both are gentlemen by birth and education, men of honor,
men who, you would think, would scorn baseness as they hate poison--and
then what happens? For three weary months the followers of each attack
the character and intelligence of the other until, if you really
believed what was said of either, neither in your estimation would have
a shred of reputation left. Is that either diverting or elevating or
educational or, indeed, anything but deplorable?"

"It's perfectly fine," said the Idiot, "to think that we have men in the
country whose characters are such that they can stand four months of
such a test. That's what I find elevating in it. When a man who is
nominated for the Presidency in June or July can emerge in November
unscathed in spite of the minute scrutiny to which himself and his
record and the record of his sisters and his cousins and his aunts have
been subjected, it's time for the American rooster to get upon his hind
legs and give three cheers for himself and the people to whom he
belongs. Even old Diogenes, who spent his life looking for an honest
man, would have to admit every four years that he could spot him
instantly by merely coming to this country and taking his choice from
among the several candidates."

"You must admit, however," said the Bibliomaniac, "that a man with an
honorable name must find it unpleasant to have such outrageous stories
told of him."

"Not a bit of it," laughed the Idiot. "The more outrageous the better.
For instance, when _The Sunday Jigger_ comes out with a four-page
revelation of your Republican candidate's past, in which we learn how,
in 1873, he put out the eyes of a maiden aunt with a red-hot poker, and
stabbed a negro cook in the back with a skewer, because she would not
permit him to put rat-poison in his grandfather's coffee, you know
perfectly well that that story has been put forth for the purpose of
turning the maiden aunt, negro, and grandfather votes against him. You
know well enough that he either never did what is charged against him,
or at least that the story is greatly exaggerated--he may have stuck a
pin into the cook, and played some boyish trick upon some of his
relatives--but the story on the face of it is untrue and therefore
harmless. Similarly with the Democratic candidate. When the _Daily Flim
Flam_ asserts that he believes that the working-man is entitled to four
cents a day for sixteen hours' work, and has repeatedly avowed that
bread and water is the proper food for motormen, everybody with
common-sense realizes at once that even the _Flim Flam_ doesn't believe
the story. It hurts no one, therefore, and provokes a great deal of
innocent mirth. You don't yourself believe that last yarn about the
Prohibition candidate, do you?"

"I haven't heard any yarn about him," said the Bibliomaniac.

"That he is the owner of a brewery up in Rochester, and backs fifteen
saloons and a pool-room in New York?" said the Idiot.

"Of course I don't," said the Bibliomaniac. "Who does?"

"Nobody," said the Idiot; "and therefore the story doesn't hurt the
man's reputation a bit, or interfere with his chances of election in the
least. Take that other story published in a New York newspaper that on
the 10th of last August Thompson Bondifeller's yacht was seen anchored
for six hours off Tom Watson's farm, two hundred miles from the sea, and
that the Populist candidate, disguised as a bank president, went off
with the trust magnate on a cruise from Atlanta, Georgia, to
Oklahoma--you don't believe that, do you?"

"It's preposterous on the face of it," said Mr. Bib.

"Well, that's the way the thing works," said the Idiot. "And that's why
I think there's a lot of bully good fun to be had out of a political
campaign. I love anything that arouses the imagination of a people too
much given over to the pursuit of the cold, hard dollar. If it wasn't
for these quadrennial political campaigns to spur the fancy on to
glorious flights we should become a dull, hard, prosaic, unimaginative
people, and that would be death to progress. No people can progress that
lacks imagination. Politics is an emery-wheel that keeps our wits
polished."

"Well, granting all that you say is true," said the Bibliomaniac, "the
intrusion upon a man's private life that politics makes possible--surely
you cannot condone that."

The Idiot laughed.

"That's the strangest argument of all," he said. "The very idea of a man
who deliberately chooses public life as the sphere of his activities
seeking to hide behind his private life is preposterous. The fellow who
does that, Mr. Bib, wants to lead a double life, and that is
reprehensible. The man who offers himself to the people hasn't any
business to tie a string to any part of him. If Jim Jones wants to be
President of the United States the people who are asked to put him there
have a right to know what kind of a person Jim Jones is in his
dressing-gown and slippers. If he beats his mother-in-law, and eats
asparagus with the sugar-tongs, and doesn't pay his grocer, the public
have a right to know it. If he has children, the voters are perfectly
justified in asking what kind of children they are, since the voters own
the White House furniture, and if the Jim Jones children wipe their
feet on plush chairs, and shoot holes in the paintings with their
bean-snappers and putty-blowers, Uncle Sam, as a landlord and owner of
the premises, ought to be warned beforehand. You wouldn't yourself rent
a furnished residence to a man whose children were known to have built
bonfires in the parlor of their last known home, would you?"

"I think not," smiled the Bibliomaniac.

"Then you cannot complain if Uncle Sam is equally solicitous about the
personal paraphernalia of the man who asks to occupy his little cottage
on the Potomac," said the Idiot. "So it happens that when a man runs for
the Presidency the persons who intrude upon his private life, as you put
it, are conferring a real service upon their fellow-citizens. When I
hear from an authentic source that Mr. So-and-So, the candidate of the
Thisorthatic party for the Presidency, is married to an estimable lady
who refers to all Frenchmen as parricides, because she believes they
have come from Paris, I have a right to consider whether or not I wish
to vote to place such a lady at the head of my official table at White
House banquets, where she is likely, sooner or later, to encounter the
French ambassador, and the man who gives me the necessary information is
doing me a service. You may say that the lady is not running for a
public office, and that, therefore, she should be protected from public
scrutiny, but that is a fallacy. A man's wife is his better half and his
children are a good part of the remainder, and what they do or don't do
becomes a matter of legitimate public concern. As a matter of fact, a
public man _can_ have no private life."

"Then you approve of these stories of candidates' cousins, the prattling
anecdotes of their grandchildren, these paragraphs narrating the doings
of their uncles-in-law, and all that?" sneered the Bibliomaniac.

"Certainly, I do," said the Idiot. "When I hear that Judge Torkin's
grandson, aged four, has come out for his grandfather's opponent I am
delighted, and give the judge credit for the independent spirit which
heredity accounts for; when it is told to me that Tom Watson's uncle is
going to vote for Tom because he knows Tom doesn't believe what he says,
I am almost inclined to vote for him as the uncle of his country; when I
hear that Debs's son, aged three, has punched his daddy in the eye, on
general principles I feel that there's a baby I want in the White House;
and when it is told to me that the Prohibition candidate's third cousin
has just been cured of delirium tremens, I feel that possibly there is a
family average there that may be struck to the advantage of the
country."

"Say, Mr. Idiot," put in the Poet, at this point, "who are you going to
vote for, anyhow?"

"Don't ask me," laughed the Idiot. "I don't know yet. I admire all the
candidates personally very much."

"But what are your politics--Republican or Democratic?" asked the
Lawyer.

"Oh, that's different," said the Idiot. "I'm a Sammycrat."

"A what?" cried the Idiot's fellow-boarders in unison.

"A Sammycrat," said the Idiot. "I'm for Uncle Sam every time. He's the
best ever."




XV

ON SHORT COURSES AT COLLEGE


Mr. Pedagog threw down the morning paper with an ejaculation of
impatience.

"I don't know what on earth we are coming to!" he said, stirring his
coffee vigorously. "These new-fangled notions of our college presidents
seem to me to be destructive in their tendency."

"What's up now? Somebody flunked a football team?" asked the Idiot.

"No, I quite approve of that," said Mr. Pedagog; "but this matter of
reducing the college course from four to two years is so radical a
suggestion that I tremble for the future of education."

"Oh, I wouldn't if I were you, Mr. Pedagog," said the Idiot. "Your
trembling won't help matters any, and, after all, when men like
President Eliot of Harvard and Dr. Butler of Columbia recommend the
short course the idea must have some virtue."

"Well, if it stops where they do I don't suppose any great harm will be
done," said Mr. Pedagog. "But what guarantee have we that fifty years
from now some successor to these gentlemen won't propose a one-year
course?"

"None," said the Idiot. "Fact is, we don't want any guarantee--or at
least I don't. They can turn colleges into bicycle academies fifty years
from now for all I care. I expect to be doing time in some other sphere
fifty years from now, so why should I vex my soul about it?"

"That's rather a selfish view, isn't it, Mr. Idiot?" asked Mr.
Whitechoker. "Don't you wish to see the world getting better and better
every day?"

"No," said the Idiot. "It's so mighty good as it is, this bully old
globe, that I hate to see people monkeying with it all the time. Of
course, I wasn't around it in the old days, but I don't believe the
world's any better off now than it was in the days of Adam."

"Great Heavens! What a thing to say!" cried the Poet.

"Well, I've said it," rejoined the Idiot. "What has it all come to,
anyhow--all this business of man's trying to better the world? It's just
added to his expenses, that's all. And what does he get out of it that
Adam didn't get? Money? Adam didn't need money. He had his garden truck,
his tailor, his fuel supply, his amusements--all the things we have to
pay cash for--right in his backyard. All he had to do was to reach out
and take what we fellows nowadays have to toil eight or ten hours a day
to earn. Literature? His position was positively enviable as far as
literature is concerned. He had the situation in his own hands. He
wasn't prevented from writing 'Hamlet,' as I am, because somebody else
had already done it. He didn't have to sit up till midnight seven nights
a week to keep up with the historical novels of the day. Art? There were
pictures on every side of him, splendid in color, instinct of life,
perfect in their technique, and all from the hand of that first of Old
Masters, Nature herself. He hadn't any Rosa Bonheurs or Landseers on his
farm, but he could get all the cow pictures he wanted from the back
window of his bungalow without their costing him a cent. Drama? Life was
a succession of rising curtains to Adam, and while, of course, he had
the errant Eve to deal with, the garden was free from Notorious Mrs.
Ebbsmiths, there wasn't a Magda from one end of the apple-orchard to the
other, and not a First, Second, or Third Mrs. Tanqueray in sight. Music?
The woods were full of it--the orioles singing their cantatas, the
nightingales warbling their concertos, the eagles screeching out their
Wagnerian measures, the bluejays piping their intermezzos, and no
Italian organ-grinders doing De Koven under his window from one year's
end to the other. Gorry! I wish sometimes Adam had known a good thing
when he had it and hadn't broken the monologue."

"The what?" demanded Mr. Brief.

"The monologue," repeated the Idiot. "The one commandment. If ten
commandments make a decalogue, one commandment makes a monologue,
doesn't it?"

"You're a philologist and a half," said the Bibliomaniac, with a laugh.

"No credit to me," returned the Idiot. "A ten years' residence in this
boarding-house has resulted practically in my having enjoyed a diet of
words. I have literally eaten syllables--"

"I hope you haven't eaten any of your own," said the Bibliomaniac. "That
would ruin the digestion of an ostrich."

"That's true enough," said the Idiot. "Rich foods will overthrow any
kind of a digestion in the long run. But to come back to the college
tendencies, Mr. Pedagog, it is my belief that in this short-course
business we haven't more than started. It's my firm conviction that some
day we shall find universities conferring degrees 'while you wait,' as
it were. A man, for instance, visiting Boston for a week will some day
be able to run out to Harvard, pay a small fee, pass an examination,
and get a bachelor's degree, as a sort of souvenir of his visit; another
chap, coming to New York for a brief holiday, instead of stealing a
spoon from the Waldorf for his collection of souvenirs, can ring up
Columbia College, tell 'em all he knows over the wire, and get a
sheepskin by return mail; while at New Haven you'll be able to stop off
at the railway station and buy your B. A. at the lunch-counter--they may
even go so far as to let the newsboys on the train confer them without
making the applicant get off at all. Then the golden age of education
will begin. There'll be more college graduates to the square inch than
you can now find in any ten square miles in Massachusetts, and our
professional men, instead of beginning the long wait at thirty, will be
in full practice at twenty-one."

"That is the limit!" ejaculated Mr. Brief.

"Oh, no indeed," said the Idiot. "There's another step. That's the
gramophone course, in which a man won't have to leave home at all to
secure a degree from any college he chooses. By tabulating his knowledge
and dictating it into a gramophone he can send the cylinder to the
university authorities, have it carefully examined, and receive his
degree on a postal-card within forty-eight hours. That strikes me as
being the limit, unless some of the ten-cent magazines offer an LL. D.
degree with a set of Kipling and a punching-bag as a premium for a one
year's subscription."

"And you think that will be a good thing?" demanded the Bibliomaniac.

"No, I didn't say so," said the Idiot. "In one respect I think it would
be a very bad thing. Such a method would involve the utter destruction
of the football and rowing seasons, unless the universities took some
decided measures looking toward the preservation of these branches of
undergraduate endeavor. It is coming to be recognized as a fact that a
man can be branded with the mark of intellectual distinction in
absentia, as the Aryan tribes used to put it, but a man can't win
athletic prowess without giving the matter attention in propria
persona, to adopt the phraseology of the days of Uncle Remus. You can't
stroke a crew by mail any more than you can stroke a cat by freight, and
it doesn't make any difference how wonderful he may be physically, a
Yale man selling dry-goods out in Nebraska can't play football with a
Harvard student employed in a grocery store at New Orleans by telephone.
You can do it with chess, but not with basket ball. There are some
things in university life that require the individual attention of the
student. Unless something is done by our colleges, then, to care for
this very important branch of their service to growing youth, the new
scheme will meet with much opposition from the public."

"What would you, in your infinite wisdom, suggest?" asked the Doctor.
"The wise man, when he points out an objection to another's plans,
suggests a remedy."

"That's easy," said the Idiot. "I should have what I should call
residential terms for those who wished to avail themselves of athletic
training under academic auspices. The leading colleges could announce
that they were open for business from October 1st to December 1st for
the study of the Theory and Practice of Gridirony--"

"Excuse me," said Mr. Pedagog. "But what was that word?"

"Gridirony," observed the Idiot. "That would be my idea of the proper
academic designation of a course in football, a game which is played on
the gridiron. It is more euphonious than goalology or leather spheroids,
which have suggested themselves to me."

"Go on!" sighed the Doctor. "As a word-mint you are unrivalled."

"There could be a term in baseballistics; another in lacrossetics; a
fourth in aquatics, and so on all through the list of intercollegiate
sports, each in the season best suited to its completest development."

"It's not a bad idea, that," said Mr. Pedagog. "A parent sending his boy
to college under such conditions would have a fairly good idea of what
the lad was doing. As matters are now, it's a question whether the
undergraduate acquires as much of Euripides as he does of Travis, and as
far as I can find out there are more Yale men around who know all about
Bob Cook and Hinkey than there are who are versed in Chaucer, Milton,
and Shakespeare."

"But what have these things to do with the arts?" asked Mr. Whitechoker.
"A man may know all about golf, base and foot ball and rowing, and yet
be far removed from the true ideals of culture. You couldn't give a man
a B. A. degree because he was a perfect quarter rush, or whatever else
it is they call him."

"That's a good criticism," observed the Idiot, "and there isn't a doubt
in my mind that the various faculties of our various colleges will meet
it by the establishment of a new degree which shall cover the case."

"Again I would suggest that it is up to you to cover that point," said
Mr. Brief. "You have outlined a pretty specific scheme. The notion that
you haven't brains enough to invent a particular degree is to my mind
preposterous."

"Right," said the Idiot. "And I think I have it. When I was in college
they used to confer a degree upon chaps who didn't quite succeed in
passing their finals which was known as A. B. Sp. Gr.--they were mostly
fellows who had played more football than Herodotus who got them. The
Sp. Gr. meant 'by special favor of the Faculty.' I think I should
advocate that, only changing its meaning to 'Great Sport.'"

Mr. Pedagog laughed heartily. "You are a great Idiot," he said. "I
wonder they don't call you to a full professorship of idiocy somewhere."

"I guess it's because they know I wouldn't go," said the Idiot.

"Did you say you were in college ever?" sneered the Bibliomaniac, rising
from the table.

"Yes," said the Idiot. "I went to Columbia for two weeks in the early
nineties. I got a special A. B. at the beginning of the third week for
my proficiency in sciolism and horseplay. I used a pony in an
examination and stuck too closely to the text."

"You talk like it," snapped the Bibliomaniac.

"Thank you," returned the Idiot, suavely. "I ought to. I was one of the
few men in my class who really earned his degree by persistent effort."




XVI

THE HORSE SHOW


"I suppose, Mr. Idiot," observed Mr. Brief, as the Idiot took his
accustomed place at the breakfast-table, "that you have been putting in
a good deal of your time this week at the Horse Show?"

"Yes," said the Idiot, "I was there every night it was open. I go to all
the shows--Horse, Dog, Baby, Flower, Electrical--it doesn't matter what.
It's first-rate fun."

"Pretty fine lot of horses, this year?" asked the Doctor.

"Don't know," said the Idiot. "I heard there were some there, but I
didn't see 'em."

"What?" cried the Doctor. "Went to the Horse Show and didn't see the
horses?"

"No," said the Idiot. "Why should I? I don't know a cob from a lazy
back. Of course I know that the four-legged beast that goes when you say
get ap is a horse, but beyond that my equine education has been
neglected. I can see all the horses I want to look at on the street,
anyhow."

"Then what in thunder do you go to the Horse Show for?" demanded the
Bibliomaniac. "To sleep?"

"No," rejoined the Idiot. "It's too noisy for that. I go to see the
people. People are far more interesting to me than horses, and I get
more solid fun out of seeing the nabobs go through their paces than
could be got out of a million nags of high degree kicking up their heels
in the ring. If they'd make the horses do all sorts of stunts, it might
be different, but they don't. They show you the same old stuff year in
and year out, and things that you can see almost any fine day in the
Park during the season. You and I know that a four-horse team can pull a
tally-ho coach around without breaking its collective neck. We know that
two horses harnessed together fore and aft instead of abreast are
called a tandem, and can drag a cart on two wheels and about a mile high
a reasonable distance without falling dead. There isn't anything new or
startling in their performance, and why anybody should pay to see them
doing the commonplace, every-day act I don't know. It isn't as if they
had a lot of thoroughbreds on exhibition who could sit down at a table
and play a round of bridge whist or poker. That would be worth seeing.
So would a horse that could play 'Cavalleria Rusticana' on the piano,
but when it comes to dragging a hansom-cab or a grocery-wagon around the
tanbark, why, it seems to me to lack novelty."

"The idea of a horse playing bridge whist!" jeered the Bibliomaniac.
"What a preposterous proposition!"

"Well, I've seen fellows with less sense than the average horse make a
pretty good stab at it at the club," said the Idiot. "Perhaps my
suggestion is extreme, but I put it that way merely to emphasize my
point. I've seen an educated pig play cards, though, and I don't see
why they can't put the horse through very much the same course of
treatment and teach him to do something that would make him more of an
object of interest when he has his week of glory. I don't care what it
is as long as it is out of the ordinary."

"There is nothing in the world that is more impressive than a fine horse
in action," said the Doctor. "What you suggest would take away from his
dignity and make him a freak."

"I didn't say it wouldn't," rejoined the Idiot. "In fact, my remarks
implied that it would. You don't quite understand my meaning. If I owned
a stable I'd much rather my horses didn't play bridge whist, because, in
all probability, they'd be sending into the house at all hours of the
night asking me to come over to the barn and make a fourth hand. It's
bad enough having your neighbors doing that sort of thing without
encouraging your horse to go into the business. Nor would it please me
as a lover of horseback-riding to have a mount that could play grand
opera on the piano. The chances are it would spoil three good
things--the horse, the piano, and the opera--but if I were getting up a
show and asking people from all over the country to pay good money to
get into it, then I should want just such things. In the ordinary daily
pursuits of equine life the horse suits me just as he is, but for the
extraordinary requirements of an exhibition he lacks diverting
qualities. He's more solemn than a play by Sudermann or Blanketty
Bjornsen; he is as lacking in originality as a comic-opera score by Sir
Reginald de Bergerac, and his drawing powers, outside of cab-work, as
far as I am concerned, are absolutely nil. A horse that can draw a
picture I'd travel miles to see. A horse that can't draw anything but a
T-cart or an ice-wagon hasn't two cents' worth of interest in my eyes."

"But can't you see the beauty in the action of a horse?" demanded the
Doctor.

"It all depends on his actions," said the Idiot. "I've seen horses whose
actions were highly uncivilized."

"I mean his form--not his behavior," said the Doctor.

"Well, I've never understood enough about horses to speak intelligently
on that point," observed the Idiot. "It's incomprehensible to me how
your so-called judges reason. If a horse trots along hiking his
fore-legs 'way up in the air as if he were grinding an invisible
hand-organ with both feet, people rave over his high-stepping and call
him all sorts of fine names. But if he does the same thing with his
hind-legs they call it springhalt or stringhalt, or something of that
kind, and set him down as a beastly old plug. The scheme seems to me to
be inconsistent, and if I were a horse I'm blessed if I think I'd know
what to do. How a thing can be an accomplishment in front and a blemish
behind is beyond me, but there is the fact. They give a blue ribbon to
the front-hiker and kick the hind-hiker out of the show altogether--they
wouldn't even pin a Bryan button on his breast."

"I fancy a baby show is about your size," said the Doctor.

"Well--yes," said the Idiot, "I guess perhaps you are right, as far as
the exhibit is concerned. There's something almost human about a baby,
and it's the human element always that takes hold of me. It's the human
element in the Horse Show that takes me and most other people as well.
Fact is, so many go to see the people and so few to see the horses that
I have an idea that some day they'll have it with only one horse--just
enough of a nag to enable them to call it a Horse Show--and pay proper
attention to the real things that make it a success even now."

The Doctor sniffed contemptuously. "What factors in your judgment
contribute most to the success of the Horse Show?" he asked.

"Duds chiefly," said the Idiot, "and the people who are inside of them.
If there were a law passed requiring every woman who goes to the Horse
Show to wear a simple gown in order not to scare the horses, ninety per
cent. of 'em would stay at home, and all the blue-ribbon steeds in
creation couldn't drag them to the Garden--and nobody'd blame them for
it, either. Similarly with the men. You don't suppose for an instant, do
you, that young Hawkins Van Bluevane would give seven cents for the
Horse Show if it didn't give him a chance to appear every afternoon in
his Carnegie plaid waistcoat?"

"That's a new one on me," said Mr. Brief. "Is there such a thing as a
Carnegie plaid?"

"It's the most popular that ever came out of Scotland," said the Idiot.
"It's called the Carnegie because of the size of the checks. Then
there's poor old Jimmie Varickstreet--the last remnant of a first
family--hasn't enough money to keep a goat-wagon, and couldn't tell you
the difference between a saw-horse and a crupper. He gives up his hall
bedroom Horse-Show week and lives in the place day and night, covering
up the delinquencies of his afternoon and evening clothes with a long
yellow ulster with buttons like butter-saucers distributed all over his
person--"

"Where did he get it, if he's so beastly poor?" demanded the Lawyer.

"He's gone without food and drink and clothes that don't show. He has
scrimped and saved, and denied himself for a year to get up a gaudy
shell in which for six glorious days to shine resplendent," said the
Idiot. "Jimmie lives for those six days, and as you see him flitting
from box to box and realize that he is an opulent swell for six days of
every year, and a poor, down-trodden exile for the rest of the time, you
don't grudge him his little diversion and almost wish you had sufficient
will power to deny yourself the luxuries and some of the necessities of
life as well to get a coat like that. If I had my way they'd award
Jimmie Varickstreet at least an honorable mention as one of the most
interesting exhibits in the whole show.

"And there are plenty of others. There's raw material enough in that
Horse Show to make it a permanent exhibition if the managers would only
get together and lick it into shape. As a sort of social zoo it is
unsurpassed, and why they don't classify the various sections of it I
can't see. In the first place, imagine a dozen boxes filled with members
of the Four Hundred, men and women whose names have become household
words, and wearing on their backs garments made by the deft fingers of
the greatest sartorial artists of the ages. You and I walk in and are
permitted to gaze upon this glorious assemblage--the American
nobility--in its gayest environment. Wouldn't it interest you to know
that that very beautiful woman in the lavender creation, wrapped up in a
billion-dollar pearl necklace, is the famous Mrs. Bollington-Jones, who
holds the divorce championship of South Dakota, and that those two chaps
who are talking to her so vivaciously are two of her ex-husbands, Van
Bibber Beaconhill and 'Tommy' Fitz Greenwich? Wouldn't it interest you
more than any horse in the ring to know that her gown was turned out at
Mrs. Robert Bluefern's Dud Studio at a cost of nine thousand seven
hundred and fifty dollars, hat included? Yet the programme says never a
word about these people. Every horse that trots in has a number so that
you can tell who and what and why he is, but there are no placards on
Mrs. Bollington-Jones by which she may be identified.

"Then on the promenade, there is Hooker Van Winkle. He's out on bail for
killing a farmer with his automobile up in Connecticut somewhere. There
is young Walston Addlepate, whose father pays him a salary of
twenty-five thousand dollars a year for keeping out of business. There's
Jimson Gooseberry, the cotillon leader, whose name is on every lip
during the season. Approaching you, dressed in gorgeous furs, is Mrs.
Dinningforth Winter, who declined to meet Prince Henry when he was here,
because of a previous engagement to dine with Tolby Robinson's pet
monkey just in from a cruise in the Indies. And so it goes. The place
fairly shrieks with celebrities whose names appear in the _Social
Register_, and whose photographs in pink and green are the stock in
trade of the Sunday newspapers of saffron tendencies everywhere--but
what is done about it? Nothing at all. They come and go, conspicuous
but unidentified, and wasting their notoriety on the desert air. It is a
magnificent opportunity wasted, and, unless you happen to know these
people by sight, you miss a thousand and one little points which are the
_sine qua non_ of the show."

"I wonder you don't write another Baedeker," said the
Bibliomaniac--"_The Idiot's Hand-book to the Horse Show, or Who's Who
at the Garden._"

"It would be a good idea," said the Idiot. "But the show people must
take the initiative. The whole thing needs a live manager."

"A sort of Ward MacAllister again?" asked Mr. Brief.

"No, not exactly," said the Idiot. "Society has plenty of successors to
Ward MacAllister. What they seem to me to need most is a P. T. Barnum. A
man like that could make society a veritable Klondike, and with the
Horse Show as a nucleus he wouldn't have much trouble getting the thing
started along."




XVII

SUGGESTION TO CHRISTMAS SHOPPERS


"By Jingo!" said the Idiot, as he wearily took his place at the
breakfast-table the other morning, "but I'm just regularly tuckered
out."

"Late hours again?" asked the Lawyer.

"Not a late hour," returned the Idiot. "Matter of fact, I went to bed
last night at half-after seven and never waked until nine this morning.
In spite of all that sleep and rest I feel now as if I'd been put
through a threshing-machine. Every bone in my body from the funny to the
medulla aches like all possessed, and my joints creak like a new pair of
shoes on a school-boy in church, they are so stiff."

"Oh well," said the Doctor, "what of it? The pace that kills is bound
to have some symptoms preliminary to dissolution. If you, like other
young men of the age, burn the candle at both ends and in the middle,
what can you expect? You push nature into a corner and then growl like
all possessed because she rebels."

"Not I," retorted the Idiot. "Mr. Pedagog and the Poet and Mr. Bib may
lead the strenuous life, but as for mine the simple life is the thing.
I'm not striving after the unattainable. I'm not wasting my physical
substance in riotous living. The cold and clammy touch of dissipation is
not writing letters of burning condemnation proceedings on my brow.
Excesses in any form are utterly unknown to me, and from one end of the
Subway to the other you won't find another man of my age who in general
takes better care of himself. I am as watchful of my own needs as though
I were a baby and my own nurse at one and the same time. No mother could
watch over her offspring more tenderly than I watch over me, and--"

"Well, then, what in thunder is the matter with you?" cried the Lawyer,
irritated. "If this is all true, why on earth are you proclaiming
yourself as a physical wreck? There must be some cause for your
condition."

"There is," said the Idiot, meekly. "I went Christmas shopping yesterday
without having previously trained for it, and this is the result. I
sometimes wonder, Doctor, that you gentlemen, who have the public health
more or less in your hands, don't take the initiative and stave off
nervous prostration and other ills attendant upon a run-down physical
condition instead of waiting for a fully developed case and trying to
cure it after the fact. The ounce-of-prevention idea ought to be
incorporated, it seems to me, into the _materia medica_."

"What would you have us do, move mountains?" demanded the Doctor. "I'm
not afraid to tackle almost any kind of fever known to medical science,
but the shopping-fever--well, it is incurable. Once it gets hold of a
man or a woman, and more especially a woman, there isn't anything that
I know of can get it out of the system. I grant you that it is as much
of a disease as scarlet, typhoid, or any other, but the mind has not yet
been discovered that can find a remedy for it short of abject poverty,
and even that has been known to fail."

"That's true enough," said the Idiot, "but what you can do is to make it
harmless. There are lots of diseases that our forefathers used to regard
as necessarily fatal that nowadays we look upon as mere trifles, because
people can be put physically into such a condition that they are
practically immune to their ravages."

"Maybe so--but if people will shop they are going to be knocked out by
it. I don't see that we doctors can do anything to mitigate the evil
effects of the consequences _ab initio_. After the event we can pump you
full of quinine and cod-liver oil and build you up again, but the ounce
of prevention for shopping troubles is as easily attainable as a ton of
radium to a man with eight cents and a cancelled postage-stamp in his
pocket," said the Doctor.

"Nonsense, Doctor. You're only fooling," said the Idiot. "A college
president might as well say that boys will play football, and that
there's nothing they can do to stave off the inevitable consequences of
playing the game to one who isn't prepared for it. You know as well as
anybody else that from November 15th to December 24th every year an
epidemic of shopping is going to break out in our midst. You know that
it will rage violently in the last stage beginning December 15th, thanks
to our habit of leaving everything to the last minute. You know that the
men and women in your care, unless they have properly trained for the
exigencies of the epidemic period, will be prostrated physically and
nervously, racked in bone and body, aching from tip to toe, their energy
exhausted and their spines as limp as a rag, and yet you claim you can
do nothing. What would we think of a football trainer who would try thus
to account for the condition of his eleven at the end of a season? We'd
bounce him, that's what."

"Perhaps that gigantic intellect of yours has something to suggest,"
sneered the Doctor.

"Certainly," quoth the Idiot. "I dreamed it all out in my sleep last
night. I dreamed that you and I together had started a series of
establishments all over the country--"

"To eradicate the shopping evil?" laughed the Doctor. "A sort of Keeley
Cure for shopping inebriates?"

"Nay, nay," retorted the Idiot. "The shopping inebriate is too much of a
factor in our commercial prosperity to make such a thing as that
popular. My scheme was a sort of shopnasium."

"A what?" roared the Doctor.

"A shopnasium," explained the Idiot. "We have gymnasiums in which we
teach gymnastics. Why not have a shopnasium in which to teach what we
might call shopnastics? Just think of what a boon it would be for a lot
of delicate women, for instance, who know that along about
Christmas-time they must hie them forth to the department stores, there
to be crushed and mauled and pulled and hauled until there is scarcely
anything left to them, to feel that they could come to our shopnasium
and there be trained for the ordeal which they cannot escape."

"Very nice," said the Doctor. "But how on earth can you train them?
That's what I'd like to know."

"How? Why, how on earth do you train a football team except by
practice?" demanded the Idiot. "It wouldn't take a very ingenious mind
to figure out a game called shopping that would be governed by rules
similar to those of football. Take a couple of bargain-counters for the
goals. Place one at one end of the shopnasium and one at the other. Then
let sixty women start from number one and try to get to number two
across the field through another body of sixty women bent on getting to
the other one, and _vice versa_. You could teach 'em all the arts of the
rush-line, defence, running around the ends, breaking through the
middle, and all that. At first the scrimmage would be pretty hard on the
beginners, but with a month's practice they'd get hardened to it, and
by Christmas-time there isn't a bargain-counter in the country they
couldn't reach without more than ordinary fatigue. An interesting
feature of the game would be to have automatic cars and automobiles and
cabs running to and fro across the field all the time so that they would
become absolute masters of the art of dodging similar vehicles when they
encounter them in real life, as they surely must when the holiday season
is in full blast and they are compelled by the demands of the hour to go
out into the world."

"The women couldn't stand it," said the Doctor. "They might as well be
knocked out at the real thing as in the imitation."

"Not at all," said the Idiot. "They wouldn't be knocked out if you gave
them preliminary individual exercise with punching-bags, dummies for
tackle practice, and other things the football player uses to make
himself tough and irresistible."

"But you can't reason with shopping as you do with football," suggested
the Lawyer. "Think of the glory of winning a goal which sustains the
football player through the toughest of fights. The knowledge that the
nation will ring with its plaudits of his gallant achievement is half
the backing of your quarter-back."

"That's all right," said the Idiot, "but the make-up of the average
woman is such that what pursuit of fame does for the gladiator, the
chase after a bargain does for a woman. I have known women so worn and
weary that they couldn't get up for breakfast who had a lion's strength
an hour later at a Monday marked-down sale of laundry soap and Yeats's
poems. What the goal is to the man the bargain is to the woman, so on
the question of incentive to action, Mr. Brief, the sexes are about
even. I really think, Doctor, there's a chance here for you and me to
make a fortune. Dr. Capsule's Shopnasium, opened every September for the
training and development of expert shoppers in all branches of
shopnastics, under the medical direction of yourself and my business
management would be a winner. Moreover, it would furnish a business
opening for all those football players our colleges are turning out,
for, as our institution grew and we established branches of it all over
the country, we should, of course, have to have managers in every city,
and who better to teach all these things than the expert footballist of
the hour?"

"Oh, well," said the Doctor, "perhaps it isn't such a bad thing, after
all; but I don't think I care to go into it. I don't want to be rich."

"Very well," said the Idiot. "That being the case, I will modify my
suggestion somewhat and send the idea to President Taylor of Vassar and
other heads of women's colleges. As things are now they all ought to
have a course of shopping for the benefit of the young women who will
soon graduate into the larger institution of matrimony. That is the only
way I can see for us to build up a woman of the future who will be able
to cope with the strenuous life that is involved to-day in the purchase
of a cake of soap to send to one's grandmother at Christmas. I know,
for I have been through it; and rather than do it again I would let the
All-American eleven for 1908 land on me after a running broad jump of
sixteen feet in length and four in the air."




XVIII

FOR A HAPPY CHRISTMAS


"I have a request to make of you gentlemen," observed the Idiot, as the
last buckwheat-cake of his daily allotment disappeared within. "And I
sincerely hope you will all grant it. It won't cost you anything, and
will save you a lot of trouble."

"I promise beforehand under such conditions," said the Doctor. "The
promise that doesn't cost anything and saves a lot of trouble is the
kind I like to make."

"Same here," said Mr. Brief.

"None for me," said the Bibliomaniac. "My confidence in the Idiot's
prophecies is about as great as a defeated statesman's popular
plurality. My experience with him teaches me that when he signals no
trouble ahead then is the time to look out for squalls. Therefore, you
can count me out on this promise he wants us to make."

"All right," said the Idiot. "To tell the truth, I didn't think you'd
come in because I didn't believe you could qualify. You see, the promise
I was going to ask you to make presupposes a certain condition which you
don't fulfil. I was going to ask you, gentlemen, when Christmas comes to
give me not the rich and beautiful gifts you contemplate putting into my
stocking, but their equivalent in cash. Now you, Mr. Bib, never gave me
anything at Christmas but advice, and your advice has no cash equivalent
that I could ever find out, and even if it had I'm long on it now. That
piece of advice you gave me last March about getting my head shaved so
as to give my brain a little air I've never been able to use, and your
kind suggestion of last August, that I ought to have my head cut off as
a sure cure of chronic appendicitis, which you were certain I had,
doctors tell me would be conducive to heart failure, which is far more
fatal than the original disease. The only use to which I can put it, on
my word of honor, is to give it back to you this Christmas with my best
wishes."

"Bosh!" sneered the Bibliomaniac.

"It was, indeed," said the Idiot. "And there isn't any market for it.
But the rest of you gentlemen will really delight my soul if you will do
as I ask. You, Mr. Brief--what is the use of your paying out large sums
of money, devoting hour after hour of your time, and practically risking
your neck in choosing it, for a motor-car for me, when, as a matter of
fact, I'd rather have the money? What's the use of giving thirty-six
hundred dollars for an automobile to put in my stocking when I'd be
happier if you'd give me a certified check for twenty-five hundred
dollars? You couldn't get any such discount from the manufacturers, and
I'd be more greatly pleased into the bargain. And you, Doctor--generous
heart, that you are--why in thunder should you wear yourself out between
now and Christmas-day looking for an eighteen-hundred-dollar fur-lined
overcoat for me, when, as a matter of actual truth, I'd prefer a
twenty-two-dollar ulster with ten crisp one-hundred-dollar bills in the
change-pocket?"

"I'm sure I don't see why I should," said the Doctor. "And I promise you
I won't. What's more, I'll give you the ulster and the ten crisp one
hundred dollars without fail if you'll cash my check for eighteen
hundred dollars and give me the change."

"Certainly," said the Idiot. "How will you have it, in dimes or
nickels?"

"Any way you please," said the Doctor, with a wink at Mr. Brief.

"All right," returned the Idiot. "Send up the ulster and the ten crisps
and I'll give you my check for the balance. Then I'll do the same by
you, Mr. Poet. My policy involves a square deal for everybody whatever
his previous condition of servitude. Last year, you may remember, you
sent me a cigar and a lovely little poem of your own composition:

    "When I am blue as indigo, you wrote,
     And cold as is the Arctic snow,
       Give me no megrims rotting.
     I choose the friend
     The Heavens send
       Who takes me Idiyachting.

Remember that? Well, it was a mighty nice present, and I wouldn't sell
it for a million abandoned farms up in New Hampshire, but this year I'd
rather have the money--say one thousand dollars and five cents--a
thousand dollars instead of the poem and five cents in place of the
cigar."

"I am afraid you value my verse too high," smiled the Poet.

"Not that one," said the Idiot. "The mere words don't amount to much. I
could probably buy twice as many just as good for four dollars, but the
way in which you arranged them, and the sentiment they conveyed, made
them practically priceless to me. I set their value at a thousand
dollars because that is the minimum sum at which I can be tempted to
part with things that on principle I should always like to keep--like
my word of honor, my conscience, my political views, and other things a
fellow shouldn't let go of for minor considerations. The value of the
cigar I may have placed too high, but the poem--never."

"And yet you don't want another?" asked the Poet, reproachfully.

"Indeed I do," returned the Idiot, "but I can't afford to own so much
literary property any more than I can afford to possess Mr. Brief's
automobile--and this is precisely what I am driving at. So many people
nowadays present us at Christmas with objects we can't afford to own,
that we cannot possibly repay, and overwhelm us with luxuries when we
are starving for our necessities, so that Christmas, instead of bringing
happiness with it, brings trial and tribulation. I know of a case last
year where a very generous-hearted individual sent a set of Ruskin,
superbly bound in full calf that would have set the Bibliomaniac here
crazy with joy, to a widow who had just pawned her wedding-ring to buy a
Christmas turkey for her children. A bundle of kindling-wood would have
been far more welcome than a Carnegie library at that moment, and yet
here was a generous soul who was ready to spend a good hundred dollars
to make the recipient happy. Do you suppose the lady looked upon that
sumptuous Ruskin with anything but misery in her heart?"

"Oh, well, she could have pawned that instead of her wedding-ring,"
sniffed the Bibliomaniac.

"She couldn't for two reasons," said the Idiot. "In the first place, her
sensibilities were such that she could not have pawned a present just
received, and, in the second place, she lived in the town of Hohokus on
the Nepperhan, and there isn't a pawnshop within a radius of fifty miles
of her home. Besides, it's easier to sneak into a pawnshop with a
wedding-ring for your collateral than to drive up with a van big enough
to hold a complete set of Ruskin bound in full calf. It takes nerve and
experience to do that with a cool and careless _mien_, and, whatever you
may have in that respect, Mr. Bib, there are few refined widows in
reduced circumstances who are similarly gifted. Then take the case of my
friend Billups--some sharp of a tailor got out a judgment against
Billups for ninety-eight dollars for a bill he couldn't pay on the
fifteenth of December. Billups got his name in the papers, and received
enough notoriety to fill him with ambition to go on the stage, and it
nearly killed him, and what do you suppose his friends did when
Christmas came around? Did they pay off that judgment and relieve him of
the odium of having his name chalked up on the public slate? Not they.
They sent him forty dollars' worth of golf-clubs, sixteen dollars' worth
of cuff-buttons, eight ten-dollar umbrellas, a half-dozen silver
match-boxes, a cigar-cutter, and about two hundred dollars' worth of
other trash that he's got to pay storage-room for. And on top of that,
in order to keep up his end, Billups has had to hang up a lot of
tradesmen for the match-cases and cigar-cutters and umbrellas and trash
he's sent to his generous friends in return for their generosity."

"Oh, rot," interrupted the Bibliomaniac. "What an idiot your friend
Billups must be. Why didn't he send the presents he received to others,
and so saved his money to pay his debts with?"

"Well, I guess he didn't think of that," said the Idiot. "We haven't all
got the science of Christmas-giving down as fine as you have, Mr. Bib.
But that is a valuable suggestion of yours and I'll put it down among
the things that can be done in the plan I am formulating for the
painless Christmas."

"We can't relieve one another's necessities unless we know what they
are, can we?" asked Mr. Whitechoker.

"We can if we adopt my cash system," said the Idiot. "For instance, I
know that I need a dozen pairs of new socks. Modesty would prevent my
announcing this fact to the world, and as long as I wear shoes you'd
never find it out, but if, when Christmas came, you gave me twenty-five
dollars instead of Foxe's _Book of Martyrs_ in words of one syllable,
you would relieve my necessities and so earn my everlasting gratitude.
Dr. Capsule here wouldn't acknowledge to you or to me that his
suspenders are held together in three places with safety-pins, and will
so continue to be until these prosperous times moderate; but if we were
to present him with nine dollars and sixty-eight cents on Christmas
morning, we should discern a look of gratitude in his eye on that
suspender account that would be missing if we were to hand him out a
seven-dollar gold-mounted shaving-mug instead. We should have shown our
generous spirit on his behalf, which is all a Christmas present ever
does, whether it is a diamond tiara or a chain of sausages, and at the
same time have relieved his anxieties about his braces. His gratitude
would be double-barrelled, and his happiness a surer shot. Give us the
money, say I, and let us relieve our necessities first, and then if
there is anything left over we can buy some memorial of the day with the
balance."

"Well, I think it's a pretty good plan," said Mrs. Pedagog. "It would
save a lot of waste, anyhow. But it isn't possible for all of us to do
it, Mr. Idiot. I, for instance, haven't any money to give you."

"You could give me something better," said the Idiot. "I wouldn't accept
any money from you for a Christmas present."

"Then what shall it be?" asked the Landlady.

"Well--a receipt in full for my bill to date," said the Idiot.

"Mercy!" cried the Landlady. "I couldn't afford that--"

"Oh, yes you could," said the Idiot. "Because for your Christmas I'd
give you a check in full for the amount."

"Oh--I see," smiled the Landlady. "Then what do we get for our
Christmas? Strikes me it's about as broad as it is long."

"Precisely," said the Idiot. "We get even--and that's about as conducive
to a happy Christmas, to Peace on Earth and Good-will to men, as any
condition I know of. If I can get square for Christmas I don't want
anything else."


THE END




I

THE IDEA


The idea was certainly an original one. It was Bedford Parke who
suggested it to Tenafly Paterson, and Tenafly was so pleased with it
that he in turn unfolded it in detail to his friend Dobbs Ferry,
claiming its inception as his very own. Dobbs was so extremely
enthusiastic about it that he invited Tenafly to a luncheon at the
Waldoria to talk over the possibilities of putting the plan into
practical operation, and so extract from it whatever of excellence it
might ultimately be found to contain.

"As yet it is only an idea, you know," said Dobbs; "and if you have ever
had any experience with ideas, Tenny, you are probably aware that,
unless reduced to a practical basis, an idea is of no more value than a
theory."

"True," Tenafly replied. "I can demonstrate that in five minutes at the
Waldoria. For instance, you see, Dobbsy, I have an idea that I am as
hungry as a bear, but as yet it is only a theory, from which I derive no
substantial benefit. Place a portion of whitebait, a filet Bearnaise,
and a quart of Sauterne before me, and--"

"I see," said Dobbsy. "Come along."

[Illustration: DISCUSSING THE IDEA]

And they went; and the result of that luncheon at the Waldoria was the
formation of "The Dreamers: A Club." The colon was Dobbs Ferry's
suggestion. The objects of the club were literary, and Dobbs, who was an
observant young man, had noticed that the use of the colon in these days
of unregenerate punctuation was confined almost entirely to the literary
contingent and its camp-followers. With small poets particularly was
it in vogue, and Dobbs--who, by-the-way, had written some very dainty
French poems to the various _fiancées_ with whom his career had been
checkered--had a sort of vague idea that if his brokerage business would
permit him to take the necessary time for it he might become famous as a
small poet himself. The French poems and his passion for the colon,
combined with an exquisite chirography which he had assiduously
cultivated, all contributed to assure him that it was only lack of time
that kept him in the ranks of the mute, inglorious Herricks.

As formulated by Dobbs and Tenafly, then, Bedford Parke's suggestion
that a Dreamers' Club be formed was amplified into this: Thirteen choice
spirits, consisting of Dobbs, Tenafly, Bedford Parke, Greenwich Place,
Hudson Rivers of Hastings, Monty St. Vincent, Fulton Streete, Berkeley
Hights, Haarlem Bridge, the three Snobbes of Yonkers--Tom, Dick, and
Harry--and Billy Jones of the _Weekly Oracle_, were to form themselves
into an association which should endeavor to extract whatever latent
literary talent the thirteen members might have within them. It was a
generally accepted fact, Bedford Parke had said, that all literature,
not even excepting history, was based upon the imagination. Many of the
masterpieces of fiction had their basis in actual dreams, and, when they
were not founded on such, might in every case be said to be directly
attributable to what might properly be called waking dreams. It was the
misfortune of the thirteen gentlemen who were expected to join this
association that the business and social engagements of all, with the
possible exception of Billy Jones of the _Weekly Oracle_, were such as
to prevent their indulgence in these waking dreams, dreams which should
tend to lower the colors of Howells before those of Tenafly Paterson,
and cause the memory of Hawthorne to wither away before the scorching
rays of that rising sun of genius, Tom Snobbe of Yonkers. Snobbe,
by-the-way, must have inherited literary ability from his father, who
had once edited a church-fair paper which ran through six editions in
one week--one edition a day for each day of the fair--adding an
unreceipted printer's bill for eighty-seven dollars to the proceeds to
be divided among the heathen of Central Africa.

"It's a well-known fact," said Bedford--"a sad fact, but still a
fact--that if Poe had not been a hard drinker he never would have
amounted to a row of beans as a writer. His dreams were induced--and I
say, what's the matter with our inducing dreams and then putting 'em
down?"

That was the scheme in a nutshell--to induce dreams and put them down.
The receipt was a simple one. The club was to meet once a month, and eat
and drink "such stuff as dreams are made of"; the meeting was then to
adjourn, the members going immediately home and to bed; the dreams of
each were to be carefully noted in their every detail, and at the
following meeting were to be unfolded such soul-harrowing tales as
might with propriety be based thereon. An important part of the
programme was a stenographer, whose duty it would be to take down the
stories as they were told and put them in type-written form, which Dobbs
was sure he had heard an editor say was one of the first steps towards a
favorable consideration by professional readers of the manuscripts of
the ambitious.

"I am told," said he, "that many a truly meritorious production has gone
unpublished for years because the labor of deciphering the author's
handwriting proved too much for the reader's endurance--and it is very
natural that it should be so. A professional reader is, after all, only
human, and when to the responsibilities of his office is added the
wearisome task of wading through a Spencerian morass after the
will-o'-wisp of an idea, I don't blame him for getting impatient. Why, I
saw the original manuscript of one of Charles Dickens's novels once, and
I don't see how any one knew it was good enough to publish until it got
into print!"

"That's simply a proof of what I've always said," observed one of the
Snobbe boys. "If Charles Dickens's works had been written by me, no one
would ever have published them."

"I haven't a doubt of it," returned Billy Jones of the _Oracle_, dryly.
"Why, Snobbey, my boy, I believe if you had written the plays of
Shakespeare they'd have been forgotten ages ago!"

"So do I," returned Snobbe, innocently. "This is a queer world."

"The stenographer will save us a great deal of trouble," said Bedford.
"The hard part of literary work is, after all, the labor of production
in a manual sense. These real geniuses don't have to think. Their ideas
come to them, and they let 'em develop themselves. In realistic writing,
as I understand it, the author sits down with his pen in his hand and
his characters in his mind's eye, and they simply run along, and he does
the private-detective act--follows after them and jots down all they
do. In imaginative writing it's done the same way. The characters of
these ridiculous beings we read of are quite as real to the imaginative
writer as the characters of the realist are to the latter, and they do
supernatural things naturally. So you see these things require very
little intellectual labor. It's merely the drudgery of chasing a
commonplace or supernatural set of characters about the world in order
to get 400 pages full of reading-matter about 'em that makes the
literary profession a laborious one. Our stenographer will enable us to
avoid all this. There isn't a man of us but can talk as easily as he can
fall off a log, and a tale once told at our dinners becomes in the
telling a bit of writing."

"But, my dear Parke," said Billy Jones of the _Oracle_, who had been a
"literary journalist," as his fond grandmother called it, for some
years, "a story told is hardly likely to be in the form calculated to
become literature."

"That's just what we want you for, Billy," Bedford replied. "You know
how to give a thing that last finishing-touch which will make it go,
where otherwise it might forever remain a fixture in the author's
pigeon-hole. When our stories are told and type-written, we want you to
go over them, correct the type-writer's spelling, and make whatever
alterations you may think, after consulting with us, to be necessary.
Then, if the tales are ever published as a collection, you can have your
name on the title-page as editor."

"Thanks," answered Billy, gratefully. "I shall be charmed."

And then he hurried back to his apartments, and threw himself on his bed
in a paroxysm of laughter which seemed never-ending, but which in
reality did not last more than three hours at the most.

Hudson Rivers of Hastings, when the idea was suggested to him, was the
most enthusiastic of all--so enthusiastic that the Snobbe boys thought
that, in their own parlance, he ought to be "called down."

"It's bad form to go crazy over an idea," they said. "If Huddy's going
to behave this way about it, he ought to be kept out altogether. It is
all very well to experience emotions, but no well-bred person ever shows
them--that is, not in Yonkers."

"Ah, but you don't understand Huddy," said Tenafly Paterson. "Huddy has
two great ambitions in this life. One is to get into the Authors' Club,
and the other is to marry a certain young woman whose home is in Boston
and whose ambitions are Bostonian. To appear before the world as a
writer, which the Dreamers will give him a chance to do at small
expense, will help him on to the realization of his most cherished
hopes; in fact, Huddy told me that he thought we ought to publish the
proceedings of the club at least four times a year, so establishing a
quarterly magazine, to which we shall all be regular contributors. He
thinks it will pay for itself, and knows it will make us all famous,
because Billy Jones is certain to see that everything that goes out is
first chop, and I'm inclined to believe Huddy is right. The continual
drip, drip, drip of a drop of water on a stone will gradually wear away
the stone, and, by Jove! before we know it, by constant hammering away
at this dream scheme of ours we'll gain a position that won't be
altogether unenviable."

"That's so," said Billy. "I wouldn't wonder if with the constant drip,
drip, drip of your drops of ink and inspiration you could wear the
public out in a very little while. The only troublesome thing will be in
getting a publisher for your quarterly."

"I haven't any idea that we want a publisher," said Bedford Parke.
"We've got capital enough among ourselves to bring the thing out, and so
I say, what's the use of letting anybody else in on the profits? A
publisher wouldn't give us more than ten per cent. in royalties. If we
publish it ourselves we'll get the whole thing."

"Yes," assented Tom Snobbe, "and, what's more, it will have a higher
tone to it if we can say on the title-page 'Privately printed,' eh?
That'll make everybody in society want one for his library, and
everybody not in society will be crazy to get it because it's
aristocratic all through."

"I hadn't thought of that," said Billy Jones. "I've no doubt you are
right, only I'd think you'd sell more copies if you'd also put on the
title-page 'For circulation among the élite only.' Then every man,
woman, or child who happened to get a copy would take pride in showing
it to others, who would immediately send for it, because not having it
would seem to indicate that one was not in the swim."

Nor were the others to whom the proposition was advanced any less
desirous to take part. They saw, one and all, opportunities for a very
desirable distinction through the medium of the Dreamers, and within two
weeks of the original formation of the plan the club was definitely
organized. Physicians were consulted by the various members as to what
edibles contained the properties most likely to produce dreams of the
nature desired, and at the organization meeting all but Billy Jones were
well stocked with suggestions for the inauguration dinner. Hudson Rivers
was of the opinion that there should be six courses at that dinner, each
one of Welsh-rabbit, but varying in form, such as Welsh-rabbit purée,
for instance, in which the cheese should have the consistency of
pea-soup rather than of leather; such as Welsh-rabbit pâté, in which the
cheese should rest within walls of pastry instead of lying quiescent and
inviting like a yellow mantle upon a piece of toast; then a Welsh-rabbit
roast; and so on all through the banquet, rabbit upon rabbit, the whole
washed down with the accepted wines of the ordinary banquet, which
experience had taught them were likely in themselves to assist in the
work of dream-making.

[Illustration: AND SO TO DREAM]

Monty St. Vincent observed that he had no doubt that the Welsh-rabbit
dinner would work wonders, but he confessed his inability to see any
reason why the club should begin its labors by committing suicide. He
added that, for his part, he would not eat six Welsh rabbits at one
sitting if he was sure of Shakespeare's immortality as his reward,
because, however attractive immortality was, he preferred mortality in
the flesh to the other in the abstract. If the gentlemen would begin the
meal with a grilled lobster apiece, he suggested, going thence by an
easy stage to a devilled bird, rounding up with a "slip-on"--which, in
brief, is a piece of mince-pie smothered in a blanket of molten
cheese--he was ready to take the plunge, but further than this he would
not go. The other members were disposed to agree with Monty. They
thought the idea of eating six Welsh rabbits in a single evening was
preposterous, and that in making such a suggestion Huddy was inspired by
one of but two possible motives--that he wished to leap to the foremost
position in imaginative literature at one bound, or else was prompted,
by jealousy of what the others might do, to wish to kill the club at its
very start. Huddy denied these aspersions upon his motives with
vociferous indignation, and to show his sincerity readily acquiesced in
the adoption of Monty St. Vincent's menu as already outlined.

The date of the dinner was set, Billy Jones was made master of
ceremonies, the dinner was ordered, and eaten amid scenes of such
revelry as was possible in the presence of the Snobbe boys, to whom
anything in the way of unrestrained enjoyment was a bore and bad form,
and at its conclusion the revellers went straight home to bed and to
dream.

Two weeks later they met again over viands of a more digestible nature
than those which lent interest to the first dinner, and told the tales
which follow. And I desire to add here that my report of this dinner and
the literature there produced is based entirely upon the stenographer's
notes, coupled with additional information of an interesting kind
furnished me by my friend William Jones, Esq., Third Assistant Exchange
Editor of _The Weekly Oracle, a Journal of To-day, Yesterday, and
To-morrow_.




II

IN WHICH THOMAS SNOBBE, ESQ., OF YONKERS, UNFOLDS A TALE


The second dinner of the Dreamers had been served, all but the coffee,
when Mr. Billy Jones, of the _Oracle_, rapped upon the table with a
dessert-spoon and called the members to order.

"Gentlemen," said he, when all was quiet, "we have reached the crucial
crisis of our club career. We have eaten the stuff of which our dreams
were to be made, and from what I can gather from the reports of those
who are now seated about this festal board--and I am delighted to note
that the full membership of our organization is here represented--there
is not a single one of you who is unprepared for the work we have in
hand, and, as master of ceremonies, it becomes my pleasant duty to
inform you that the hour has arrived at which it behooveth us to begin
the narration of those tales which--of those tales which I am
certain--yes, gentlemen, very certain--will cause the unlaid ghosts of
those masters of the story-tellers' art--"

"Is this a continued story Billy is giving us?" observed Tenafly
Paterson.

"No," replied Bedford Parke, with a laugh; "it is only a life sentence."

"Get him to commute it!" ejaculated Hudson Rivers.

"Order, gentlemen, order!" cried the master of ceremonies, again rapping
upon the table. "The members will kindly not interrupt the speaker. As I
was saying, gentlemen," he continued, "we are now to listen to the
narration of tales which I am convinced will cause the unlaid ghosts of
the past grand masters of the story-tellers' art to gnash their spirit
teeth with anguish for that they in life failed to realize the
opportunities that were theirs in not having told the tales to which we
are about to listen, and over which, when published, the leading living
literary lights will writhe in jealousy."

When the applause which greeted these remarks had subsided, Mr. Jones
resumed:

"That there may be no question of precedence among the gifted persons
from whom we are now to hear, I have provided myself with a small
leathern bottle, such as is to be seen in most billiard-parlors, within
which I have placed twelve numbered ivory balls. These I will now
proceed to distribute among you. When you receive them, I request that
you immediately return them to me, that I may arrange the programme
according to your respective numbers."

Mr. Jones thereupon distributed the ivory balls, and when the returns
had been made, according to his request, he again rose to his feet and
announced that to Mr. Thomas Snobbe, of Yonkers, had fallen the lot of
telling the first story, adding that he took great pleasure in the
slightly supererogative task that devolved upon him of presenting Mr.
Snobbe to his audience. Mr. Snobbe's health was drunk vociferously,
after which, the stenographer having announced himself as ready to
begin, the distinguished son of Yonkers arose and told the following
story, which he called

  VAN SQUIBBER'S FAILURE

[Illustration: THE DREAMERS DINE]

You can't always tell what kind of a day you are going to have in town
in October just because you happen to have been in town on previous
October days, and Van Squibber, for that reason, was not surprised when
his man, on waking him, informed him that it was cold out. Even if he
had been surprised he would not have shown it, for fear of demoralizing
his man by setting him a bad example. "We must take things as they
come," Van Squibber had said to the fellow when he engaged him, "and I
shall expect you to be ready always for any emergency that may arise.
If on waking in the morning I call for a camel's-hair shawl and a bottle
of Nepaul pepper, it will be your duty to see that I get them without
manifesting the slightest surprise or asking any questions. Here is your
next year's salary in advance. Get my Melton overcoat and my box, and
have them at the Rahway station at 7.15 to-morrow morning. If I am not
there, don't wait for me, but come back here and boil my egg at once."

This small bit of a lecture had had its effect on the man, to whom
thenceforth nothing was impossible; indeed, upon this very occasion he
demonstrated to his employer his sterling worth, for when, on looking
over Van Squibber's wardrobe, he discovered that his master had no
Melton overcoat, he telegraphed to his tailor's and had one made from
his previous measure in time to have it with Van Squibber's box at the
Rahway station at the stipulated hour the following morning. Of course
Van Squibber was not there. He had instructed his man as he had simply
to test him, and, furthermore, the egg was boiled to perfection. The
test cost Van Squibber about $150, but it was successful, and it was
really worth the money to know that his man was all that he should be.

"He's not half bad," said Van Squibber, as he cracked the egg.

"It's wintry," said Van Squibber's man on the morning of the 5th of
October.

"Well," Van Squibber said, sleepily, "what of that? You have your
instructions as to the bodily temperature I desire to maintain. Select
my clothing, as usual--and mark you, man, yesterday was springy, and you
let me go to the club in summery attire. I was two and a half degrees
too warm. You are getting careless. What are my engagements to-day?"

"University settlement at eleven, luncheon at the Actors' at one, drive
with the cynical Miss Netherwood at three, five-o'clock tea at four--"

"What?" cried Van Squibber, sharply.

"At fuf--five, I should say, sir," stammered the embarrassed man.

"Thought so," said Van Squibber. "Proceed, and be more careful. The very
idea of five-o'clock tea at four is shocking."

"Dinner with the Austrian ambassador at eight, opera at eleven--"

"In October? Opera?" cried Van Squibber.

"Comic," said the man. "It is Flopper's last night, sir, and you are to
ring down the curtain."

"True," said Van Squibber, meditatively--"true; I'd forgotten. And
then?"

"At midnight you are to meet Red Mike at Cherry Street and Broadway to
accompany him to see how he robs national banks, for the _Sunday
Whirald_."

"What bank is it to be?"

"The Seventeenth National."

"Gad!" cried Van Squibber, "that's hard luck. It's my bank. Wire Red
Mike and ask him to make it the Sixteenth National, at once. Bring me my
smoking-jacket and a boiled soda mint drop. I don't care for any
breakfast this morning. And, by-the-way, I feel a little chilly. Take a
quinine pill for me."

"Your egg is ready, sir," said the man, tremulously.

"Eat it," said Van Squibber, tersely, "and deduct the Café Savarin price
of a boiled egg from your salary. How often must I tell you not to have
my breakfast boiled until I am boil--I mean ready until I am ready for
it?"

The man departed silently, and Van Squibber turned over and went to
sleep.

An hour later, having waited for his soda mint drop as long as his
dignity would permit, Van Squibber arose and dressed and went for a walk
in Central Park. It was eccentric of him to do this, but he did it
nevertheless.

"How Travers would laugh if he saw me walking in Central Park!" he
thought. "He'd probably ask me when I'd come over from Germany," he
added. And then, looking ahead, a thing Van Squibber rarely did,
by-the-way--for you can't always tell by looking ahead what may happen
to you--his eyes were confronted by a more or less familiar back.

"Dear me!" he said. "If that isn't Eleanor Huyler's back, whose back is
it, by Jove?"

Insensibly Van Squibber quickened his pace. This was also a thing he
rarely did. "Haste is bad form," he had once said to Travers, who, on
leaving Delmonico's at 7.20, seemed anxious to catch the 7.10 train for
Riverdale. Insensibly quickening his pace, he soon found himself beside
the owner of the back, and, as his premonitions had told him, it was
Eleanor Huyler.

"Good-morning," he said.

"Why, Mr. Van Squibber!" she replied, with a terrified smile. "You
here?"

"Well," returned Van Squibber, not anxious to commit himself, "I think
so, though I assure you, Miss Huyler, I am not at all certain. I seem to
be here, but I must confess I am not quite myself this morning. My
man--"

"Yes--I know," returned the girl, hastily. "I've heard of him. He is
your _alter ego_."

"I had not noticed it," said Van Squibber, somewhat nonplussed. "I think
he is English, though he may be Italian, as you suggest. But," he added,
to change the subject, "you seem disturbed. Your smile is a terrified
smile, as has been already noted."

"It is," said Miss Huyler, looking anxiously about her.

"And may I ask why?" asked Van Squibber, politely--for to do things
politely was Van Squibber's ambition.

"I--I--well, really, Mr. Van Squibber," the girl replied, "I am always
anxious when you are about. The fact is, you know, the things that
happen when you are around are always so very extraordinary. I came here
for a quiet walk, but now that you have appeared I am quite certain that
something dramatic is about to occur. You see--you--you have turned up
so often at the--what I may properly call, I think, the nick of time,
and so rarely at any other time, that I feel as though some disaster
were impending which you alone can avert."

"And what then?" said Van Squibber, proudly. "If I am here, what bodes
disaster?"

"That is the question I am asking myself," returned Miss Huyler, whose
growing anxiety was more or less painful to witness. "Can your luck hold
out? Will your ability as an averter of danger hold out? In short, Mr.
Van Squibber, are you infallible?"

The question came to Van Squibber like a flash of lightning out of a
clear sky. It was too pertinent. Had he not often wondered himself as to
his infallibility? Had he not only the day before said to Travers, "You
can't always tell in advance just how a thing you are going into may
turn out, even though you have been through that thing many times, and
think you do."

"I do lead a dramatic life," he said, quietly, hoping by a show of
serenity to reassure her. "But," he added, proudly, "I am, after all,
Van Squibber; I am here to do whatever is sent me to do. I am not a
fatalist, but I regard myself as the chosen instrument of fate--or
something. So far, I have not failed. On the basis of averages, I am not
likely to fail now. Fate, or something, has chosen me to succeed."

"That is true," said Eleanor--"quite true; but there are exceptions to
all rules, and I would rather you would fail to rescue some other girl
from a position of peril than myself."

That Miss Huyler's words were prophetic, the unhappy Van Squibber was to
realize, and that soon, for almost as they spoke the cheeks of both were
blanched by a dreadful roar in the bushes beside the path upon which
they walked.

"Shall I leave you?" asked Van Squibber, politely.

[Illustration: "'REMEMBER TO BE BRAVE'"]

"Not now--oh, not now, I beg!" cried Miss Huyler. "It is too late. The
catastrophe is imminent. You should have gone before the author
brought it on. Finding me defenceless and you gone, he might have spared
me. As it is, you are here, and must fulfil your destiny."

"Very well," returned Van Squibber. "That being so, I will see what this
roaring is. If it is a child endeavoring to frighten you, I shall get
his address and have my man chastise his father, for I could never
strike a child; but if it is a lion, as I fear, I shall do what seems
best under the circumstances. I have been told, Miss Huyler, that a show
of bravery awes a wild beast, while a manifestation of cowardice causes
him to spring at once upon the coward. Therefore, if it be a lion, do
you walk boldly up to him and evince a cool head, while I divert his
attention from you by running away. In this way you, at least, will be
saved."

"Noble fellow!" thought Eleanor to herself. "If he were to ask me, I
think I might marry him."

Meanwhile Van Squibber had investigated, and was horror-struck to find
his misgivings entirely too well founded. It was the lion from the park
menagerie that had escaped, and was now waiting in ambush to pounce upon
the chance pedestrian.

"Remember, Eleanor," he cried, forgetting for the moment that he had
never called her by any but her last name with its formal
prefix--"remember to be brave. That will awe him, and then when he sees
me running he will pursue me."

[Illustration: "'ELEANOR HUYLER HAS DISAPPEARED'"]

Removing his shoes, Van Squibber, with a cry which brought the hungry
beast bounding out into the path, started on a dead run, while Miss
Huyler, full of confidence that the story would end happily whatever she
might do, walked boldly up to the tawny creature, wondering much,
however, why her rescuer had removed his shoes. It was strange that,
knowing Van Squibber as well as she did, she did not at once perceive
his motive in declining to run in walking-shoes, but in moments of peril
we are all excusable for our vagaries of thought! You never can tell,
when you are in danger, what may happen next, for if you could you
would know how it is all going to turn out; but as it is, mental
disturbance is quite to be expected.

For once Van Squibber failed. He ran fast enough and betrayed enough
cowardice to attract the attention of ten lions, but this special lion,
by some fearful idiosyncrasy of fate, which you never can count on, was
not to be deceived. With a louder roar than any he had given, he pounced
upon the brave woman, and in an instant she was no more. Van Squibber,
turning to see how matters stood, was just in time to witness the final
engulfment of the fair girl in the lion's jaws.

"Egad!" he cried. "_I have failed!_ And now what remains to be done?
Shall I return and fight the lion, or shall I keep on and go to the
club? If I kill the lion, people will know that I have been walking in
the park before breakfast. If I continue my present path and go to the
club, the fellows will all want to know what I mean by coming without
my shoes on. What a dilemma! Ah! I have it; I will go home."

And that is what Van Squibber did. He went back to his rooms in the
Quigmore at once, hastily undressed, and when, an hour later, his man
returned with the soda mint drop, he was sleeping peacefully.

That night he met Travers at the club reading the _Evening Moon_.

"Hello, Van!" said Travers. "Heard the news?"

"No. What?" asked Van Squibber, languidly.

"Eleanor Huyler has disappeared."

"By Jove!" cried Van Squibber, with well-feigned surprise. "I heard the
boys crying 'Extra,' but I never dreamed they would put out an extra for
her."

"They haven't," said Travers. "The extra's about the lion."

"Ah! And what's happened to the lion?" cried Van Squibber, nervously.

"He's dead. Got loose this morning early, and was found at ten o'clock
dying of indigestion. It is supposed he has devoured some man, name
unknown, for before his nose was an uneaten patent-leather pump, size
9-3/4 B, and in his throat was stuck the other, half eaten."

"Ha!" muttered Van Squibber, turning pale. "And they don't know whose
shoes they were?" he added, in a hoarse whisper.

"No," said Travers. "There's no clew, even."

Van Squibber breathed a sigh of relief.

"Robert!" he cried, addressing the waiter, "bring me a schooner of
absinthe, and ask Mr. Travers what he'll have." And then, turning, he
said, _sotto voce_, to himself, "Saved! And Eleanor is revenged. Van
Squibber may have failed, but his patent-leather pumps have conquered."




III

IN WHICH A MINCE-PIE IS RESPONSIBLE FOR A REMARKABLE COINCIDENCE


When Mr. Snobbe sat down after the narration of his story, there was a
thunderous outburst of applause. It was evident that the exciting
narrative had pleased his fellow-diners very much--as, indeed, it was
proper that it should, since it dealt in a veiled sort of way with
characters for whom all right-minded persons have not only a deep-seated
admiration, but a feeling of affection as well. They had, one and all,
in common with the unaffected portion of the reading community, a liking
for the wholesome and clean humor of Mr. Van Bibber, and the fact that
Snobbe's story suggested a certain original, even in a weak sort of
fashion, made them like it in spite of its shortcomings.

"Good work," cried Hudson Rivers. "Of course it's only gas in comparison
with the sun, but it gives light, and we like it."

"And it's wholly original, too, even though an imitation in manner. The
real Van Bibber never failed in anything he undertook," said Tenafly
Paterson. "I've often wished he might have, just once--it would have
made him seem more human--and for that reason I think Tom is entitled to
praise."

"I don't know about that," observed Monty St. Vincent. "Tom hadn't
anything to do with it--it was the dinner. Honor to whom honor is due,
say I. Praise the cook, or the caterer."

"That's the truth," put in Billie Jones. "Fact is, when this book of
ours comes out, I think, instead of putting our names on the title-page
as authors, the thing to do is to print the menu."

"You miss the point of this association," interjected Snobbe. "We
haven't banded ourselves together to immortalize a Welsh rabbit or a
mince-pie--nay, nor even a ruddy duck. It's our own glory we're after."

"That's it," cried Monty St. Vincent--"that's the beauty of it. The
scheme works two ways. If the stuff is good and there is glory in it,
we'll have the glory; but if it's bad, we'll blame the dinner. That's
what I like about it."

"It's a valuable plan from that point of view," said the presiding
officer. "And now, if the gentleman who secured the ball numbered two
will make himself known, we will proceed."

Hudson Rivers rose up. "I have number two," he said, "but I have nothing
to relate. The coffee I drank kept me awake all night, and when I
finally slept, along about six o'clock next morning, it was one of those
sweet, dreamless sleeps that we all love so much. I must therefore ask
to be excused."

[Illustration: "WRIT A POME ABOUT A KID"]

"But how shall you be represented in the book?" asked Mr. Harry Snobbe.

"He can do the table of contents," suggested St. Vincent.

"Or the fly-leaves," said Tenafly Paterson.

"No," said Huddy; "I shall ask that the pages I should have filled be
left blank. There is nothing helps a book so much as the leaving of
something to the reader's imagination. I heard a great critic say so
once. He said that was the strong point of the French writers, and he
added that Stockton's _Lady or the Tiger_ took hold because Stockton
didn't insist on telling everything."

"It's a good idea," said Mr. Jones. "I don't know but that if those
pages are left blank they'll be the most interesting in the book."

Mr. Rivers sat down with a smile of conscious pride, whereupon Mr.
Tenafly Paterson rose up.

"As I hold the number three ball, I will give you the fruits of my
dinner. I attribute the work which I am about to present to you to the
mince-pie. Personally, I am a great admirer of certain latter-day poets
who deal with the woes and joys of more or less commonplace persons. I
myself would rather read a sonnet to a snow-shovel than an ode to the
moon, but in my dream I seem to have conceived a violent hatred for
authors of homely verse, as you will note when I have finished reading
my dream-poem called 'Retribution.'"

"Great Scott!" murmured Billie Jones, with a deep-drawn sigh. "Poetry!
From Tenafly Paterson! Of all the afflictions of man, Job could have
known no worse."

"The poem reads as follows," continued Paterson, ignoring the chairman's
ill-timed remark:

[Illustration: "I BOUGHT A BOOK OF VERSE"]


RETRIBUTION

    Writ a pome about a kid.
    Finest one I ever did.

    Heaped it full o' sentiment--
    Very best I could invent.

    Talked about his little toys;
    How he played with other boys;

    How the beasts an' birdies all
    Come when little Jamie'd call.

    'N' 'en I took that little lad,
    Gave him fever, mighty bad.

    'N' 'en it sorter pleased my whim
    To have him die and bury him.

    It got printed, too, it did
    That small pome about the kid,

    In a paper in the West;
    Put ten dollars in my vest.

    Every pa an' ma about
    Cried like mighty--cried right out.

    I jess took each grandma's heart,
    Lammed and bruised it, made it smart;

    'N' everybody said o' me,
    "Finest pote we ever see,"

    'Cept one beggar, he got mad.
    Got worst lickin' ever had;

    Got my head atween his fists,
    Called me "Prince o' anarchists."

    Clipped me one behind my ear--
    Laid me up for 'most a year.

    "'Cause," he said, "my poetry
    'D made his wife an' mother cry;

    "'Twarn't no poet's bizness to
    Make the wimmin all boo-hoo."

    'N' 'at is why to-day, by Jings!
    I don't fool with hearts an' things.

    I don't care how high the bids,
    I've stopped scribblin' 'bout dead kids;

    'R if I haven't, kinder sorter
    Think 'at maybe p'r'aps I'd oughter.

The lines were received with hearty appreciation by all save Dobbs
Ferry, who looked a trifle gloomy.

[Illustration: "IT FILLED ME WITH DISMAY"]

"It is a strange thing," said the latter, "but that mince-pie affected
me in precisely the same way, as you will see for yourselves when I
read my contribution, which, holding ball number four as I do, I will
proceed to give you."

Mr. Ferry then read the following poem, which certainly did seem to
indicate that the man who prepared the fatal pie had certain literary
ideas which he mixed in with other ingredients:

    I bought a book of verse the other day,
    And when I read, it filled me with dismay.

    I wanted it to take home to my wife,
    To bring a bit of joy into her life;

    And I'd been told the author of those pomes
    Was called the laureate of simple homes.

    But, Jove! I read, and found it full of rhyme
    That kept my eyes a-filling all the time.

    One told about a pretty little miss
    Whose father had denied a simple kiss,

    And as she left, unhappy, full of cares,
    She fell and broke her neck upon the stairs.

    And then he wrote a lot of tearful lines
    Of children who had trouble with their spines;

    And 'stead of joys, he penned so many woes
    I sought him out and gave him curvature 'f the nose;

    And all the nation, witnessing his plight,
    Did crown me King, and cry, "It served him right."

"A remarkable coincidence," said Thomas Snobbe. "In fact, the
coincidence is rather more remarkable than the poetry."

"It certainly is," said Billie Jones; "but what a wonderfully suggestive
pie, considering that it was a mince!"

After which dictum the presiding officer called upon the holder of the
fifth ball, who turned out to be none other than Bedford Parke, who
blushingly rose up and delivered himself of what he called "The
Overcoat, a Magazine Farce."




IV

BEING THE CONTRIBUTION OF MR. BEDFORD PARKE

THE OVERCOAT

A FARCE. IN TWO SCENES


SCENE FIRST

_Time_: MORNING AT BOSTON

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "I think it will rain to-day, but there is no
need to worry about that. Robert has his umbrella and his mackintosh,
and I don't think he is idiotic enough to lend both of them. If he does,
he'll get wet, that's all." Mrs. Edwards is speaking to herself in the
sewing-room of the apartment occupied by herself and her husband in the
Hotel Hammingbell at Boston. It is not a large room, but cosey. A
frieze one foot deep runs about the ceiling, and there is a carpet on
the floor. Three pins are seen scattered about the room, in one corner
of which is a cane-bottomed chair holding across its back two black
vests and a cutaway coat. Mrs. Edwards sits before a Wilcox & Wilson
sewing-machine sewing a button on a light spring overcoat. The overcoat
has one outside and three inside pockets, and is single-breasted. "It is
curious," Mrs. Edwards continues, "what men will do with umbrellas and
mackintoshes on a rainy day. They lend them here and there, and the
worst part of it is they never remember where." A knock is heard at the
door. "Who's there?"

_Voice_ (_without_). "Me."

[Illustration: "'COME IN'"]

_Mrs. Robert Edwards_ (_with a nervous shudder_). "Come in." Enter Mary
the house-maid. She is becomingly attired in blue alpaca, with green
ribbons and puffed sleeves. She holds a feather duster in her right
hand, and in her left is a jar of Royal Worcester. "Mary," Mrs. Edwards
says, severely, "where are we at?"

_Mary_ (_meekly_). "Boston, ma'am."

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "South Boston or Boston proper?"

_Mary._ "Boston proper, ma'am."

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "Then when I say 'Who's there?' don't say 'Me.'
That manner of speaking may do at New York, Brooklyn, South Boston, or
Congress, but at Boston proper it is extremely gauche. 'I' is the word."

_Mary._ "Yes, ma'am; but you know, ma'am, I don't pretend to be
literary, ma'am, and so these little points baffles I very often." Mrs.
Edwards sighs, and, walking over to the window, looks out upon the
trolley-cars for ten minutes; then, picking up one of the pins from the
floor and putting it in a pink silk pin-cushion which stands next to an
alarm-clock on the mantel-piece, a marble affair with plain caryatids
and a brass fender around the hearth, she resumes her seat before the
sewing-machine, and threads a needle. Then--

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "Well, Mary, what do you want?"

_Mary._ "Please, Mrs. Edwards, the butcher is came, and he says they
have some very fine perairie-chickens to-day."

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "We don't want any prairie-chickens. The prairies
are so very vulgar. Tell him never to suggest such a thing again. Have
we any potatoes in the house?"

_Mary._ "There's three left, ma'am, and two slices of cold roast beef."

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "Then tell him to bring five more potatoes, a
steak, and--Was all the pickled salmon eaten?"

_Mary._ "All but the can, ma'am."

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "Well--Mr. Edwards is very fond of fish.
Tell him to bring two boxes of sardines and a bottle of anchovy paste."

_Mary._ "Very well, Mrs. Edwards."

[Illustration: MARY]

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "And--ah--Mary, tell him to bring some Brussels
sprouts for breakfast. What are you doing with that Worcester vase?"

_Mary._ "I was takin' it to cook, ma'am. Sure she broke the bean-pot
this mornin', and she wanted somethin' to cook the beans in."

_Mrs. Robert Edwards._ "Oh, I see. Well, take good care of it, Mary.
It's a rare piece. In fact, I think you'd better leave that here and
remove the rubber plant from the jardinière, and let Nora cook the beans
in that. Times are a little too hard to cook beans in Royal Worcester."

_Mary._ "Very well, ma'am." Mary goes out through the door. Mrs. Edwards
resumes her sewing. Fifteen minutes elapse, interrupted only by the
ticking of the alarm-clock and the occasional ringing of the bell on
passing trolley-cars. "If it does rain," Mrs. Edwards says at last, with
an anxious glance through the window, "I suppose Robert won't care about
going to see the pantomime to-night. It will be too bad if we don't go,
for this is the last night of the season, and I've been very anxious to
renew my acquaintance with 'Humpty Dumpty.' It is so very dramatic, and
I do so like dramatic things. Even when they happen in my own life I
like dramatic things. I'll never forget how I enjoyed the thrill that
came over me, even in my terror, that night last winter when the
trolley-car broke down in front of this house; and last summer, too,
when the oar-lock broke in our row-boat thirty-three feet from shore;
that was a situation that I enjoyed in spite of its peril. How people
can say that life is humdrum, I can't see. Exciting things, real
third-act situations, climaxes I might even call them, are always
happening in my life, and yet some novelists pretend that life is
humdrum just to excuse their books for being humdrum. I'd just like to
show these apostles of realism the diary I could have kept if I had
wanted to. Beginning with the fall my brother George had from the
hay-wagon, back in 1876, running down through my first meeting with
Robert, which was romantic enough--he paid my car-fare in from Brookline
the day I lost my pocket-book--even to yesterday, when an entire
stranger called me up on the telephone, my life has fairly bubbled with
dramatic situations that would take the humdrum theory and utterly
annihilate it." As Mrs. Edwards is speaking she is also sewing the
button already alluded to on Mr. Edwards's coat as described. "There,"
taking the last stitch in the coat, "that's done, and now I can go and
get ready for luncheon." She folds up the coat, glances at the clock,
and goes out. A half-hour elapses. The silence is broken only by
occasional noises from the street, the rattling of the wheels of a
herdic over the pavement, the voices of newsboys, and an occasional
strawberry-vender's cry. At the end of the half-hour the alarm-clock
goes off and the curtain falls.


SCENE SECOND

_Time_: EVENING AT BOSTON

The scene is laid in the drawing-room of Mr. and Mrs. Robert Edwards.
Mrs. Edwards is discovered reading _Pendennis_, and seems in imminent
danger of going to sleep over it. Mr. Edwards is stretched out upon the
sofa, quite asleep, with _Ivanhoe_ lying open upon his chest.
Twenty-five minutes elapse, when the door-bell rings.

_Mr. Edwards_ (_drowsily_). "Let me off at the next corner, conductor."

_Mrs. Edwards._ "Why, Robert--what nonsense you are talking!"

_Mr. Edwards_ (_rubbing his eyes and sitting up_). "Eh? What? Nonsense?
I talk nonsense? Really, my dear, that is a serious charge to bring
against one of the leading characters in a magazine farce. Wit, perhaps,
I may indulge in, but nonsense, never!"

[Illustration: EDWARDS REBELS]

_Mrs. Edwards._ "That is precisely what I complain about. The idea of
a well-established personage like yourself lying off on a sofa in his
own apartment and asking a conductor to let him off at the next corner!
It's--"

_Mr. Edwards._ "I didn't do anything of the sort."

_Mrs. Edwards._ "You did, too, Robert Edwards. And I can prove it. If
you will read back to the opening lines of this scene you will find that
I have spoken the truth--unless you forgot your lines. If you admit
that, I have nothing to say, but I will add that if you are going to
forget lines that give the key-note of the whole situation, you've got
no business in a farce. You'll make the whole thing fall flat some day,
and then you will be discharged."

_Mr. Edwards._ "Well, I wish I might be discharged; I'm tired of the
whole business. Anybody'd take me for an idiot, the way I have to go on.
Every bit of fun there is to be had in these farces is based upon some
predicament into which my idiocy or yours gets me. Are we idiots? I ask
you that. Are we? You may be, but, Mrs. Edwards, I am not. The idea of
my falling asleep over _Ivanhoe_! Would I do that if I had my way? Well,
I guess not! Would I even dare to say 'I guess not' in a magazine farce?
Again, I guess not. I'm going to write to the editor this very night,
and resign my situation. I want to be me. I don't want to be what some
author thinks I ought to be. Do you know what I think?"

_Mrs. Edwards_ (_warningly_). "Take care, Robert. Take care. You aren't
employed to think."

_Mr. Edwards._ "Precisely. That's what makes me so immortally mad. The
author doesn't give me time to think. I could think real thoughts if
he'd let me, but then! The curtain wouldn't stay up half a second if I
did that; and where would the farce be? The audience would go home
tired, because they wouldn't get their nap if the curtain was down. It's
hard luck; and as for me, I wouldn't keep the position a minute if I
could get anything else to do. Nobody'd give me work, now that I've been
made out to be such a confounded jackass. But let's talk of other
things."

_Mrs. Edwards._ "I'd love to, Robert--but we can't. There are no other
things in the farce. The Billises are coming."

_Mr. Edwards._ "Hang the Billises! Can't we ever have an evening to
ourselves?"

_Mrs. Edwards._ "How you do talk! How can we? There's got to be some
action in the farce, and it's the Billis family that draws out our
peculiarities."

_Mr. Edwards._ "Well, I'm going out, and you can receive the Billises,
and if it's necessary for me to say anything to give go to the play, you
can say it. I make you my proxy."

_Mrs. Edwards._ "It can't be done, Robert. They are here. The bell rang
ten minutes ago, and they ought to have got in here five minutes since.
You can't go out without meeting them in the wings--I mean the
hallway."

_Mr. Edwards._ "Lost!"

    _Enter_ MR. _and_ MRS. BILLIS.

_Billis._ "Ah, Edwards! Howdy do? Knew you were home. Saw light in--"

_Mrs. Billis._ "Don't rattle on so, my dear. Speak more slowly, or the
farce will be over before nine."

_Billis._ "I've got to say my lines, and I'm going to say them my way.
Ah, Edwards! Howdy do? Knew you were home. Saw light in window. Knew
your economical spirit. Said to myself must be home, else why gas? He
doesn't burn gas when he's out. Wake up--"

_Mr. Edwards._ "I'm not asleep. Fact is, I am going out."

_Mrs. Billis._ "Out?"

_Mrs. Edwards._ "Robert!"

_Mr. Edwards._ "That's what I said--out. _O-u-t._"

_Billis._ "Not bad idea. Go with you. Where to?"

_Mr. Edwards._ "Anywhere--to find a tragedy and take part in it. I'm
done farcing, my boy."

_Billis_ (_slapping_ Edwards _on back_). "Rah! my position exactly. I'm
sick of it too. Come ahead. I know that fellow Whoyt--he'll take us in
and give us a chance."

_Mrs. Billis._ "I've been afraid of this."

_Mrs. Edwards._ "Robert, consider your family."

_Mr. Edwards._ "I have; and if I'm to die respected and honored, if my
family is to have any regard for my memory, I've got to get out of
farcing. That's all. Did you sew the button on my overcoat?"

_Mrs. Edwards._ "I did. I'll go get it."

She goes out. Mrs. Billis throws herself sobbing on sofa. Billis dances
a jig. Forty minutes elapse, during which Billis's dance may be encored.
Enter Mrs. Edwards, triumphantly, with overcoat.

_Mrs. Edwards._ "There's your overcoat."

_Mr. Edwards._ "But--but the button isn't sewed on. I can't go out in
this."

_Mrs. Edwards._ "I knew it, Robert. I sewed the button on the wrong
coat."

Billis and Robert fall in a faint. Mrs. Billis rises and smiles,
grasping Mrs. Edwards's hand fervently.

_Mrs. Billis._ "Noble woman!"

_Mrs. Edwards._ "Yes; I've saved the farce."

_Mrs. Billis._ "You have. For, in spite of these--these strikers--these
theatric Debses, you--you got in the point! _The button was sewed on the
wrong overcoat!_"


CURTAIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When the farce was finished," said Mr. Parke, "and the applause which
greeted the fall of the curtain had subsided, I dreamed also the
following author's note: 'The elapses' in this farce may seem rather
long, but the reader must remember that it is the author's intention
that his farce, if acted, should last throughout a whole evening. If it
were not for the elapses the acting time would be scarcely longer than
twenty minutes, instead of two hours and a half."

"I mention this," Mr. Parke added, "not only in justification of myself,
but also as a possible explanation of certain shortcomings in the work
of the original master. Sometimes the action may seem to drag a trifle,
but that is not the fault of the author, but of life itself. To be real
one must be true, and truth is not to be governed by him who holds the
pen."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Parke's explanation having been received in a proper and
appreciative spirit by his fellow-Dreamers, Mr. Jones announced that Mr.
Monty St. Vincent was the holder of the sixth ball, whereupon Mr. St.
Vincent arose and delivered himself as follows:




V

THE SALVATION OF FINDLAYSON

     _Being the story told by the holder of the sixth ball, Mr. Monty
     St. Vincent._


A donkey engine, next to a Sophomore at a football match that is going
his way, is the noisiest thing man ever made, and No. 4-11-44, who
travelled first-class on the American liner _New York_, was not inclined
to let anybody forget the fact. He held a commanding position on the
roof of the deck state-room No. 10, just aft of the forecastle stringer
No. 3, and over the main jib-stay boom No. 6-7/8, that held the
rudder-chains in place. All the little Taffrails and Swashbucklers
looked up to him, and the Capstan loved him like a brother, for he very
often helped the Capstan to bring the Anchor aboard, when otherwise
that dissipated bit of iron would have staid out all night. The Port
Tarpaulins insisted that the Donkey Engine was the greatest humorist
that ever lived, although the Life Preservers hanging by the rail did
not like him at all, because he once said they were Irish--"Cork all
through," said he. Even the Rivets that held the Top Gallant Bilges
together used to strain their eyes to see the points of the Donkey
Engine's jokes, and the third Deputy-assistant Piston Rod, No. 683, in
the hatchway stoke-hole, used to pound the cylinders almost to pieces
trying to encore the Donkey Engine's comic songs.

The Main Mast used to say that the Donkey Engine was as bright as the
Starboard Lights, and the Smoke Stack is said to have told the Safety
Valve that he'd rather give up smoking than lose the constant flow of
wit the Donkey Engine was always giving forth.

Findlayson discovered all this. After his Bridge had gone safely through
that terrible ordeal when the Ganges rose and struck for higher tides,
Findlayson collapsed. The Bridge--But that is another story. This is
this one, and there is little profit in telling two stories at once,
especially in a day when one can get the two stories printed separately
in the several magazines for which one writes exclusively.

After the ordeal of the Kashi Bridge, Findlayson, as I have said,
collapsed, and it is no wonder, as you will see for yourself when you
read that other story. As the Main Girder of the Bridge itself wrote
later to the Suspension Cables of the Brooklyn Bridge, "It's a wonder to
me that the Sahib didn't have the _Bashi-bazouks_ earlier in the game.
He suffered a terrible strain that night."

To which the Cables of the Brooklyn Bridge wittily replied that while
they sympathized with Findlayson, they didn't believe he really knew
what strain was. "Wait until he has five lines of trolley-cars running
over him all day and night. That _is_ a strain! He'd be worse cut up
than ever if he had that. And yet we thrive under it. After all, for
solid health, it's better to be a Bridge than a Man. When are you coming
across?"

Now Findlayson might have collapsed a dozen times before the Government
would have cared enough to give him the vacation he needed. Not that
Government is callous, like an elephant, but because it is conducted, as
a witty Cobra once remarked in the jungle as he fascinated a Tigress, by
a lot of Red Tapirs. Findlayson put in an application for a six months'
vacation, but by the time the necessary consent had reached him the six
months were up. Everybody remembers the tale of Dorkins of the Welsh
Fusileers and his appointment to the Department of the Poloese, how his
term of office was to be six years, and how by the time his credentials
reached him his term of office had expired. So with Findlayson. On the
very date of the expiration of his desired leave he received permission
to go, and of course could not then do so, because it was too late.
Fortunately for Findlayson, however, the Viceroy himself happened to be
passing through, and Findlayson entertained him at a luncheon on the
Bridge. By some curious mistake, when the nuts and raisins were passed,
Findlayson had provided a plateful of steel nuts, designed to hold
rivets in place, instead of the usual assortment of almonds and
_hiki-ree_.

"This man needs a rest," said the Viceroy, as he broke his front tooth
trying to crack one of the steel nuts, and he immediately extended
Findlayson's leave to twenty years without pay, for which Findlayson was
very grateful.

"What is the matter with the man?" asked the Viceroy, as he drove to the
station with the practising Jinrikshaw of the place.

[Illustration: THE VICEROY EXAMINES HIS RUINED SMILE]

"It's my professional opinion," replied the Jinrikshaw, "that the Sahib
has a bad attack of melancholia. He hasn't laughed for six months. If we
could only get him to laugh, I think he'd recover."

"Then it was not in a jocular spirit that he ruined my teeth with those
nuts?" demanded the Viceroy, taking a small mirror out of his pocket and
gazing ruefully on his ruined smile.

"No, your most Excellent Excellency," replied the Jinrikshaw. "The fact
that he ate five of them himself shows that it was an error, not a
jest."

It was thus that Findlayson got his vacation, and even to this day the
Kaskalooloo folk are laughing over his error more heartily than they
ever laughed over a joke.

A month after leaving his post Findlayson reached London, where he was
placed under the care of the most famous physicians. They did everything
they could to make him laugh, without success. _Punch_ was furnished,
and he read it through day after day, and burst into hysterical weeping.
They took him to the theatres, and he never even smiled. They secured a
front seat in the House of Commons for him during important debates, and
he merely sobbed. They took him to the Army and Navy Stores, and he
shivered with fear. Even Beerbohm Tree as Lady Macbeth, or whatever rôle
it was he was playing at the time, failed to coax the old-time dimple to
his cheek. His friends began to whisper among themselves that "old
Findlayson was done for," when Berkeley Hauksbee, who had been with him
in the Soudan, suggested a voyage to the United States.

"He'll see enough there to laugh at, or I'm an unshod, unbroken,
saw-backed, shark-eating skate!" he asserted, and as a last resource
Findlayson was packed, bag and baggage, aboard the liner _New York_.

The first three days out Findlayson was dead to the world. He lay like a
fallen log in the primeval forest. Stewards were of no avail. Even the
repeated calls of the doctor, whose apprehensions were aroused, could
not restore him to life.

[Illustration: THEY GAVE HIM _PUNCH_]

"They'll be sewin' him up in a jute bag and droppin' him overboard if
he doesn't come to by to-morrow," observed the Water Bottle to the Soap
Dish, with a sympathetic glance at the prostrate Findlayson.

"He'll be seasicker than ever if they do," returned the Soap Dish. "It's
a long swim from here to Sandy Hook."

But Findlayson came to in time to avert the catastrophe, and took
several turns up and down the deck. He played horse-billiards with an
English curate, but showed no sign of interest or amusement even at the
curious aspect of the ladies who lay inert in the steamer chairs ranged
along the deck.

"I'm afraid it's hopeless," said Peroo, his valet, shaking his head
sadly. "Unless I take him in hand myself." And Peroo was seized with an
idea.

"I'll do it!" he cried.

He approached Findlayson.

"The Sahib will not laugh," he said. "He will not smile even. He has not
snickered all day. Take these, then. They're straight opium, but
there's fun in them."

He took a small zinc bait-box from his fishing-kit and handed it to
Findlayson, who, on opening it, found a dozen or more brown pellets.
Hastily swallowing six of them, the sick man turned over in his bunk and
tried to go to sleep, while Peroo went into the smoking-room for a game
of _Pok-Kah_ with a party of _Drummerz_ who were crossing to America.

A soft yellow haze suffused the state-room, and Findlayson, nervously
starting to his feet to see what had caused it, was surprised to find
himself confronted by a grinning row of Technicalities ranged in a line
upon the sofa under the port, while seated upon his steamer trunk was
the Donkey Engine 4-11-44.

"Well, here we are," said the Deck Beam, addressing the Donkey Engine.
"What are we here for?"

"That's it," said the Capstan. "We've left our places at your command.
Now, why?"

[Illustration: THE DONKEY ENGINE CALLS ON FINDLAYSON]

"I wanted you to meet my friend Findlayson," said the Donkey Engine.
"He's a good fellow. Findlayson, let me present you to my
associates--Mr. Capstan, Mr. Findlayson. And that gentleman over in the
corner, Mr. Findlayson, is the Starboard Upper Deck Stringer. Rivet,
come over here and meet Mr. Findlayson. The Davits will be here in a
minute, and the Centrifugal Bilge Pump will drop in later."

"I'm glad to meet you all," said Findlayson, rather dazed.

"Thought you would be," returned the Donkey Engine. "That's why I asked
them to come up."

"Do you mind if I smoke in here?" said the Funnel.

"Not a bit," said Findlayson, solemnly. "Let me offer you a cigar."

The party roared at this.

"He doesn't smoke cigars, Fin, old boy," said the Donkey Engine. "Offer
him a ton of coal Perfectos or a basket of kindling Invincibles and
he'll take you up. Old Funnel makes a cigarette of a cord of pine logs,
you know."

"I should think so much smoking would be bad for your nerves," suggested
Findlayson.

"'Ain't got any," said the Funnel. "I'm only a Flue, you know. Every
once in a while I do get a sooty feeling inside, but beyond that I don't
suffer at all."

"Where's the Keel?" asked the Thrust Block, taking off one of his six
collars, which hurt his neck.

"He can't come up to-night," said the Donkey Engine, with a sly wink at
Findlayson, who, however, failed to respond. "The Hold is feeling a
little rocky, and the Keel's got to stay down and steady him."

Findlayson looked blankly at the Donkey Engine. As an Englishman in a
nervously disordered state, he did not seem quite able to appreciate the
Donkey Engine's joke. The latter sighed, shook his cylinder a trifle,
and began again.

"Hear about the Bow Anchor's row with the Captain?" he asked the
Garboard Strake.

"No," replied the Strake. "Wouldn't he bow?"

"He'd bow all right," said the Donkey Engine, "but he wouldn't ank.
Result is he's been put in chains."

"Serves him right," said the Bilge Stringer, filling his pipe with
Findlayson's tooth-powder. "Serves him right. He ought to be chucked
overboard."

"True," said the Donkey Engine. "An anchor can't be made to ank unless
you chuck him overboard."

The company roared at this, but Findlayson never cracked a smile.

"That is very true," he said. "In fact, how could an anchor ank, as you
put it, without being lowered into the sea?"

"It's a bad case," observed Bulwark Plate, in a whisper, to the Upper
Deck Plank.

"It floors me," said the Plank. "I don't think he'd laugh if his uncle
died and left him a million."

"Shut up," said the Donkey Engine. "We've got to do it or bust. Let's
try again."

Then he added, aloud,

"Say, Technicalities, did you ever hear that riddle of the Starboard
Coal Bunker's?"

The company properly had not.

"Well, the Starboard Coal Bunker got it off at Lady Airshaft's last
reception at Binks's Ship-yard: 'What's the difference between a
man-o'-war going through the Suez Canal under tow of a tug-boat and a
boiler with a capacity of 6000 tons of steam loaded to 7000 tons, with
no safety-valve, in charge of an engineer who has a certificate from
Bellevue Hospital showing that he is a good ambulance-driver, but
supports a widowed mother and seven uncles upon no income to speak of,
all of which is invested in Spanish fours, bought on a margin of two per
cent. in a Wall Street bucket-shop conducted by two professional
card-players from Honolulu under indictment at San Francisco for
arson?'"

"Tutt!" said the Rudder. "What a chestnut! I was brought up on riddles
of that kind. _They can't climb a tree._"

"Nope," said the Donkey Engine. "That's not the answer."

"You don't know it yourself," suggested the Funnel.

"Nope," said the Donkey Engine.

"Well, what the deuce is the answer?" said Findlayson, irritably.

"Give it up--the rest of you?" cried the Donkey Engine.

"We do," they roared in chorus.

"I'm surprised at you," said the Donkey Engine. "It's very simple
indeed. The man-o'-war going through the Suez Canal under tow of a
tug-boat has a pull--and the other hasn't, don't you know--eh?"

Findlayson scratched his forehead.

"I don't see--" he began.

"There is no reason why you should. You're not feeling well,"
interrupted the Donkey Engine, "but it's a good riddle--eh?"

"Quite so," said Findlayson.

"It's long, anyhow," said the Screw.

"Which we can't say for to-day's run--only 867 miles?" suggested the
Donkey Engine, interrogatively.

"It's long enough," growled the Screw.

"It certainly is, if it is reckoned in minutes," retorted the Donkey
Engine. "I never knew such a long day."

And so they continued in an honest and technical effort to restore
Findlayson. But he wouldn't laugh, and finally the Screw and the
Centrifugal Bilge Pump and the Stringers and the other well-meaning
Technicalities rose up to leave. Day was approaching, and all were
needed at their various posts.

"Good-night--or good-morning, Findlayson," said the Donkey Engine.
"We've had a very pleasant night. I am only sorry, however, we cannot
make you laugh."

"I never laugh," said Findlayson. "But tell me, old chap, are you
really human? You talk as if you were."

"No," returned the Donkey Engine, sadly. "I am neither fish, flesh, nor
fowl. I'm a _bivalve--a cockney bivalve_," he added.

"Oh," replied Findlayson, with a gesture of deprecation, "you are not a
clam!"

"No," the Donkey Engine replied, as with a sudden inspiration; "but I'm
a hoister."

And Findlayson burst into a paroxysm of mirth--it must be remembered
that he was English--the like of which the good old liner never heard
before.

And later, when Peroo returned, having won at _Pok-Kah_ with the
_Drummerz_, he found his master sleeping like the veriest child.

Findlayson was saved.




VI

IN WHICH HARRY SNOBBE RECITES A TALE OF GLOOM


Monty St. Vincent had no sooner seated himself after telling the
interesting tale of the Salvation of Findlayson, when Billy Jones, of
the _Oracle_, rose up and stated that Mr. Harry Snobbe, as the holder of
the seventh ball, would unfold the truly marvellous story that had come
to him after the first dinner of the Dreamers.

"Mr. Snobbe requests all persons having nerves to be unstrung to
unstring them now. His tale, he tells me, is one of intense gloom; but
how intense the gloom may be, I know not. I will leave it to him to
show. Gentlemen, Mr. Snobbe."

Mr. Snobbe took the floor, and after a few preliminary remarks, read as
follows:


THE GLOOMSTER

A TALE OF THE ISLE OF MAN

Old Gloomster Goodheart, of Ballyhack, left the Palace of the Bishop of
Man broken-hearted. The Bishop had summoned him a week previous to show
cause why he should not be removed from his office of Gloomster, a
position that had been held by members of his family for ten
generations, aye, since the days of that ancient founder of the family,
Cronky Gudehart, of whom tradition states that his mere presence at a
wedding turned the marriage feast into a seeming funeral ceremony,
making men and women weep, and on two occasions driving the bride to
suicide and the groom into the Church. Indeed, Cronky Gudehart was
himself the first to occupy the office of Gloomster. The office was
created for his especial benefit, as you will see, for it was the mere
fact that the two grooms bereft at the altar sought out the consolation
of the monastery that called the attention of the ecclesiastical
authorities to the desirability of establishing such a functionary. The
two grooms were men of wealth, and, had it not been for Cronky
Gudehart's malign influence, neither they nor their wealth would have
passed into the control of the Church, a fact which Ramsay Ballawhaine,
then Bishop of Man, was quick to note and act upon.

"The gloomier the world," said he, "the more transcendently bright will
Heaven seem; and if we can make Heaven seem bright, the Church will be
able to declare dividends. Let us spread misery and sorrow. Let us
destroy the sunshine of life that so gilds with glory the flesh and the
devil. Let all that is worldly be made to appear mean and vile and
sordid."

"But how?" Ramsay Ballawhaine was asked. "That is a hard thing to do."

"For some 'twill doubtless so appear, but I have a plan," the Bishop had
answered. "We have here living, not far from Jellimacksquizzle, the
veriest spoil-sport in the person of Cronky Gudehart. He has a face that
would change the August beauties of a sylvan forest into a bleak scene
of wintry devastation. I am told that when Cronky Gudehart gazes upon a
rose it withers, and children passing him in the highways run shrieking
to their mothers, as though escaping from the bogie man of Caine
Hall--which castle, as you know, has latterly been haunted by horrors
that surpass the imagination. His voice is like the strident cry of
doom. Hearing his footsteps, strong men quail and women swoon; and I am
told that, dressed as Santa Claus, on last Christmas eve he waked up his
sixteen children, and with a hickory stick belabored one and all until
they said that mercy was all they wanted for their Yule-tide gifts."

"'Tis true," said the assistant vicar. "'Tis very true; and I happen to
know, through my own ministrations, that when a beggar-woman from Sodor
applied to Cronky Gudehart for relief from the sorrows of the world, he
gave her a bottle of carbolic acid, saying that therein lay the cure of
all her woes. But what of Cronky and your scheme?"

"Let us establish the office of Gloomster," returned the Bishop. "Set
apart Nightmare Abbey as his official residence, and pay him a salary to
go about among the people spreading grief and woe among them until they
fly in desperation to us who alone can console."

"It's out of sight!" ejaculated the assistant vicar, "and Cronky's just
the man for the place."

It was thus that the office of Gloomster was instituted. As will be
seen, the duties of the Gloomster were simple. He was given liberty of
entrance to all joyous functions in the life of the Isle of Man, social
or otherwise, and his duties were to ruin pleasure wherever he might
find it. Cronky Gudehart was installed in the office, and Nightmare
Abbey was set apart as his official residence. He attended all
weddings, and spoiled them in so far as he was able. It was his custom,
when the vicar asked if there was any just reason why these two should
not be joined together in holy wedlock, to rise up and say that, while
he had no evidence at hand, he had no doubt there was just cause in
great plenty, and to suggest that the ceremony should be put off a week
or ten days while he and his assistants looked into the past records of
the principals. At funerals he took the other tack, and laughed joyously
at every manifestation of grief. At hangings he would appear, and dilate
humorously upon the horrid features thereof; and at afternoon teas he
would appear clad in black garments from head to foot, and exhort all
present to beware of the future, and to give up the hollowness and
vanities of tea and macaroons.

Results were not long in their manifestation. In place of open marriage
the young people of the isle, to escape the malignant persecution of the
Gloomster, took up the habit of elopement, and as elopements always end
in sorrow and regret, the monasteries and nunneries waxed great in the
land. To avoid funerals, at which the Gloomster's wit was so fearsome a
thing, the sick or the maimed and the halt fled out into the open sea
and drowned themselves, and all sociability save that which came from
book sales and cake auctions--in their very nature destructive of a love
of life--faded out of the land.

"Cronky Gudehart was an ideal Gloomster," said the Bishop of Man, with a
sigh, when that worthy spoil-sport, having gone to Africa for a
vacation, was eaten by cannibals. "We shall not look upon his like
again."

"I've no doubt he disagreed with the cannibals," sobbed the vicar, as he
thought over the virtues of the deceased.

[Illustration: THE END OF THE GLOOMSTER]

"None who ate him could escape appendicitis," commented the Bishop,
wiping a tear from his eye; "and, thank Heaven, the operation for that
has yet to be invented. Those cannibals have been taken by this time
from their wicked life."

So it had gone on for ten generations. Cronky had been succeeded by his
son and by his son's son, and so on. To be Gloomster of the Isle of Man
had by habit become the prerogative of the Gudehart family until the
present, when Christian Goodheart found himself summoned before the
Bishop to show cause why he should not be removed. Hitherto the
Gloomster had given satisfaction. It would be hard to point to one of
them--unless we except Eric Goodheart, the one who changed the name from
Gudehart to Goodheart--who had not filled the island with that kind of
sorrow that makes life seem hardly worth living. Eric Goodheart had once
caught his father, "Bully Gudehart," as he was called, in a moment of
forgetfulness, doing a kindly act to a beggar at the door. A wanderer
had appeared at the door of Nightmare Abbey in a starving condition, and
Eric had surprised the Gloomster in the very act of giving the beggar a
piece of apple-pie. The father found himself suddenly confronted by the
round, staring eyes of his son, and he was frightened. If it were ever
known that the Gloomster had done a kindly thing for anybody, he might
be removed, and Bully Gudehart recognized the fact.

"Come here!" he cried brutally, to Eric, as the beggar marched away
munching hungrily on the pie. "Come here, you brat! Do you hear? Come
_here_!" The boy was coming all the while. "You saw?"

"Yes, your Honor," he replied, "I saw. The man said he was nearly dead
with hunger, and you gave him food."

"No," roared the Gloomster, full of fear, for he knew how small boys
prattle, "I did not give him food! _I gave him pie!_"

"All right, your Majesty," the boy answered. "You gave him pie. And I
see now why they call you Bully. For pie is bully, and nothing less."

"My son," the Gloomster responded, seizing a trunk-strap and whacking
the lad with it forcefully, "you don't understand. Do you know why I
fed that man?"

"Because he was dying of hunger," replied the lad, ruefully, rubbing his
back where the trunk-strap had hit him.

"Precisely," said the Gloomster. "If I hadn't given him that pie he'd
have died on the premises, and I can't afford the expense of having a
tramp die here. As it is, he will enjoy a lingering death. _That was one
of your mother's pies._"

Eric ran sobbing to his room, but in his heart he believed that he had
detected his father in a kindly act, and conceived that a Gloomster
might occasionally relax. Nevertheless, when he succeeded to the office
he was stern and unrelenting, in spite of the fact that occasionally
there was to be detected in his eye a glance of geniality. This was
doubtless due to the fact that from the time of his intrusion upon his
father's moment of weakness he was soundly thrashed every morning before
breakfast, and spanked before retiring at night, as a preliminary to his
prayers.

But Christian Goodheart, the present incumbent, had not given
satisfaction, and his Bishop had summoned him to show cause why he
should not be removed, and, as we have seen, the Gloomster had gone away
broken-hearted. Shortly after having arrived at Nightmare Abbey he was
greeted by his wife.

"Well, Christian," she said, "what did the Bishop say?"

"He wants my resignation," sighed Christian. "He says I have shown
myself unworthy, and I fear he has evidence."

"Evidence? Against you, my husband, the most disagreeable man in the
isle?" cried his wife, fondly.

"Yes," sighed Christian. "Do you remember, you old termagant, how,
forgetting myself and my position, last Tuesday I laughed when Peter
Skelly told us what his baby said to his nurse?"

"I do, Christian," the good woman answered. "You laughed heartily, and I
warned you to be careful. It is not the Gloomster's place to laugh, and
I feared it might reach the Bishop's ears."

"It has done so," sighed Christian, shaking his head sadly and wringing
his hands in his agony. "It has reached the Bishop's ears. Little Glory
Grouse was passing by the door at the moment and saw me. Astonished, the
child ran home and told her mother. 'Mommer!' she cried, 'I have seen
the Gloomster laugh! I have seen the Gloomster laugh!' The child was
cross-questioned, but stuck to her story until Mrs. Grouse was
convinced, and told her neighbors, and these neighbors told other
neighbors, until the story came to the ears of Canon Cashman, by whom it
was conveyed to the Bishop himself."

"What a little gossip that Glory Grouse is! She'll come to a bad end,
mark my words!" cried Mrs. Goodheart, angrily. "She'll have her honored
father's name on the circus posters yet."

"Do not blame the child," said Christian, sadly. "She was right. Who
had ever seen a Gloomster smile before? As well expect a ray of
sunshine or a glimpse of humor in a Manx novel--"

"But the Bishop is not going to remove you for one false step, is he,
Christian? He cannot do that, can he?" pleaded the woman.

"That is what I asked him," Christian answered. "And he handed me a
type-written memorandum of what he called my record. It seems that for
six months they have been spying upon me. Read it for yourself."

Mrs. Goodheart took the paper and read, with trembling hands:

"'January 1, 1898--wished Peggy Meguire a happy New Year.' Did you
really, Christian?"

"I don't remember doing so," sighed the Gloomster. "If I did, it must
have been in sarcasm, for I hate Peggy Meguire, and I am sure I wish her
nothing of the sort. I told the Bishop so, but all he would say was,
'Read on.'"

[Illustration: WISHED HER A HAPPY NEW-YEAR]

"'February 23, 1898,'" Mrs. Goodheart continued, reading from the
paper--"'took off his coat and wrapped it about the shivering form of a
freezing woman.'

"How very imprudent of you, Christian!" said his wife.

"But the Bishop didn't know the circumstances," said Christian. "It was
the subtlest kind of deviltry, not humanity, that prompted the act. If I
hadn't given her my coat, the old lady would have frozen to death and
been soon out of her misery. As it was, my wet coat saved her from an
immediate surcease of sorrow, and, as I had foreseen, gave her muscular
rheumatism of the most painful sort, from which she has suffered ever
since."

"You should have explained to the Bishop."

"I did."

"And what did he say?"

"He said my methods were too damned artistic."

"What?" cried Mrs. Goodheart. "The Bishop?"

"Oh, well," said Christian, "words to that effect. He doesn't
appreciate the subtleties of gloom distinction. What he looks for is
sheer brutality. Might as well employ an out-and-out desperado for the
work. I like to infuse a little art into my work. I've tried to bring
Gloomsterism up to the level of an art, a science. Slapping a man in the
face doesn't make him gloomy; it makes him mad. But subtlely infusing
woe into his daily life, so that he doesn't know whence all his trouble
comes--ah! that is the perfect flower of the Gloomster's work!"

"H'm!" said Mrs. Goodheart. "That's well enough, Christian. If you are
rich enough to consume your own product with profit, it's all right to
be artistic; but if you are dependent on a salary, don't forget your
consumer. What else have they against you?"

"Read on, woman," said the Gloomster.

"'April 1, 1898,'" the lady read. "'Gave a half-crown to a starving
beggar.'"

"That was another highly artistic act," said Christian. "I told the
Bishop that I had given the coin to the beggar knowing it to be
counterfeit, and hoping that he would be arrested for trying to pass it.
The Bishop cut me short by saying that my hope had not been fulfilled.
It seems that that ass of a beggar bought some food with the half-crown,
and the grocer who sold him the food put the counterfeit half-crown in
the contribution-box the next Sunday, and the Church was stuck. That's
what I call hard luck."

"Oh, well," returned Mrs. Goodheart, putting the paper down in despair.
"There's no need to read further. That alone is sufficient to cause your
downfall. When do you resign?"

"At once," sighed Christian. "In fact, the Bishop had already written my
resignation--which I signed."

"And the land is without a Gloomster for the first time in five hundred
years?" demanded Mrs. Goodheart.

"No," said Christian, the tears coursing down his nose. "The place is
filled already, and by one who knows gloom only theoretically--a mere
summer resident of the Isle of Man. In short, a famous London author has
succeeded me."

"His name!" cried Mrs. Goodheart.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Just then," said Snobbe, "I awoke, and did not catch the author's name.
It is a curious thing about dreams that just when you get to the crucial
point you wake up."

"I wonder who the deuce the chap could have been?" murmured the other
diners. "Has any London author with a residence on the Isle of Man ever
shown any acquaintance with gloom?"

"I don't know for sure," said Billy Jones. "But my impression is that it
must be the editor of _Punch_. What I am uncertain about is his
residence on the Isle of Man. Otherwise I think he fills the bill."




VII

THE DREAMERS DISCUSS A MAGAZINE POEM


The pathetic tale of the Gloomster having been told and discussed, it
turned out that Haarlem Bridge was the holder of the next ball in the
sequence, the eighth. Haarley had been looking rather nervous all the
evening, and two or three times he manifested some desire to withdraw
from the scene. By order of the chairman, however, the precaution had
been taken to lock all the doors, so that none of the Dreamers should
escape, and, consequently, when the evil hour arrived, Haarley was
perforce on hand.

He rose up reluctantly, and, taking a single page of manuscript from his
pocket, after a few preliminary remarks that were no more nor less
coherent than the average after-dinner speech, read the following
lines, which he termed a magazine poem:

[Illustration: "'O ARGENT-BROWED SARCOPHAGUS'"]

    "O argent-browed Sarcophagus,
      That looms so through the ethered trees,
    Why dost thou seem to those of us
      Who drink the poisoned chalice on our knees
    So distant and so empyrean,
      So dour yet full of mystery?
    Hast thou the oracle as yet unseen
      To guide thy fell misogyny?

    "Nay, let the spirit of the age
      With all its mystic beauty stand
    Translucent ever, aye, in spite the rage
      Of Cossack and of Samarcand!
    Thou art enough for any soul's desire!
    Thou hast the beauty of cerulean fire!
    But we who grovel on the damask earth
    Are we despoilt of thy exigeant mirth?

    "Canst listen to a prayer, Sarcophagus?
    Indeed O art thou there, Sarcophagus?
    What time the Philistine denies,
    What time the raucous cynic cries,
    Avaunt, yet spare! Let this thy motto be,
    With thy thesaurian verbosity.
    Nor think that I, a caterpillian worm,
    Before thy glance should ever honk or squirm.

    "'Tis but the stern condition of the poor
    That panting brings me pottering at thy door,
    To breathe of love and argent charity
    For thee, for thee, iguanodonic thee!"

"That's an excellent specimen of magazine poetry," said Billy Jones.
"But I observe, Haarley, that you haven't given it a title. Perhaps if
you gave it a title we might get at the mystery of its meaning. A title
is a sort of Baedeker to the general run of magazine poems."

Haarlem grew rather red of countenance as he answered, "Well, I didn't
exactly like to give it the title I dreamed; it didn't seem to shed
quite as much light on the subject as a title should."

"Still, it may help," said Huddy Rivers. "I read a poem in a magazine
the other day on 'Mystery.' And if it hadn't had a title I'd never have
understood it. It ran this way:

    "Life, what art thou? Whence springest thou?
    The past, the future, or the now?
    Whence comes thy lowering lunacy?
    Whence comes thy mizzling mystery?
    Hast thou a form, a shape, a lineament?
    Hast thou a single seraph-eyed medicament
    To ease our sorrow and our twitching woe?
    Hast thou one laudable Alsatian glow
    To compensate, commensurate, and condign
    For all these dastard, sleekish qualms of mine?
    Hast thou indeed an abject agate plot
    To show that what exists is really not?
    Or art thou just content to sit and say
    Life's but a specious, coral roundelay?"

"I committed the thing to memory because it struck me as being a good
thing to remember--it was so full of good phrases. 'Twitching woe,' for
instance, and 'sleekish qualms,'" he continued.

"Quaking qualms would have been better," put in Tenafly Paterson, who
judged poetry from an alliterative point of view.

"Nevertheless, I liked sleekish qualms," retorted Huddy. "Quaking qualms
might be more alliterative, but sleekish qualms is _less_ commonplace."

"No doubt," said Tenafly. "I never had 'em myself, so I'll take your
word for it. But what do you make out of 'coral roundelay'?"

"Nothing at all," said Huddy. "I don't bother my head about 'coral
roundelay' or 'seraph-eyed medicament.' I haven't wasted an atom of my
gray matter on 'lowering lunacy' or 'agate plot' or 'mizzling mystery.'
And all because the poet gave his poem a title. He called the thing
'Mystery,' and when I had read it over half a dozen times I concluded
that he was right; and if the thing remained a mystery to the author, I
don't see why a reader should expect ever to be able to understand it."

"Very logical conclusion, Huddy," said Billy Jones, approvingly. "If a
poet chooses a name for his poem, you may make up your mind that there
is good reason for it, and certainly the verses you have recited about
the 'coral roundelay' are properly designated."

"Well, I'd like to have the title of that yard of rhyme Haarlem Bridge
just recited," put in Dobbs Ferry, scratching his head in bewilderment.
"It strikes me as being quite as mysterious as Huddy's. What the deuce
can a man mean by referring to an 'auburn-haired Sarcophagus'?"

"It wasn't auburn-haired," expostulated Haarlem. "It was argent-browed."

"Old Sarcophagus had nickel-plated eyebrows, Dobby," cried Tom Snobbe,
forgetting himself for a moment.

"Well, who the dickens was old Sarcophagus?" queried Dobby, unappeased.

"He was one of the Egyptian kings, my dear boy," vouchsafed Billy Jones,
exploding internally with mirth. "You've heard of Augustus Cæsar,
haven't you?"

"Yes," said Dobby.

"Well," explained Billy Jones, "Sarcophagus occupied the same relation
to the Egyptians that Augustus did to the Romans--in fact, the
irreverent used to call him Sarcophagustus, instead of Sarcophagus,
which was his real name. This poem of Haarley's is manifestly addressed
to him."

[Illustration: "SARCOPHAGUSTUS"]

"Did he have nickel-plated eyebrows?" asked Bedfork Parke, satirically.

"No," said Billy Jones. "As I remember the story of Sarcophagus as I
read of him in college, he was a very pallid sort of a potentate--his
forehead was white as marble. So they called him the Argent-browed
Sarcophagus."

"It's a good thing for us we have Billy Jones with us to tell us all
these things," whispered Tom Snobbe to his brother Dick.

"You bet your life," said Dick. "There's nothing, after all, like a
classical education. I wish I'd known it while I was getting mine."

"What's 'fell misogyny'?" asked Tenafly Paterson, who seemed to be
somewhat enamoured of the phrase. "Didn't old Sarcophagus care for
chemistry?"

"Chemistry?" demanded the chairman.

"That's what I said," said Tenny. "Isn't misogyny a chemical compound of
metal and gas?"

Tenny had been to the School of Mines for two weeks, and had retired
because he didn't care for mathematics and the table at the college
restaurant wasn't good.

"I fancy you are thinking of heterophemy, which is an infusion of
unorthodox gases into a solution of vocabulary particles," suggested
Billy Jones, grasping his sides madly to keep them from shaking.

"Oh yes," said Tenny, "of course. I remember now." Then he laughed
somewhat, and added, "I always get misogyny and heterophemy mixed."

"Who wouldn't?" cried Harry Snobbe. "I do myself! There's no chance to
talk about either where I live," he added. "Half the people don't know
what they mean. They're not very anthropological up my way."

"What's a Samarcand?" asked Tenafly, again. "Haarley's poem speaks of
Cossack and of Samarcand. Of course we all know that a Cossack is a
garment worn by the Russian peasants, but I never heard of a Samarcand."

"It's a thing to put about your neck," said Dick Snobbe. "They wear 'em
in winter out in Siberia. I looked it up some years ago."

"Let's take up 'cerulean fire,'" said Bedford Parke, Tenafly appearing
to be satisfied with Snobbe's explanation.

"What's 'cerulean fire'?"

"Blue ruin," said Huddy.

"And 'damask earth'?" said Bedford.

"Easy," cried Huddy. "Even I can understand that. Did you never hear,
Beddy, of painting a town red? That's damask earth in a small way. If
you can paint a town red with your limited resources, what couldn't a
god do with a godlike credit? As I understand the poem, old Sarcophagus
comes down out of the cerulean fire, and goes in for a little damask
earth. That's why the poet later says:

    "'Canst listen to a prayer, Sarcophagus?
    Indeed O art thou there, Sarcophagus?'

He wanted to pray to him, but didn't know if he'd got back from damask
earth yet."

"You're a perfect wonder, Huddy," said Billy Jones. "As a
thought-detector you are a beauty. I believe you'd succeed if you opened
up a literary bureau somewhere and devoted your time to explaining
Browning and Meredith and others to a mystified public."

"'Tis an excellent idea," said Tom Snobbe. "I'd really rejoice to see
certain modern British masterpieces translated into English, and, with
headquarters in Boston, the institution ought to flourish. Do worms
honk?"

[Illustration: MR. BILLY JONES]

"I never heard of any doing so," replied the chairman, "but in these
days it is hardly safe to say that anything is impossible. If you have
watched the development of the circus in the last five years--I mean the
real circus, not the literary--you must have observed what an advance
intellectually has been made by the various members of the animal
kingdom. Elephants have been taught to sit at table and dine like
civilized beings on things that aren't good for them; pigs have been
educated so that, instead of evincing none but the more domestic
virtues and staying contentedly at home, they now play poker with the
sangfroid of a man about town; while the seal, a creature hitherto
considered useful only in the production of sacques for our wives, and
ear-tabs for our children, and mittens for our hired men, are now
branching out as rivals to the college glee clubs, singing songs,
playing banjoes, and raising thunder generally. Therefore it need
surprise no one if a worm should learn to honk as high as any goose that
ever honked. Anyhow, you can't criticise a poet for anything of that
kind. His license permits him to take any liberties he may see fit with
existing conditions."

"All of which," observed Dick Snobbe, "is wandering from the original
point of discussion. What is the meaning of Haarley's poem? I can't see
that as yet we have reached a definite understanding on that point."

"Well, I must confess," said Jones, "that I can't understand it myself;
but I never could understand magazine poetry, so that doesn't prove
anything. I'm only a newspaper man."

"Let's have the title, Haarley," cried Tenafly Paterson. "Was it called
'Life,' or 'Nerve Cells,' or what?"

For a second Bridge's cheeks grew red.

"Oh, well, if you must have it," he said, desperately, "here it is. It
was called, 'A Thought on Hearing, While Visiting Gibraltar in June,
1898, that the War Department at Washington Had Failed to Send Derricks
to Cuba, Thereby Delaying the Landing of General Shafter Three Days and
Giving Comfort to the Enemy.'"

"Great Scott!" roared Dick Snobbe. "What a title!"

"It is excellent," said Billy Jones. "I now understand the intent of the
poem."

"Which was--?" asked Rivers.

"To supply a real hiatus in latter-day letters," Jones replied; "to give
the public a war poem that would make them think, which is what a true
war poem should do. Who has the ninth ball?"

"I am the unfortunate holder of that," said Greenwich Place. "I'd just
been reading Anthony Hope and Mr. Dooley. The result is a composite,
which I will read."

"What do you call it, Mr. Place?" asked the stenographer.

"Well, I don't know," replied Greenwich. "I guess 'A Dooley Dialogue'
about describes it."




VIII

DOLLY VISITS CHICAGO

     _Being the substance of a Dooley dialogue dreamed by Greenwich
     Place, Esq._


"I must see him," said Dolly, rising suddenly from her chair and walking
to the window. "I really must, you know."

"Who?" I asked, rousing myself from the lethargy into which my morning
paper had thrust me. It was not grammatical of me--I was somewhat under
the influence of newspaper English--but Dolly is quick to understand.
"Must see who?" I continued.

"Who indeed?" cried Dolly, gazing at me in mock surprise. "How stupid of
you! If I went to Rome and said I must see him, you'd know I must mean
the Pope; if I went to Berlin and said I must see it, you'd know I
meant the Emperor. Therefore, when I come to Chicago and say that I must
see him, you ought to be able to guess that I mean--"

"Mr. Dooley?" I ventured, at a guess.

"Good for you!" cried Dolly, clapping her hands together joyously; and
then she hummed bewitchingly, "The Boy Guessed Right the Very First
Time," until I begged her to desist. When Dolly claps her hands and
hums, she becomes a vision of loveliness that would give the most
confirmed misogynist palpitation of the heart, and I had no wish to die.

"Do you suppose I could call upon him without being thought too
unconventional?" she blurted out in a moment.

"You can do anything," said I, admiringly. "That is, with me to help," I
added, for I should be sorry if Dolly were to grow conceited. "Perhaps
it would be better to have Mr. Dooley call upon you. Suppose you send
him your card, and put 'at home' on it? I fancy that would fetch him."

"Happy thought!" said Dolly. "Only I haven't one. In the excitement of
our elopement I forgot to get any. Suppose I write my name on a blank
card and send it?"

"Excellent," said I.

And so it happened; the morning's mail took out an envelope addressed to
Mr. Dooley, and containing a bit of pasteboard upon which was written,
in the charming hand of Dolly:

    Mrs. R. Dolly-Rassendyll.
            At Home.
         The Hippodorium.
        Tuesday Afternoon.

The response was gratifyingly immediate.

The next morning Dolly's mail contained Mr. Dooley's card, which read as
follows:

[Illustration: "'I MUST SEE HIM,' SAID DOLLY"]

          Mr. Dooley.
           At Work.
    Every Day.      Archie Road.

"Which means?" said Dolly, tossing the card across the table to me.

"That if you want to see Dooley you'll have to call upon him at his
place of business. It's a saloon, I believe," I observed. "Or a
club--most American saloons are clubs, I understand."

"I wonder if there's a ladies' day there?" laughed Dolly. "If there
isn't, perhaps I'd better not."

And I of course agreed, for when Dolly thinks perhaps she'd better not,
I always agree with her, particularly when the thing is a trifle
unconventional.

"I am sorry," she said, as we reached the conclusion. "To visit Chicago
without meeting Mr. Dooley strikes me as like making the Mediterranean
trip without seeing Gibraltar."

But we were not to be disappointed, after all, for that afternoon who
should call but the famous philosopher himself, accompanied by his
friend Mr. Hennessey. They were ushered into our little parlor, and
Dolly received them radiantly.

"Iv coorse," said Dooley, "I hatter come t' see me new-found cousin.
Hennessey here says, he says, 'She ain't yer cousin,' he says; but whin
I read yer car-r-rd over th' second time, an' see yer na-a-ame was R.
Dooley-Rassendyll, wid th' hifalution betwixt th' Dooley an' th'
Rassendyll, I says, 'Hennessey,' I says, 'that shmall bit iv a coupler
in that na-a-ame means only wan thing,' I says. 'Th' la-ady,' I says,
'was born a Dooley, an' 's prood iv it,' I says, 'as she'd ought to be,'
I says. 'Shure enough,' says Hennessey; 'but they's Dooleys an'
Dooleys,' he says. 'Is she Roscommon or Idunnaw?' he says. 'I dinnaw
meself,' I says, 'but whichiver she is,' I says, 'I'm goin' to see her,'
I says. 'Anny wan that can feel at home in a big hotel like the
Hippojorium,' I says, 'is wort' lookin' at, if only for the curawsity
of it,' I says. Are ye here for long?"

"We are just passing through," said Dolly, with a pleased smile.

"It's a gud pla-ace for that," said Dooley. "Thim as pass troo Chicago
ginerally go awaa pleased, an' thim as stays t'ink it's th' only pla-ace
in th' worruld, gud luk to 'em! for, barrin' Roscommon an' New York,
it's th' only pla-ace I have anny use for. Is yer hoosband anny relation
t' th' dood in the _Prizner iv Cinders_?"

I laughed quietly, but did not resent the implication. I left Dolly to
her fate.

"He is the very same person," said Dolly.

"I t'ought as much," said Dooley, eying me closely. "Th' strorberry mark
on his hair sort of identified him," he added. "Cousin Roopert, I ta-ak
ye by the hand. Ye was a bra-ave lad in th' first book, an' a dom'd fool
in th' second; but I read th' second first, and th' first lasht, so whin
I left ye ye was all right. I t'ought ye was dead?"

"No," said I. "I am only dead in the sense that Mr. Hope has no further
use for me."

"A wise mon, that Mr. Ant'ny Hawp," said Dooley. "Whin I write me book,"
he continued, "I'm goin' t' shtop short whin folks have had enough."

"Oh, indeed!" cried Dolly, enthusiastically. "Are you writing a book,
Mr. Dooley? I am so glad."

"Yis," said Dooley, deprecatingly, yet pleased by Dolly's enthusiasm.
"I'm half finished already. That is to say, I've made th'
illusthrations. An' the publishers have accepted the book on th'
stringth iv them."

"Really?" said Dolly. "Do you really draw?"

"Nawm," said Dooley. "I niver drew a picture in me life."

"He draws corks," put in Hennessey. "He's got a pull that bates--"

"Hennessey," interrupted Mr. Dooley, "since whin have ye been me
funnygraph? Whin me cousin ashks me riddles, I'll tell her th' answers.
G' down-shtairs an' get a cloob san'wich an' ate yourself to death.
Char-rge it to--er--char-rge it to Misther Rassendyll here--me cousin
Roop, be marritch. He looks liks a soft t'ing."

Hennessey subsided and showed an inclination to depart, and I, not
liking to see a well-meaning person thus sat upon, tried to be pleasant
to him.

"Don't go just yet, Mr. Hennessey," said I. "I should like to talk to
you."

"Mr. Rassendyll," he replied, "I'm not goin' just yet, but an invitation
to join farces with one iv the Hippojorium's cloob sandwhiches is too
much for me. I must accept. Phwat is the noomber iv your shweet?"

I gave him the number, and Hennessey departed. Before he went, however,
he comforted me somewhat by saying that he too was "a puppit in th'
han's iv an auter. Ye've got to do," said he, "whativer ye're sint t'
do. I'm told ye've killed a million Germans--bless ye!--but ye're
nawthin' but a facthory hand afther all. I'm th' background iv Dooley.
If Dooley wants to be smar-rt, I've got t' play th' fool. It's the same
with you; only you've had yer chance at a printcess, later on pla-acin'
the la-ady in a 'nonymous p'sition--which is enough for anny man, Dooley
or no Dooley."

Hennessey departed in search of his club sandwich, which was
subsequently alluded to in my bill, and for which I paid with pleasure,
for Hennessey is a good fellow. I then found myself listening to the
conversation between Dolly and Dooley.

"Roscommon, of course," Dolly was saying. What marvellous adaptability
that woman has! "How could you think, my dear cousin, that I belonged to
the farmer Dooleys?"

"I t'ought as much," said Mr. Dooley, genially, "now that I've seen ye.
Whin you put th' wor-rds 'at home' on yer car-rd, I had me doots. No
Dooley iv th' right sor-rt iver liked annyt'ing a landlord gave him; an'
whin y' expreshed satisfaction wid th' Hippojorium, I didn't at first
t'ink ye was a true Dooley. Since I've seen ye, I love ye properly,
ma'am--like th' cousin I am. I've read iv ye, just as I've read iv yer
hoosband, Cousin Roopert here be marritch, in th' biojographies of Mr.
Ant'ny Hawp, an' while I cudn't help likin' ye, I must say I didn't
t'ink ye was very deep on th' surface, an' when I read iv your elopin'
with Cousin Roop, I says to Hennessey, I says, 'Hennessey,' I says,
'that's all right, they'd bote iv 'em better die, but let us not be
asashinators,' I says; 'let 'em be joined in marritch. That's punishment
enough,' I says to Hennessey. Ye see, Miss Dooley, I have been marrit
meself."

"But I have found married life far from punishment," I heard Dolly say.
"I fear you're a sad pessimist, Mr. Dooley," she added.

"I'm not," Mr. Dooley replied. "I'm a Jimmycrat out an' out, if ye refer
to me politics; but if your remark is a reflection on me religion, let
me tell ye, ma'am, that, like all me countrymen in this beautiful land,
I'm a Uni-tarrian, an' prood iv it."

I ventured to interpose at this point.

"Dooley," said I, "your cousin Roop, as you call him, is very glad to
meet you, whatever your politics or your religion."

"Mosht people are," said he, dryly.

"That shows good taste," said I. "But how about your book? It has been
accepted on the strength of its illustrations, you say. How about them?
Can we see them anywhere? Are they on exhibition?"

"You can not only see thim, but you can drink 'em free anny time you
come out to Archie Road," Dooley replied, cordially.

"Drink--a picture?" I asked.

[Illustration: "'KAPE YOUR HOOSBAND HOME'"]

"Yis," said Dooley. "Didn't ye iver hear iv dhrinkin' in a picture,
Cousin Roopert? Didn't ye hear th' tark about th' 'Angelus' whin 'twas
here? Ye cud hear th' bells ringin' troo th' paint iv it. Ye cud almost
hear th' couple in front just back iv th' varnish quar'lin as t'whether
'twas th' Angelus er the facthery bell that was goin' off. 'Twas big
an' little felt th' inflooance iv Misther Miller's jaynius, just be
lukin' at ut--though as fer me, th' fir-rst time I see the t'ing I says,
says I, 'Is ut lukin' for bait to go fishin' with they are?' I says.
'Can't ye hear the pealin' iv the bells?' says Hennessey, who was with
me. 'That an' more,' I says. 'I can hear the pealin' o' th' petayties,'
I says. 'Do ye dhrink in th' feelin' iv it?' says Hennessey. 'Naw, t'ank
ye,' I says. 'I'm not thirsty,' I says. 'Besides, I've swore off
dhrinkin' ile-paintin's,' I says. 'Wathercoolers is gud enough fer me,'
I says. An' wid that we wint back to the Road. But that was th' fir-rst
time I iver heard iv dhrinkin' a work iv ar-rt."

"But some of the things you--ah--you Americans drink," put in Dolly,
"are works of art, my dear Mr. Dooley. Your cousin Rupert gave me a
cocktail at dinner last night--"

"Ye've hit ut, Miss Dooley," returned the philosopher, with a beautiful
enthusiasm. "Ye've hit ut square. I see now y're a thrue Dooley. An'
wid yer kind permission I'll dedicate me book to ye. Ut's cocktails that
book's about, ma'am. _Fifty Cocktails I Have Met_ is th' na-ame iv ut.
An' whin I submitted th' mannyscrip' wid th' illusthrations to the
publisher, he dhrank 'em all, an' he says, 'Dooley,' he says, 'ut's a
go. I'll do yer book,' he says, 'an' I'll pay ye wan hoondred an'
siventy-five per cent.,' he says. 'Set 'em up again, Dooley,' he says;
an' I mixed 'em. 'I t'ink, Dooley,' he says, afther goin' troo th'
illusthrations th' second toime--'I t'ink,' he says, 'ye'd ought to get
two hoondred an' wan per cent. on th' retail price iv th' book,' he
says. 'Can't I take a bottle iv these illusthrations to me office?' he
says. 'I'd like to look 'em over,' he says; an' I mixed 'im up a quar-rt
iv th' illusthrations to th' chapther on th' Mar-rtinney, an' sent him
back to his partner in th' ambylanch."

[Illustration: MIXING ILLUSTRATIONS]

"I shall look forward to the publication of your book with much
interest, Mr. Dooley," said Dolly. "Now that I have discovered our
cousinship, I am even more interested in you than I was before; and let
me tell you that, before I met you, I thought of you as the most vital
figure in American humor that has been produced in many years."

"I know nothin' iv American humor," said Dooley, "for I haven't met anny
lately, an' I know nothin' iv victuals save what I ate, an' me appytite
is as satisfoid wid itself as Hobson is wid th' kisses brawt onto him by
th' sinkin' iv th' Merrimickinley. But for you an' Misther Rassendyll,
ma'am, I've nothin' but good wishes an' ah--illusthrations to me book
whenever ye give yer orders. Kape your hoosband home, Miss Dooley," he
added. "He's scrapped wanst too often already wi' th' Ruraltarriers, an'
he's been killed off wanst by Mr. Ant'ny Hawp; but he'll niver die if ye
only kape him home. If he goes out he'll git fightin' agin. If he
attimpts a sayquil to the sayquil, he's dead sure enough!"

And with this Dolly and Dooley parted.

For myself, Rupert Rassendyll, I think Dooley's advice was good, and as
long as Dolly will keep me home, I'll stay. For is it not better to be
the happy husband of Dolly of the Dialogues, than to be going about like
a knight of the Middle Ages clad in the evening dress of the nineteenth
century, doing impossible things?

As for Dooley's impression of Dolly, I can only quote what I heard he
had said after meeting her.

"She's a Dooley sure," said he, being novel to compliment. And I am glad
she is, for despite the charms of Flavia of pleasant memory, there's
nobody like Dolly for me, and if Dolly can only be acknowledged by the
Dooleys, her fame, I am absolutely confident, is assured.




IX

IN WHICH YELLOW JOURNALISM CREEPS IN


The applause which followed the reading of the Dooley Dialogue showed
very clearly that, among the diners at least, neither Dooley nor Dolly
had waned in popularity. If the dilution, the faint echo of the
originals, evoked such applause, how potent must have been the genius of
the men who first gave life to Dooley and the fair Dolly!

"That's good stuff, Greenwich," said Billie Jones. "You must have eaten
a particularly digestible meal. Now for the tenth ball. Who has it?"

"I," said Dick Snobbe, rising majestically from his chair. "And I can
tell you what it is; I had a tough time of it in my dream, as you will
perceive when I recite to you the story of my experiences at the battle
of Manila."

"Great Scott, Dick!" cried Bedford Parke. "You weren't in that, were
you?"

"Sir," returned Dick, "I was not only _in_ it, I was the thing itself. I
was the war correspondent of the Sunday _Whirnal_, attached to Dewey's
fleet."

Whereupon the talented Mr. Snobbe proceeded to read the following cable
despatch from the special correspondent of the _Whirnal_:

  MANILA FALLS
  THE SPANISH FLEET DESTROYED
  THE SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT OF THE _WHIRNAL_
  AIDED BY COMMODORE DEWEY AND HIS FLEET
  CAPTURES THE PHILIPPINES

[Illustration: THE SHIP'S BARBER AT WORK]

MANILA, _May 1, 1898_.--I have glorious news. I have this day destroyed
the Spanish fleet and captured the Philippine Islands. According to my
instructions from the City Editor of the _Whirnal_, I boarded the
_Olympia_, the flag-ship of the fleet under Commodore Dewey at
Hong-kong, on Wednesday last. Upon reading my credentials the Commodore
immediately surrendered the command of the fleet to me, and retired to
his state-room, where he has since remained. I deemed it well to keep
him there until after the battle was over, fearing lest he should annoy
me with suggestions, and not knowing but that he might at any time
spread dissension among the officers and men, who, after the habit of
seamen, frequently manifest undue affection and sympathy for a deposed
commander. I likewise, according to your wishes, concealed from the
officers and crew the fact that the Commodore had been deposed,
furthering the concealment by myself making up as Dewey. Indeed, it was
not until after the battle this morning that any but Dewey and the
ship's barber were aware of the substitution, since my disguise was
perfect. The ship's barber I had to take into my confidence, for
unfortunately on leaving Hong-kong I had forgotten to provide myself
with a false mustache, so that in concealing the deposition of the
Commodore by myself assuming his personality I was compelled to have the
gentleman's mustache removed from his upper lip and transferred to my
own. This the barber did with neatness and despatch, I having first
chloroformed the Commodore, from whom some resistance might have been
expected, owing to his peculiar temperament. Fortunately the fellow was
an expert wig-maker, and within an hour of the shaving of Dewey I was
provided with a mustache which could not fail to be recognized as the
Commodore's, since it was indeed that very same object. When five
hundred miles at sea I dropped the barber overboard, fearing lest he
should disturb my plans by talking too much. I hated to do it, but in
the interest of the _Whirnal_ I hold life itself as of little
consequence, particularly if it is the life of some one else--and who
knows but the poor fellow was an expert swimmer, and has by this time
reached Borneo or some other bit of dry land? He was alive when I last
saw him, and yelling right lustily. If it so happen that he has swum
ashore somewhere, kindly let me know at your convenience; for beneath a
correspondent's exterior I have a warm heart, and it sometimes troubles
me to think that the poor fellow may have foundered, since the sea was
stressful and the nearest dry point was four hundred and sixty knots
away to S.E. by N.G., while the wind was blowing N.W. by N.Y.C. & H.R.R.
But to my despatch.

Dewey done for, despoiled of his mustache and rifled of his place, with
a heavy sea running and a dense fog listing to starboard, I summoned my
officers to the flag-ship, and, on the evening of April 30th, the
fog-horns of Cavité having indicated the approach of the Philippine
coast, gave them, one and all, their final instructions. These were, in
brief, never to do anything without consulting with me.

"To facilitate matters, gentlemen," said I, ordering an extra supply of
grog for the captains, and milk punches for the lieutenants, "we must
connect the various vessels of the fleet with telephone wires. Who will
undertake this perilous duty?"

They rose up as one man, and, with the precision of a grand-opera
chorus, replied: "Commodore"--for they had not penetrated my
disguise--"call upon us. If you will provide the wires and the 'phones,
we will do the rest." And they followed these patriotic words with
cheers for me.

Their heroism so affected me that I had difficulty in frowning upon the
head-butler's suggestion that my glass should be filled again.

"Gentlemen," said I, huskily--for I was visibly affected--"I have
provided for all. I could not do otherwise and remain myself. You will
find ten thousand miles of wire and sixty-six telephones in the larder."

That night every ship in the fleet was provided with telephone service.
I appointed the _Olympia_ to be the central office, so that I might
myself control all the messages, or at least hear them as they passed to
and fro. In the absence of ladies from the fleet, I appointed a somewhat
effeminate subaltern to the post of "Hello Officer," with complete
control over the switch-board. And, as it transpired, this was a very
wise precaution, because the central office was placed in the hold, and
the poor little chap's courage was so inclined to ooze that in the midst
of the fight he was content to sit below the water-line at his post, and
not run about the promenade-deck giving orders while under fire. I have
cabled the President about him, and have advised his promotion. His
heroic devotion to the switch-board ought to make him a naval attaché to
some foreign court, at least. I trust his bravery will ultimately result
in his being sent to the Paris Exposition as charge d'affaires in the
Erie Canal department of the New York State exhibit.

But to return to my despatch--which from this point must disregard
space and move quickly. Passing Cape Bolinao, we soon reached Subig Bay,
fifty miles from Manila. Recognizing the cape by the crop of hemp on its
brow, I rang up the _Boston_ and the _Concord_.

"Search Subig Bay," I ordered.

"Who's this?" came the answer from the other end.

"Never mind who I am," said I. "Search Subig Bay for Spaniards."

"Hello!" said the _Boston_.

"Who the deuce are you?" cried the _Concord_.

"I'm seventeen-five-six," I replied, with some sarcasm, for that was not
my number.

"I want sixteen-two-one," retorted the _Boston_.

"Ring off," said the _Concord_. "What do you mean by giving me
seventeen-five-six?"

"Hello, _Boston_ and _Concord_," I put in in commanding tones. "I'm
Dewey."

This is the only false statement I ever made, but it was in the
interests of my country, and my reply was electrical in its effect. The
_Boston_ immediately blew off steam, and the _Concord_ sounded all hands
to quarters.

"What do you want, Commodore?" they asked simultaneously.

"Search Subig Bay for Spaniards, as I have already ordered you," I
replied, "and woe be unto you if you don't find any."

"What do you want 'em for, Commodore?" asked the _Boston_.

"To engage, you idiot," I replied, scornfully. "What did you suppose--to
teach me Spanish?"

Both vessels immediately piped all hands on deck and set off. Two hours
later they returned, and the telephone subaltern reported, "No Spaniards
found."

"Why not?" I demanded.

"All gone to Cuba," replied the _Boston_. "Shall we pipe all hands to
Cuba?"

"Wires too short to penetrate without a bust," replied the _Concord_.

"On to Manila!" was my answer. "Ding the torpedoes--go ahead! Give us
Spaniards or give us death!"

These words inspired every ship in the line, and we immediately strained
forward, except the _McCulloch_, which I despatched at once to Hong-kong
to cable my last words to you in time for the Adirondack edition of your
Sunday issue leaving New York Thursday afternoon.

The rest of us immediately proceeded. In a short while, taking advantage
of the darkness for which I had provided by turning the clock back so
that the sun by rising at the usual hour should not disclose our
presence, we turned Corregidor and headed up the Boca Grande towards
Manila. As we were turning Corregidor the telephone-bell rang, and
somebody who refused to give his name, but stating that he was aboard
the _Petrel_, called me up.

"Hello!" said I.

"Is this Dewey?" said the _Petrel_.

"Yes," said I.

"There are torpedoes ahead," said the _Petrel_.

"What of it?" said I.

"How shall we treat 'em?"

"Blow 'em off--to soda water," I answered, sarcastically.

"Thank you, sir," the _Petrel_ replied, as she rang off.

Then somebody from the _Baltimore_ rang me up.

"Commodore Dewey," said the _Baltimore_, "there are mines in the
harbor."

"Well, what of it?" I replied.

"What shall we do?" asked the _Baltimore_.

"Treat them coldly, as they do in the Klondike," said I.

"But they aren't gold-mines," replied the _Baltimore_.

"Then salt 'em," said I, dryly. "Apply for a certificate of
incorporation, water your stock, sell out, and retire."

"Thank you, Commodore," the _Baltimore_ answered. "How many shares shall
we put you down for?"

"None," said I. "But if you'll use your surplus to start a
life-insurance company, I'll take out a policy for forty-eight hours,
and send you my demand note to pay for the first premium."

I mention this merely to indicate to your readers that I felt myself in
a position of extreme peril, and did not forget my obligations to my
family. It is a small matter, but if you will search the pages of
history you will see that in the midst of the greatest dangers the
greatest heroes have thought of apparently insignificant details.

At this precise moment we came in sight of the fortresses of Manila.
Signalling the _Raleigh_ to heave to, I left the flag-ship and jumped
aboard the cruiser, where I discharged with my own hand the
after-forecastle four-inch gun. The shot struck Corregidor, and,
glancing off, as I had designed, caromed on the smoke-stack of the
_Reina Cristina_, the flag-ship of Admiral Montojo. The Admiral,
unaccustomed to such treatment, immediately got out of bed, and,
putting on his pajamas, appeared on the bridge.

[Illustration: A CLEVER CAROM]

"Who smoked our struck-stack?" he demanded, in broken English.

"The enemy," cried his crew, with some nervousness. I was listening to
their words through the megaphone.

"Then let her sink," said he, clutching his brow sadly with his clinched
fist. "Far be it from me to stay afloat in Manila Bay on the 1st of May,
and so cast discredit on history!"

The _Reina Cristina_ immediately sank, according to the orders of the
Admiral, and I turned my attention to the _Don Juan de Austria_. Rowing
across the raging channel to the _Baltimore_, I boarded her and pulled
the lanyard of the port boom forty-two. The discharge was terrific.

"What has happened?" I asked, coolly, as the explosion exploded. "Did we
hit her?"

"We did, your honor," said the Bo's'n's mate, "square in the eye; only,
Commodore, it ain't a her this time--it's a him. It's the _Don Juan
de_--"

"Never mind the sex," I cried. "Has she sank?"

"No, sir," replied the Bo's'n's mate, "she 'ain't sank yet. She's
a-waiting orders."

"Fly signals to sink," said I, sternly, for I had resolved that she
should go down.

They did so, and the _Don Juan de Austria_ immediately disappeared
beneath the waves. Her commander evidently realized that I meant what I
signalled.

"Are there any more of the enemy afloat?" I demanded, jumping from the
deck of the _Baltimore_ to that of the _Concord_.

"No, Commodore," replied the captain of the latter.

"Then signal the enemy to charter two more gunboats and have 'em sent
out. I can't be put off with two boats when I'm ready to sink four," I
replied.

[Illustration: SINKING THE _CASTILLA_]

The _Concord_ immediately telephoned to the Spanish commandant at the
Manila Café de la Paix, who as quickly chartered the _Castilla_ and
the _Velasco_--two very good boats that had recently come in in ballast
with the idea of loading up with bananas and tobacco.

While waiting for these vessels to come out and be sunk, I ordered all
hands to breakfast, thus reviving their falling courage. It was a very
good breakfast, too. We had mush and hominy and potatoes in every style,
beefsteak, chops, liver and bacon, chicken hash, buckwheat cakes and
fish-balls, coffee, tea, rolls, toast, and brown bread.

Just as we were eating the latter the _Castilla_ and _Velasco_ came out.
I fired my revolver at the _Castilla_ and threw a fish-ball at the
_Velasco_. Both immediately burst into flames.

Manila was conquered.

The fleet gone, the city fell. It not only fell, but slid, and by
nightfall Old Glory waved over the citadel.

The foe was licked.

To-morrow I am to see Dewey again.

I think I shall resign to-night.

     P.S.--Please send word to the magazines that all articles by Dewey
     must be written by Me. Terms, $500 per word. The strain has been
     worth it.




X

THE MYSTERY OF PINKHAM'S DIAMOND STUD

     _Being the tale told by the holder of the eleventh ball,
     Mr. Fulton Streete_


"It is the little things that tell in detective work, my dear Watson,"
said Sherlock Holmes as we sat over our walnuts and coffee one bitter
winter night shortly before his unfortunate departure to Switzerland,
whence he never returned.

"I suppose that is so," said I, pulling away upon the very excellent
stogie which mine host had provided--one made in Pittsburg in 1885, and
purchased by Holmes, whose fine taste in tobacco had induced him to lay
a thousand of these down in his cigar-cellar for three years, and then
keep them in a refrigerator, overlaid with a cloth soaked in Château
Yquem wine for ten. The result may be better imagined than described.
Suffice it to say that my head did not recover for three days, and the
ash had to be cut off the stogie with a knife. "I suppose so, my dear
Holmes," I repeated, taking my knife and cutting three inches of the
stogie off and casting it aside, furtively, lest he should think I did
not appreciate the excellence of the tobacco, "but it is not given to
all of us to see the little things. Is it, now?"

"Yes," he said, rising and picking up the rejected portion of the
stogie. "We all see everything that goes on, but we don't all know it.
We all hear everything that goes on, but we are not conscious of the
fact. For instance, at this present moment there is somewhere in this
world a man being set upon by assassins and yelling lustily for help.
Now his yells create a certain atmospheric disturbance. Sound is merely
vibration, and, once set going, these vibrations will run on and on and
on in ripples into the infinite--that is, they will never stop, and
sooner or later these vibrations must reach our ears. We may not know it
when they do, but they will do so none the less. If the man is in the
next room, we will hear the yells almost simultaneously--not quite, but
almost--with their utterance. If the man is in Timbuctoo, the vibrations
may not reach us for a little time, according to the speed with which
they travel. So with sight. Sight seems limited, but in reality it is
not. _Vox populi, vox Dei_. If _vox_, why not _oculus_? It is a simple
proposition, then, that the eye of the people being the eye of God, the
eye of God being all-seeing, therefore the eye of the people is
all-seeing--Q. E. D."

I gasped, and Holmes, cracking a walnut, gazed into the fire for a
moment.

"It all comes down, then," I said, "to the question, who are the
people?"

Holmes smiled grimly. "All men," he replied, shortly; "and when I say
all men, I mean all creatures who can reason."

"Does that include women?" I asked.

"Certainly," he said. "Indubitably. The fact that women _don't_ reason
does not prove that they can't. I _can_ go up in a balloon if I wish to,
but I _don't_. I _can_ read an American newspaper comic supplement, but
I _don't_. So it is with women. Women can reason, and therefore they
have a right to be included in the classification whether they do or
don't."

"Quite so," was all I could think of to say at the moment. The
extraordinary logic of the man staggered me, and I again began to
believe that the famous mathematician who said that if Sherlock Holmes
attempted to prove that five apples plus three peaches made four pears,
he would not venture to dispute his conclusions, was wise. (This was the
famous Professor Zoggenhoffer, of the Leipsic School of Moral Philosophy
and Stenography.--ED.)

"Now you agree, my dear Watson," he said, "that I have proved that we
see everything?"

"Well--" I began.

"Whether we are conscious of it or not?" he added, lighting the gas-log,
for the cold was becoming intense.

"From that point of view, I suppose so--yes," I replied, desperately.

"Well, then, this being granted, consciousness is all that is needed to
make us fully informed on any point."

"No," I said, with some positiveness. "The American people are very
conscious, but I can't say that generally they are well-informed."

I had an idea this would knock him out, as the Bostonians say, but
counted without my host. He merely laughed.

"The American is only self-conscious. Therefore he is well-informed only
as to self," he said.

"You've proved your point, Sherlock," I said. "Go on. What else have you
proved?"

"That it is the little things that tell," he replied. "Which all men
would realize in a moment if they could see the little things--and when
I say 'if they could see,' I of course mean if they could be conscious
of them."

"Very true," said I.

"And I have the gift of consciousness," he added.

I thought he had, and I said so. "But," I added, "give me a concrete
example." It had been some weeks since I had listened to any of his
detective stories, and I was athirst for another.

He rose up and walked over to his pigeon-holes, each labelled with a
letter, in alphabetical sequence.

"I have only to refer to any of these to do so," he said. "Choose your
letter."

"Really, Holmes," said I, "I don't need to do that. I'll believe all you
say. In fact, I'll write it up and _sign my name_ to any statement you
choose to make."

[Illustration: THE LAMP-POSTS WERE TWISTED]

"Choose your letter, Watson," he retorted. "You and I are on terms that
make flattery impossible. Is it F, J, P, Q, or Z?"

He fixed his eye penetratingly upon me. It seemed for the moment as if I
were hypnotized, and as his gaze fairly stabbed me with its intensity,
through my mind there ran the suggestion "Choose J, choose J, choose J."
To choose J became an obsession. To relieve my mind, I turned my eye
from his and looked at the fire. Each flame took on the form of the
letter J. I left my chair and walked to the window and looked out. The
lamp-posts were twisted into the shape of the letter J. I returned, sat
down, gulped down my brandy-and-soda, and looked up at the portraits of
Holmes's ancestors on the wall. They were all J's. But I was resolved
never to yield, and I gasped out, desperately,

"Z!"

"Thanks," he said, calmly. "Z be it. I thought you would. Reflex
hypnotism, my dear Watson, is my forte. If I wish a man to choose Q, B
takes hold upon him. If I wish him to choose K, A fills his mind. Have
you ever observed how the mind of man repels a suggestion and flees to
something else, merely that it may demonstrate its independence of
another mind? Now I have been suggesting J to you, and you have chosen
Z--"

"You misunderstood me," I cried, desperately. "I did not say Z; I said
P."

"Quite so," said he, with an inward chuckle. "P was the letter I wished
you to choose. If you had insisted upon Z, I should really have been
embarrassed. See!" he added. He removed the green-ended box that rested
in the pigeon-hole marked Z, and, opening it, disclosed an emptiness.

"I've never had a Z case. But P," he observed, quietly, "is another
thing altogether."

Here he took out the box marked P from the pigeon-hole, and, opening it,
removed the contents--a single paper which was carefully endorsed, in
his own handwriting, "The Mystery of Pinkham's Diamond Stud."

"You could not have selected a better case, Watson," he said, as he
unfolded the paper and scanned it closely. "One would almost think you
had some pre-vision of the fact."

"I am not aware," said I, "that you ever told the story of Pinkham's
diamond stud. Who was Pinkham, and what kind of a diamond stud was
it--first-water or Rhine?"

"Pinkham," Holmes rejoined, "was an American millionaire, living during
business hours at Allegheny City, Pennsylvania, where he had to wear a
brilliant stud to light him on his way through the streets, which are so
dark and sooty that an ordinary search-light would not suffice. In his
leisure hours, however, he lived at the Hotel Walledup-Hysteria, in New
York, where he likewise had to wear the same diamond stud to keep him
from being a marked man. Have you ever visited New York, Watson?"

"No," said I.

"Well, when you do, spend a little of your time at the
Walledup-Hysteria. It is a hotel with a population larger than that of
most cities, with streets running to and from all points of the compass;
where men and women eat under conditions that Lucullus knew nothing of;
where there is a carpeted boulevard on which walk all sorts and
conditions of men; where one pays one's bill to the dulcet strains of a
string orchestra that woo him into a blissful forgetfulness of its size;
and where, by pressing a button in the wall, you may summon a grand
opera, or a porter who on request will lend you enough money to enable
you and your family to live the balance of your days in comfort. In
America men have been known to toil for years to amass a fortune for the
one cherished object of spending a week in this Olympian spot, and then
to be content to return to their toil and begin life anew, rich only in
the memory of its luxuries. It was here that I spent my time when, some
years ago, I went to the United States to solve the now famous Piano
Case. You will remember how sneak thieves stole a grand piano from the
residence of one of New York's first families, while the family was
dining in the adjoining room. While in the city, and indeed at the very
hotel in which I stopped, and which I have described, Pinkham's diamond
stud disappeared, and, hearing that I was a guest at the
Walledup-Hysteria, the owner appealed to me to recover it for him. I
immediately took the case in hand. Drastic questioning of Pinkham showed
that beyond all question he had lost the stud in his own apartment. He
had gone down to dinner, leaving it on the centre-table, following the
usual course of most millionaires, to whom diamonds are of no particular
importance. Pinkham wanted this one only because of its associations.
Its value, $80,000, was a mere bagatelle in his eyes.

"Now of course, if he positively left it on the table, it must have been
taken by some one who had entered the room. Investigation proved that
the maid, a valet, a fellow-millionaire from Chicago, and Pinkham's
children had been the only ones to do this. The maid and the valet were
above suspicion. Their fees from guests were large enough to place them
beyond the reach of temptation. I questioned them closely, and they
convinced me at once of their innocence by conducting me through the
apartments of other guests wherein tiaras of diamonds and necklaces of
pearls--ropes in very truth--rubies, turquoise, and emerald ornaments of
priceless value, were scattered about in reckless profusion.

"'D' yez t'ink oi'd waste me toime on an eighty-t'ousand-dollar shtood,
wid all dhis in soight and moine for the thrubble uv swipin' ut?" said
the French maid.

[Illustration: HOLMES IN DISGUISE INTERVIEWS WATTLES]

"I acquitted her at once, and the valet similarly proved his innocence,
only with less of an accent, for he was supposed to be English, and not
French, as was the maid, although they both came from Dublin. This
narrowed the suspects down to Mr. Jedediah Wattles, of Chicago, and
the children. Naturally I turned my attention to Wattles. A six-year-old
boy and a four-year-old girl could hardly be suspected of stealing a
diamond stud. So drawing on Pinkham for five thousand dollars to pay
expenses, I hired a room in a tenement-house in Rivington Street--a
squalid place it was--disguised myself with an oily, black, burglarious
mustache, and dressed like a comic-paper gambler. Then I wrote a note to
Wattles, asking him to call, saying that I could tell him something to
his advantage. He came, and I greeted him like a pal. 'Wattles,' said I,
'you've been working this game for a long time, and I know all about
you. You are an ornament to the profession, but we diamond-thieves have
got to combine. Understand?' 'No, I don't' said he. 'Well, I'll tell
you,' said I. 'You're a man of good appearance, and I ain't, but I know
where the diamonds are. If we work together, there's millions in it.
I'll spot the diamonds, and you lift 'em, eh? You can do it,' I added,
as he began to get mad. 'The ease with which you got away with old
Pinky's stud, that I've been trying to pull for myself for years, shows
me that.'

"I was not allowed to go further. Wattles's indignation was great enough
to prove that it was not he who had done the deed, and after he had
thrashed me out of my disguise, I pulled myself together and said, 'Mr.
Wattles, I am convinced that you are innocent.' As soon as he recognized
me and realized my object in sending for him, he forgave me, and, I must
say, treated me with great consideration.

"But my last clew was gone. The maid, the valet, and Wattles were proved
innocent. The children alone remained, but I could not suspect them.
Nevertheless, on my way back to the hotel I bought some rock-candy, and,
after reporting to Pinkham, I asked casually after the children.

[Illustration: "'YOU DID TOO!' SAID POLLY"]

"'They're pretty well,' said Pinkham. 'Billie's complaining a little,
and the doctor fears appendicitis, but Polly's all right. I guess
Billie's all right too. The seventeen-course dinners they serve in the
children's dining-room here aren't calculated to agree with Billie's
digestion, I reckon.'

"'I'd like to see 'em,' said I. 'I'm very fond of children.'

"Pinkham immediately called the youngsters in from the nursery. 'Guess
what I've got,' I said, opening the package of rock-candy. 'Gee!' cried
Billie, as it caught his eye. 'Gimme some!' 'Who gets first piece?' said
I. 'Me!' cried both. 'Anybody ever had any before?' I asked. 'He has,'
said Polly, pointing to Billie. The boy immediately flushed up. ''Ain't,
neither!' he retorted. 'Yes you did, too,' said Polly. '_You swallered
that piece pop left on the centre-table the other night!_' 'Well,
anyhow, it was only a little piece,' said Billie. 'An' it tasted like
glass,' he added. Handing the candy to Polly, I picked Billie up and
carried him to his father.

"'Mr. Pinkham,' said I, handing the boy over, 'here is your diamond. It
has not been stolen; it has merely been swallowed.' 'What?' he cried.
And I explained. The stud mystery was explained. Mr. Pinkham's boy had
eaten it."

Holmes paused.

"Well, I don't see how that proves your point," said I. "You said that
it was the little things that told--"

"So it was," said Holmes. "If Polly hadn't told--"

"Enough," I cried; "it's on me, old man. We will go down to Willis's and
have some Russian caviare and a bottle of Burgundy."

Holmes put on his hat and we went out together. It is to get the money
to pay Willis's bill that I have written this story of "The Mystery of
Pinkham's Diamond Stud."




XI

LANG TAMMAS AND DRUMSHEUGH SWEAR OFF

     _A tale of dialect told by Mr. Berkeley Hights, holder of the
     twelfth ball_


"Hoot mon!"

The words rang out derisively on the cold frosty air of Drumtochty, as
Lang Tammas walked slowly along the street, looking for the residence of
Drumsheugh. The effect was electrical. Tammas stopped short, and turning
about, scanned the street eagerly to see who it was that had spoken. But
the highway was deserted, and the old man shook his stick, as if at an
imaginary foe.

"I'll hoot-mon the dour eediot that's eensoolted a veesitor to
Drumtochty!" he shouted. "I haena brought me faithfu' steck for
naething!" he added.

He glared about, now at this closed window, now at that, as if inviting
his enemy to come forth and be punished, but seeing no signs of life,
turned again to resume his walk, muttering angrily to himself. It was
indeed hardly to be tolerated that he, one of the great characters of
fiction, should be thus jeered at, as he thought, while on a friendly
pilgrimage from Thrums to Drumtochty, the two rival towns in the
affections of the consumers of modern letters; and having walked all the
way from his home at Thrums, Lang Tammas was tired, and therefore in no
mood to accept even a mild affront, much less an insult.

He had scarcely covered ten paces, however, when the same voice, with a
harsh cackling laugh, again broke the stillness of the street:

"Gang awa', gang awa'--ha, ha, ha!"

Tammas rushed into the middle of the way and picked up a stone.

[Illustration: "'HOOT MON!'"]

"Pit your bogie pate oot o' your weendow, me gillie!" he cried. "I'll
gie it a garry crack. Pit it oot, I say! Pit it oot!"

And the old man drew himself back into an attitude which would have
defied the powers of Phidias to reproduce in marble, the stone poised
accurately and all too ready to be hurled.

"Ye ramshackle macloonatic!" he cried. "Standin' in a weendow, where
nane may see, an' heepin' eensoolts on deecint fowk. Pit it oot--pit it
oot--an' get it crackit!"

The reply was instant:

"Gang awa', gang awa'--ha, ha, ha!"

Had Lang Tammas been a creation of Lever, he would at this point have
removed his coat and his hat and thrown them down violently to earth,
and then have whacked the walk three times with the stout stick he
carried in his right hand, as a preliminary to the challenge which
followed. But Tammas was not Irish, and therefore not impulsive. He was
Scotch--as Scotch as ever was. Wherefore he removed his hat, and, after
dusting it carefully, hung it up on a convenient hook; took off his coat
and folded it neatly; picked up his "faithfu' steck," and observed:

"I hae naething to do that's of eemportance. Drumsheugh can wait, an'
sae can ee. Pit it oot, pit it oot! Here I am, an' here I stay until ye
pit it oot to be crackit."

"Gang awa', gang awa'--ha, ha, ha!" came the reply.

Lang Tammas turned on the instant to the sources of the sound. He fixed
his eyes sternly on the very window whence he thought the words had
issued.

"Number twanty-three, saxth floor," he muttered to himself. "I will
call, and then we shall see what we _shall_ see; and if what we see gets
off wi'oot a thorough 'hootin',' then I dinna ken me beezniss."

[Illustration: "A SWEET-FACED NURSE APPEARED"]

Hastily discarding his outward wrath, and assuming such portions of his
garments as went with his society manner, Tammas walked into the lobby
of the apartment-house in which his assumed insulter lived. He pushed
the electric button in, and shortly a sweet-faced nurse appeared.

"Who are you?" she asked.

"Me," said Lang Tammas, somewhat abashed. "I've called too see the head
o' the hoose."

"I am sorry," said the trained nurse, bursting into tears, "but the head
of the house is at the point of death, sir, and cannot see you until
to-morrow. Call around about ten o'clock."

"Hoots an' toots!" sighed Lang Tammas. "Canna we Scuts have e'er a story
wi'oot somebody leein' at the point o' death! It's most affectin', but
doonricht wearin' on the constitootion."

"Was there anything you wished to say to him?" asked the nurse.

"Oh, aye!" returned Lang Tammas. "I dinna ken hoo to deny that I hed
that to say to him, an' to do to him as weel. I'm a vairy truthfu' mon,
young lady, an' if ye must be told, I've called to wring his garry neck
for dereesively gee'in an unoffending veesitor frae Thrums by yelling
deealect at him frae the hoose-tops."

"Are you sure it was here?" asked the nurse, anxiously, the old
gentleman seemed so deeply in earnest.

"Sure? Oh, aye--pairfectly," replied Lang Tammas; but even as he spoke,
the falsity of his impression was proved by the same strident voice that
had so offended before, coming from the other side of the street:

"What a crittur ye are, ye cow! What a crittur ye are!"

"Soonds are hard to place, ma'am," said Lang Tammas, jerking about as if
he had been shot. It was a very hard position for the old man, for, with
the immediate need for an apology to the nurse, there rushed over him an
overwhelming wave of anger. Hitherto it was merely a suspicion that he
was being made sport of that had irritated him, but this last
outburst--"What a crittur ye are, ye cow!"--was convincing evidence that
it was to him that the insults were addressed; for in Thrums it is
history that Hendry and T'nowhead and Jim McTaggart frequently greeted
Lang Tammas's jokes with "Oh, ye cow!" and "What a crittur ye are!" But
the old man was equal to the emergency, and fixing one eye upon the
house opposite and the other upon the sweet-faced nurse, he darted
glances that should kill at his persecutor, and at the same time
apologized for disturbing the nurse. The latter he did gracefully.

"Ye look aweary, ma'am," he said. "An' if the head o' the hoose maun
dee, may he dee immejiately, that ye may rest soon."

And with this, pulling his hat down over his forehead viciously, he
turned and sped swiftly across the way. The nurse gazed anxiously after
him, and in her secret soul wondered if she would not better send for
Jamie McQueen, the town constable. Poor Tammas's eye was really so
glaring, and his whole manner so manifestly that of a man exasperated to
the verge of madness, that she considered him somewhat in the light of
a menace to the public safety. She was not at all reassured, either,
when Tammas, having reached the other side of the street, began
gesticulating wildly, shaking his "faithfu' steck" at the façade of the
confronting flat-house. But an immediate realization of the condition of
the sick man above led her to forego the attempt to protect the public
safety, and closing the door softly to, she climbed the weary stairs to
the sixth floor, and soon forgot the disturbing trial of the morning in
reading to her patient certain inspiring chapters from the Badminton
edition of _Haggert's Chase of Heretics_, relieved with the lighter
_Rules of Golf; or, Auld Putt Idylls_, by the Rev. Ian McCrockett, one
of the most exquisitely confusing humorous works ever published in the
Highlands.

Lang Tammas meanwhile was addressing an invisible somebody in the
building over the way, and in no uncertain tones.

"If I were not a geentlemon and a humorist," he said, impressively,
agitating his stick nervously at the building front, "I could say much
that nae Scut may say. But were I nae Scut, I'd say this to ye: 'Ye have
all the eelements of a confairmed heeritic. Ye've nae sense of deecint
fun. Ye're not a man for a' that, as most men air--ye're an ass, plain
and simple, wi' naether the plainness nor the simpleecity o' the
individual that Balaam rode. Further--more--'"

What Lang Tammas would have said furthermore had he not been a Scot the
world will never know, for from the other side of the street--farther
along, however--came the squawking voice again:

"Gang awa', gang awa', ye crittur, ye cow! Hoot mon--hoot mon--hoot mon!
Gang awa', gang awa'!" And this was followed by a raucous cry, which
might or might not have been Scottish, but which was, in any event,
distinctly maddening. And even as the previous insults had electrified
poor Tammas, so this last petrified him, and he stood for an
appreciable length of time absolutely transfixed. His mind was a curious
study. His coming had been prompted entirely by the genial spirit which
throbbed beneath his stony Scottish exterior. For a long time he had
been a resident of the most conspicuous Scotch town in all literature,
and he was himself its accepted humorist. Then on a sudden Thrums had a
rival. Drumtochty sprang forth, and in the matter of pathos, if not
humor, ran Thrums hard; and Lang Tammas, attracted to Drumsheugh, had
come this distance merely to pay his respects, and to see what manner of
man the real Drumsheugh was.

[Illustration: TAMMAS MEETS DRUMSHAUGH]

And this was his reception! To be laughed at--he, a Scotch humorist! Had
any one ever laughed at a Scotch humorist before? Never. Was not the
test of humor in Scotland the failure to laugh of the hearer of the
jest? Would Scotch humor ever prove great if not taken seriously? Oh,
aye! Hendry never laughed at his jokes, and Hendry knew a joke when
he saw one. McTaggart never smiled at Lang Tammas; and as for the little
Minister--he knew what was due to the humorist of Thrums, as well as to
himself, and enjoyed the exquisite humor of Tammas with a reserve well
qualified to please the Presbytery and the Congregation.

How long Lang Tammas would have stood petrified no man may say; but just
then who should come along but the person he had come to call
upon--Drumsheugh himself.

"_Knox et præterea nihil!_" he exclaimed. "What in Glasgie hae we here?"

Lang Tammas turned upon him.

"Ye hae nowt in Glasgie here," he said, sternly. "Ye hae a vairy muckle
pit-oot veesitor, wha hae coom on an airand o' good-will to be gret wi'
eensoolts."

"Eensoolts?" retorted Drumsheugh. "Eensoolts, ye say? An' wha hae bin
eensooltin' ye?"

"That I know nowt of, save that he be a doonricht foo' a-heepin' his
deealect upon me head," said Lang Tammas.

"And wha are ye to be so seensitive o' deealect?" demanded Drumsheugh.

"My name is Lang Tammas--"

"O' Thrums?" cried Drumsheugh.

"Nane ither," said Tammas.

Drumsheugh burst into an uproarious fit of laughter.

"The humorist?" he cried, catching his sides.

"Nane ither," said Tammas, gravely. "And wha are ye?"

"Me? Oh, I'm--Drumsheugh o' Drumtochty," he replied. "Come along hame
wi' me. I'll gie ye that to make the eensoolt seem a compliment."

And the two old men walked off together.

An hour later, on their way to the kirk, Drumsheugh observed that after
the service was over he would go with Lang Tammas and seek out the man
who had insulted him and "gie" him a drubbing, which invitation Tammas
was nothing loath to accept. Reverently the two new-made friends walked
into the kirk and sat themselves down on the side aisle. A hymn was
sung, and the minister was about to read from the book, when the silence
of the church was broken by a shrill voice:

"Hoot mon! Hoot mon!"

Tammas clutched his stick. The voice was the same, and here it had
penetrated the sacred precincts of the church! Nowhere was he safe from
insult. Drumsheugh looked up, startled, and the voice began again:

"Gang awa' a-that, a-that, a-that--gang awa'! Oh, ye crittur! oh, ye
cow!"

And then a titter ran through that solemn crowd; for, despite the
gravity of the situation, even John Knox himself must have smiled. A
great green parrot had flown in at one of the windows, and had perched
himself on the pulpit, where, with front undismayed, he addressed the
minister:

"Gang awa', gang awa'!" he cried, and preened himself. "Hoot mon, gang
awa'!"

"_Knox nobiscum!_" ejaculated Drumsheugh. "It's Moggie McPiggert's
pairrut," and he chuckled; and then, as Lang Tammas realized the
situation, even he smiled broadly. He had been insulted by a parrot
only, and the knowledge of it made him feel better.

The bird was removed and the service proceeded; and later, when it was
over, as the two old fellows walked back to Drumsheugh's house in the
gathering shades of the night, Lang Tammas said:

"I acquet Drumtochty o' its eensoolts, Drumsheugh, but I've lairnt a
lesson this day."

"What's that?" asked Drumsheugh.

"When pairruts speak Scutch deealect, it's time we Scuts gae it oop,"
said Tammas.

"I think so mysel'," agreed Drumsheugh. "But hoo express our thochts?"

"I dinna ken for ye," said Lang Tammas, "but for me, mee speakee heathen
Chinee this timee on."

"Vairy weel," returned Drumsheugh. "Vairy weel; I dinna ken heathen
Chinee, but I hae some acqueentance wi' the tongue o' sairtain
Amairicans, and that I'll speak from this day on--it's vairy weel called
the Bowery eediom, and is a judeecious mixture o' English, Irish, and
Volapeck."

And from that time on Lang Tammas and Drumsheugh spoke never another
word of Scotch dialect; and while Tammas never quite mastered
pidgin-English, or Drumsheugh the tongue of Fadden, they lived happily
ever after, which in a way proves that, after all, the parrot is a
useful as well as an ornamental bird.




XII

CONCLUSION--LIKEWISE MR. BILLY JONES


The cheers which followed the narration of the curious resolve of Lang
Tammas and Drumsheugh were vociferous, and Berkeley Hights sat down with
a flush of pleasure on his face. He construed these as directed towards
himself and his contribution to the diversion of the evening. It never
entered into his mind that the applause involved a bit of subtle
appreciation of the kindness of Tammas and of Drumsheugh to the reading
public in thus declining to give them more of something of which they
had already had enough.

When the cheers had subsided Mr. Jones rose from his chair and
congratulated the club upon its exhibit.

"Even if you have but faintly re-echoed the weaknesses of the strong,"
he said, "you have done well, and I congratulate you. It is not every
man in your walk in life who can write as grammatically as you have
dreamed. I have failed to detect in any one of the stories or poems thus
far read a single grammatical error, and I have no doubt that the
manuscripts that you have read from are gratifyingly free from mistakes
in spelling as well, so that, from a newspaper man's stand-point, I see
no reason why you should not get these proceedings published, especially
if you do it at your own expense.

"I now declare The Dreamers adjourned _sine die_!"

"Not much!" cried the members, unanimously. "Where's your contribution?"

"Out with it, William!" shouted Tom Snobbe. "I can tell by the set of
your coat that you've got a manuscript concealed in your pocket."

"There's nothing ruins the set of a coat more quickly than a rejected
manuscript in the pocket," put in Hudson Rivers. "I've been there
myself--so, as Lang Tammas said, Billy, 'Pit it oot, and get it
crackit.'"

"Well," Jones replied, with a pleased smile, "to tell you the truth,
gentlemen, I had come prepared in case I was called upon; but the hour
is late," he added, after the manner of one who, though willing, enjoyed
being persuaded. "Perhaps we had better postpone--"

"Out with it, old man. It is late, but it will be later still if you
don't hurry up and begin," said Tenafly Paterson.

"Very well, then, here goes," said Jones. "Mine is a ghost-story,
gentlemen, and it is called 'The Involvular Club; or, The Return of the
Screw.' It is, like the rest of the work this evening, imitative, after
a fashion, but I think it will prove effective."

[Illustration: MR. JONES BEGINS]

Mr. Jones hereupon took the manuscript from his bulging pocket and read
as follows:


THE INVOLVULAR CLUB; OR, THE RETURN OF THE SCREW

The story had taken hold upon us as we sat round the blazing hearth of
Lord Ormont's smoking-room, at Castle Aminta, and sufficiently
interfered with our comfort, as indeed from various points of view, not
to specify any one of the many, for they were, after all, in spite of
their diversity, of equal value judged by any standard, not even
excepting the highest, that of Vereker's disturbing narrative of the
uncanny visitor to his chambers, which the reader may recall--indeed,
must recall if he ever read it, since it was the most remarkable
ghost-story of the year--a year in which many ghost-stories of wonderful
merit, too, were written--and by which his reputation was made--or
rather extended, for there were a certain few of us, including Feverel
and Vanderbank and myself, who had for many years known him as a
constant--almost too constant, some of us ventured, tentatively
perhaps, but not the less convincedly, to say--producer of work of a
very high order of excellence, rivalling in some of its more conspicuous
elements, as well as in its minor, to lay no stress upon his subtleties,
which were marked, though at times indiscreetly inevident even to the
keenly analytical, hinging as these did more often than not upon
abstractions born only of a circumscribed environment--circumscribed, of
course, in the larger sense which means the narrowing of a circle of
appreciation down to the select few constituting its essence--the
productions of the greatest masters of fictional style the world has
known, or is likely, in view of present tendencies towards miscalled
romance, which consists solely of depicting scenes in which bloodshed
and murder are rife, soon to know again--it was proper it should, in a
company chosen as ours had been from among the members of The Involvular
Club, with Adrian Feverel at its head, Vereker as its vice-president,
and Lord Ormont, myself, and a number of ladies, including Diana of the
Crossways, and little Maisie--for the child was one of our cares, her
estate was so pitiable a one--Rhoda Fleming, Daisy Miller, and Princess
Cassimassima, one and all, as the reader must be aware, personages--if I
may thus refer to a group of appreciation which included myself--who
knew a good thing when they saw it, which, it may as well be confessed
at once, we rarely did in the raucous fields of fiction outside of,
though possibly at times moderately contiguous to, our own territory,
although it should be said that Miss Miller occasionally manifested a
lamentable lack of regard for the objects for which The Involvular was
formed, by showing herself, in her semi-American way, regrettably direct
of speech and given over not infrequently to an unhappy use of slang,
which we all, save Maisie, who was young, and, in spite of all she knew,
not quite so knowledgeable a young person as some superficial observers
have chosen to believe, sincerely deprecated, and on occasion when it
might be done tactfully, endeavored to mitigate by a reproving glance,
or by a still deeper plunge into nebulous rhetoric, as a sort of
palliation to the Muse of Obscurity, which in our hearts we felt that
good goddess would accept, strove to offset.

    ["Excuse me," said Mr. Tom Snobbe, rising and interrupting the
    reader at this point, "but is that all one sentence, Mr. Jones?"

    "Yes," Jones replied. "Why not? It's perfectly clear in its
    meaning. Aren't you used to long sentences on the Hudson?" he
    added, sarcastically.

    "No," retorted Snobbe; "that is to say, not where I live. I
    believe they have 'em at Sing Sing occasionally. But they never
    get used to them, I'm told."

    "Be quiet, Tom," said Harry Snobbe. "It's bad form to interrupt.
    Let Billy finish his story." Mr. Jones then resumed his
    manuscript.]

A perceptible shudder ran through, or rather rolled over, the group, for
it was corrugating in its quality, bringing forcibly to mind, quite as
much for its chill, too, as for the wrinkling suggestion of its passage
up and down our backs, turned as some of these were towards the fire,
and others towards the steam-radiator, which now and again clicked
startlingly in the dull red glow of the hearth light, augmenting the all
too obvious nervousness of the listeners, the impassive and uninspiring
squares of iron of which certain modern architects of a limited
decorative sense--if, indeed, they have any at all, for the mere use of
corrugated iron in the construction of a façade would seem not to admit
of an æsthetic side to its designer's nature, however ornately
distributed over the surface of an exterior it may be--have chosen to
avail themselves, prompted either by an appalling parsimony on the part
of a client, or for reasons of haste employed for the lack of more
immediately available material, it being an undeniable fact that in some
portions of the world stucco and terracotta, now frequently used in
lieu of more substantial, if not more enduring materials, are difficult
of access, and the use of a speedily obtainable substitute becoming thus
a requirement as inevitable as it is to be regretted, as in the case of
the fruit-market at Venice, standing as it does on the bank of the Grand
Canal, a pile of stark, staring, obtrusive, wrinkling zinc thrusting
itself brazenly into the line of a vision attuned to the most gloriously
towering palazzos, as rich in beauty as in romance, with such
self-sufficiency as to bring tears to the eyes of the most stolidly
unappreciative, of the most coldly unæsthetic, or, in short, as some one
has chosen to say, in an essay the title of which and the name of whose
author escape us at this moment, with such complacent vulgarity as to
amount to nothing less than a dastardly blot upon the escutcheon of the
Venetians, which all of their glorious achievements in art, in history,
and in letters can never quite ineradically efface, and alongside of
which the whistling steam-tugs with their belching funnels, which are
by slow degrees supplanting the romantic gondolier with his picturesque
costume and his tender songs of sunny climes in the cab service of the
Bride of the Adriatic, seem quite excusable, or, in any event, not so
unforgivable as to constitute what the Americans would call an infernal
shame.

    [At this point the reader was interrupted again.

    "Hold on a minute, Billy--will you, please?" said Tenafly
    Paterson. "Let's get this story straight. As I understand the
    first sentence somebody told a ghost-story, didn't he?"

    "Yes," replied Jones, a trifle annoyed.

    "And the second sentence means that those who heard it felt
    creepy?"

    "Precisely."

    "Then why the deuce couldn't you have said, 'When So-and-So had
    finished, the company shuddered'?"

    "Because," replied Jones, "I am reading a story which is
    constructed after the manner of a certain school. I'm not reading
    a postal-card or a cable message."

    The reader then resumed.]

Miss Miller, to relieve the strain upon the nerves of those present,
which was becoming unbearably tense--and, in fact, poor Maisie had burst
into tears with the sheer terror of the climax, and had been taken off
to be put to bed by Mrs. Brookenham, who, in spite of many other
qualities, was still a womanly woman at heart, and not wholly deficient
in those little tendernesses, those trifling but ineffable softnesses of
nature, which are at once the chief source of woman's strength and of
her weakness, a fact she was constantly manifesting to us during our
stay at Lord Ormont's, and which we all remarked and in some cases
commented upon, since the discovery had in it some of the qualities of a
revelation--began to sing one of those extraordinary popular songs that
one hears at the music-halls in London, and in the politer and more
refined circles of American society, if indeed there may be said to be
such a thing in a land so new as to be as yet mostly veneer, with little
that is solid in its social substructure, beginning as its constituent
factors do at the top and working downward, rather than choosing the
more natural course of beginning at the bottom and working upward, and
which must materially, one may think, affect the social solidarity of
the nation by retarding its growth and in otherwise interfering with its
healthy, not to say normal development, and which, as the words and
import of it come back to me, was known by the rather vulgar and
vernacular title of "All Coons Look Alike to Me," thus indicating that
the life treated of in the melody, which was not altogether unmusical,
and was indeed as a matter of fact quite fetching in its quality,
running in one's ears for days and nights long after its first hearing,
was that of the negro, and his personal likeness to his other black
brethren in the eyes even of one who was supposed to have been at one
time, prior to the action of the song if not coincidently with it, the
object of his affections.

    [Had Jones not been wholly absorbed in the reading of this
    wonderful story, he might at this moment have heard a slight but
    unmistakable rumbling sound, and have looked up and seen much that
    would have interested him. But, as this kind of a story requires
    for its complete comprehension a complete concentration of mind,
    he did not hear, and so, continuing, did not see.]

[Illustration: HE DID NOT SEE]

Diana was the first to mitigate the silence with comment [he read] a
silence whose depth had only been rendered the more depressing by Miss
Miller's uncalled-for intrusion upon our mood of something that smacked
of a society towards which most of us, in so far as we were able to do
so, had always cultivated a strenuous aloofness, prompted not by any
whelmful sense of our own perfection, latent or obvious, but rather by a
realization on our part that it lacked the essentials that could make of
it an interesting part of the lives of a group given over wholly, or
at least as nearly wholly as the exiguities of existence would permit of
a persistent and continuous devotion, to the contemplation of the
beautiful in art, letters, or any other phase of human endeavor.

"And did his soul never thaw?" Diana asked.

"Never," replied Vanderbank, "It is frozen yet."

       *       *       *       *       *

Here the rumbling sound grew to such volume that, absorbed as he was in
his reading, Jones could no longer fail to hear it. Lowering his
manuscript, he looked sternly upon the company. The rumbling sound was a
chorus, not unmusical, of snores.

_The Dreamers slept._

"Well, I'll be hanged!" cried Jones, angrily, and then he walked over
and looked behind the screen where the stenographer was seated. "I'll
finish it if it takes all night," he muttered. "Just take this down,"
he added to the stenographer; but that worthy never stirred or made
reply. _He too was sleeping._

Jones muttered angrily to himself.

"Very well," he said. "I'll read it to myself, then," and he began
again. For ten minutes he continued, and then on a sudden his voice
faltered; his head fell forward upon his chest, his knees collapsed
beneath him, and he slid inert, and snoring himself, into his chair. The
MS. fluttered to the floor, and an hour later the waiters entering the
room found the club unanimously engaged in dreaming once more.

The Involvular Club was too much for them, even for the author of it,
but whether this was because of the lateness of the hour or because of
the intricacies of the author's style I have never been able to
ascertain, for Mr. Jones is very sore on the point, and therefore
reticent, and as for the others, I cannot find that any of them remember
enough about it to be able to speak intelligently on the subject.

[Illustration: THE STENOGRAPHER SLEPT]

All I do know is what the landlord tells me, and that is that at 5 A.M.
thirteen cabs containing thirteen sleeping souls pursued their thirteen
devious ways to thirteen different houses, thus indicating that the
Dreamers were ultimately adjourned, and, as they have not met since, I
presume the adjournment was, as usual, _sine die_.


THE END

       *       *       *       *       *




  BY A. CONAN DOYLE


  THE REFUGEES. A Tale of Two Continents. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth,
  Ornamental, $1.75.


  THE WHITE COMPANY. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.75.


  MICAH CLARKE. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.75; 8vo,
  Paper, 45 cents.


  THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth,
  Ornamental, $1.50.

     CONTENTS: A Scandal in Bohemia, The Red-headed League, A Case of
     Identity, The Boscombe Valley Mystery, The Five Orange Pips, The
     Man with the Twisted Lip, The Blue Carbuncle, The Speckled Band,
     The Engineer's Thumb, The Noble Bachelor, The Beryl Coronet, The
     Copper Beeches.


  MEMOIRS OF SHERLOCK HOLMES. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental,
  $1.50.

     CONTENTS: Silver Blaze, The Yellow Face, The Stock-Broker's Clerk,
     The "Gloria Scott," The Musgrave Ritual, The Reigate Puzzle, The
     Crooked Man, The Resident Patient, The Greek Interpreter, The Navy
     Treaty, The Final Problem.


  THE PARASITE. A Story. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental,
  $1.00.


  THE GREAT SHADOW. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.00.


  HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS
  NEW YORK AND LONDON

  _Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid,
  to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt
  of the price._




  BY FRANK R. STOCKTON


  THE ASSOCIATE HERMITS. A Novel. Illustrated by A. B. Frost. Post 8vo,
  Cloth, Ornamental, $1.50.

     If there is a more droll or more delightful writer now living than
     Mr. Frank R. Stockton we should be slow to make his acquaintance,
     on the ground that the limit of safety might be passed.... Mr.
     Stockton's humor asserts itself admirably, and the story is
     altogether enjoyable.--_Independent._

     The interest never flags, and there is nothing intermittent about
     the sparkling humor.--_Philadelphia Press._


  THE GREAT STONE OF SARDIS. A Novel. Illustrated by PETER NEWELL. Post
  8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.50.

     The scene of Mr. Stockton's novel is laid in the twentieth century,
     which is imagined as the culmination of our era of science and
     invention. The main episodes are a journey to the centre of the
     earth by means of a pit bored by an automatic cartridge, and a
     journey to the North Pole beneath the ice of the Polar Seas.
     These adventures Mr. Stockton describes with such simplicity
     and conviction that the reader is apt to take the story in all
     seriousness until he suddenly runs into some gigantic pleasantry of
     the kind that was unknown before Mr. Stockton began writing, and
     realizes that the novel is a grave and elaborate bit of fooling,
     based upon the scientific fads of the day. The book is richly
     illustrated by Peter Newell, the one artist of modern times who
     is suited to interpret Mr. Stockton's characters and situations.


  HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS
  NEW YORK AND LONDON

  _Either of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid,
  to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of
  the price._




GHOSTS THAT HAVE HAUNTED ME

A FEW SPIRIT REMINISCENCES


If we could only get used to the idea that ghosts are perfectly
harmless creatures, who are powerless to affect our well-being
unless we assist them by giving way to our fears, we should enjoy
the supernatural exceedingly, it seems to me. Coleridge, I think it
was, was once asked by a lady if he believed in ghosts, and he
replied, "No, madame; I have seen too many of them." Which is my
case exactly. I have seen so many horrid visitants from other worlds
that they hardly affect me at all, so far as the mere inspiration of
terror is concerned. On the other hand, they interest me hugely; and
while I must admit that I do experience all the purely physical
sensations that come from horrific encounters of this nature, I can
truly add in my own behalf that mentally I can rise above the
physical impulse to run away, and, invariably standing my ground, I
have gained much useful information concerning them. I am prepared
to assert that if a thing with flashing green eyes, and clammy
hands, and long, dripping strips of sea-weed in place of hair,
should rise up out of the floor before me at this moment, 2 A.M.,
and nobody in the house but myself, with a fearful, nerve-destroying
storm raging outside, I should without hesitation ask it to sit down
and light a cigar and state its business--or, if it were of the
female persuasion, to join me in a bottle of sarsaparilla--although
every physical manifestation of fear of which my poor body is
capable would be present. I have had experiences in this line which,
if I could get you to believe them, would convince you that I speak
the truth. Knowing weak, suspicious human nature as I do, however, I
do not hope ever to convince you--though it is none the less true--
that on one occasion, in the spring of 1895, there was a spiritual
manifestation in my library which nearly prostrated me physically,
but which mentally I hugely enjoyed, because I was mentally strong
enough to subdue my physical repugnance for the thing which suddenly
and without any apparent reason materialized in my arm-chair.

I'm going to tell you about it briefly, though I warn you in advance
that you will find it a great strain upon your confidence in my
veracity. It may even shatter that confidence beyond repair; but I
cannot help that. I hold that it is a man's duty in this life to
give to the world the benefit of his experience. All that he sees he
should set down exactly as he sees it, and so simply, withal, that
to the dullest comprehension the moral involved shall be perfectly
obvious. If he is a painter, and an auburn-haired maiden appears to
him to have blue hair, he should paint her hair blue, and just so
long as he sticks by his principles and is true to himself, he need
not bother about what you may think of him. So it is with me. My
scheme of living is based upon being true to myself. You may class
me with Baron Munchausen if you choose; I shall not mind so long as
I have the consolation of feeling, deep down in my heart, that I am
a true realist, and diverge not from the paths of truth as truth
manifests itself to me.

This intruder of whom I was just speaking, the one that took
possession of my arm-chair in the spring of 1895, was about as
horrible a spectre as I have ever had the pleasure to have haunt me.
It was worse than grotesque. It grated on every nerve. Alongside of
it the ordinary poster of the present day would seem to be as
accurate in drawing as a bicycle map, and in its coloring it simply
shrieked with discord.

If color had tones which struck the ear, instead of appealing to the
eye, the thing would have deafened me. It was about midnight when
the manifestation first took shape. My family had long before
retired, and I had just finished smoking a cigar--which was one of a
thousand which my wife had bought for me at a Monday sale at one of
the big department stores in New York. I don't remember the brand,
but that is just as well--it was not a cigar to be advertised in a
civilized piece of literature--but I do remember that they came in
bundles of fifty, tied about with blue ribbon. The one I had been
smoking tasted and burned as if it had been rolled by a Cuban
insurrectionist while fleeing from a Spanish regiment through a
morass, gathering its component parts as he ran. It had two distinct
merits, however. No man could possibly smoke too many of them, and
they were economical, which is how the ever-helpful little madame
came to get them for me, and I have no doubt they will some day
prove very useful in removing insects from the rose-bushes. They
cost $3.99 a thousand on five days a week, but at the Monday sale
they were marked down to $1.75, which is why my wife, to whom I had
recently read a little lecture on economy, purchased them for me.
Upon the evening in question I had been at work on this cigar for
about two hours, and had smoked one side of it three-quarters of the
way down to the end, when I concluded that I had smoked enough--for
one day--so I rose up to cast the other side into the fire, which
was flickering fitfully in my spacious fireplace. This done, I
turned about, and there, fearful to see, sat this thing grinning at
me from the depths of my chair. My hair not only stood on end, but
tugged madly in an effort to get away. Four hairs--I can prove the
statement if it be desired--did pull themselves loose from my scalp
in their insane desire to rise above the terrors of the situation,
and, flying upward, stuck like nails into the oak ceiling directly
over my head, whence they had to be pulled the next morning with
nippers by our hired man, who would no doubt testify to the truth of
the occurrence as I have asserted it if he were still living, which,
unfortunately, he is not. Like most hired men, he was subject to
attacks of lethargy, from one of which he died last summer. He sank
into a rest about weed-time, last June, and lingered quietly along
for two months, and after several futile efforts to wake him up, we
finally disposed of him to our town crematory for experimental
purposes. I am told he burned very actively, and I believe it, for
to my certain knowledge he was very dry, and not so green as some
persons who had previously employed him affected to think. A cold
chill came over me as my eye rested upon the horrid visitor and
noted the greenish depths of his eyes and the claw-like formation of
his fingers, and my flesh began to creep like an inch-worm. At one
time I was conscious of eight separate corrugations on my back, and
my arms goose-fleshed until they looked like one of those miniature
plaster casts of the Alps which are so popular in Swiss summer
resorts; but mentally I was not disturbed at all. My repugnance was
entirely physical, and, to come to the point at once, I calmly
offered the spectre a cigar, which it accepted, and demanded a
light. I gave it, nonchalantly lighting the match upon the goose
-fleshing of my wrist.

[Illustration: I TURNED ABOUT, AND THERE, FEARFUL TO SEE, SAT THIS
THING GRINNING AT ME.]

Now I admit that this was extraordinary and hardly credible, yet it
happened exactly as I have set it down, and, furthermore, I enjoyed
the experience. For three hours the thing and I conversed, and not
once during that time did my hair stop pulling away at my scalp, or
the repugnance cease to run in great rolling waves up and down my
back. If I wished to deceive you, I might add that pin-feathers
began to grow from the goose-flesh, but that would be a lie, and
lying and I are not friends, and, furthermore, this paper is not
written to amaze, but to instruct.

Except for its personal appearance, this particular ghost was not
very remarkable, and I do not at this time recall any of the details
of our conversation beyond the point that my share of it was not
particularly coherent, because of the discomfort attendant upon the
fearful hair-pulling process I was going through. I merely cite its
coming to prove that, with all the outward visible signs of fear
manifesting themselves in no uncertain manner, mentally I was cool
enough to cope with the visitant, and sufficiently calm and at ease
to light the match upon my wrist, perceiving for the first time,
with an Edison-like ingenuity, one of the uses to which goose-flesh
might be put, and knowing full well that if I tried to light it on
the sole of my shoe I should have fallen to the ground, my knees
being too shaky to admit of my standing on one leg even for an
instant. Had I been mentally overcome, I should have tried to light
the match on my foot, and fallen ignominiously to the floor then and
there.

There was another ghost that I recall to prove my point, who was of
very great use to me in the summer immediately following the spring
of which I have just told you. You will possibly remember how that
the summer of 1895 had rather more than its fair share of heat, and
that the lovely New Jersey town in which I have the happiness to
dwell appeared to be the headquarters of the temperature. The
thermometers of the nation really seemed to take orders from
Beachdale, and properly enough, for our town is a born leader in
respect to heat. Having no property to sell, I candidly admit that
Beachdale is not of an arctic nature in summer, except socially,
perhaps. Socially, it is the coolest town in the State; but we are
at this moment not discussing cordiality, fraternal love, or the
question raised by the Declaration of Independence as to whether all
men are born equal. The warmth we have in hand is what the old lady
called "Fahrenheat," and, from a thermometric point of view,
Beachdale, if I may be a trifle slangy, as I sometimes am, has heat
to burn. There are mitigations of this heat, it is true, but they
generally come along in winter.

I must claim, in behalf of my town, that never in all my experience
have I known a summer so hot that it was not, sooner or later--by
January, anyhow--followed by a cool spell. But in the summer of 1895
even the real-estate agents confessed that the cold wave announced
by the weather bureau at Washington summered elsewhere--in the
tropics, perhaps, but not at Beachdale. One hardly dared take a bath
in the morning for fear of being scalded by the fluid that flowed
from the cold-water faucet--our reservoir is entirely unprotected by
shade-trees, and in summer a favorite spot for young Waltons who
like to catch bass already boiled--my neighbors and myself lived on
cracked ice, ice-cream, and destructive cold drinks. I do not myself
mind hot weather in the daytime, but hot nights are killing. I can't
sleep. I toss about for hours, and then, for the sake of variety, I
flop, but sleep cometh not. My debts double, and my income seems to
sizzle away under the influence of a hot, sleepless night; and it
was just here that a certain awful thing saved me from the insanity
which is a certain result of parboiled insomnia.

It was about the 16th of July, which, as I remember reading in an
extra edition of the _Evening Bun_, got out to mention the fact, was
the hottest 16th of July known in thirty-eight years. I had retired
at half-past seven, after dining lightly upon a cold salmon and a
gallon of iced tea--not because I was tired, but because I wanted to
get down to first principles at once, and remove my clothing, and
sort of spread myself over all the territory I could, which is a
thing you can't do in a library, or even in a white-and-gold parlor.
If man were constructed like a machine, as he really ought to be, to
be strictly comfortable--a machine that could be taken apart like an
eight-day clock--I should have taken myself apart, putting one
section of myself on the roof, another part in the spare room,
hanging a third on the clothes-line in the yard, and so on, leaving
my head in the ice-box; but unfortunately we have to keep ourselves
together in this life, hence I did the only thing one can do, and
retired, and incidentally spread myself over some freshly baked
bedclothing. There was some relief from the heat, but not much. I
had been roasting, and while my sensations were somewhat like those
which I imagine come to a planked shad when he first finds himself
spread out over the plank, there was a mitigation. My temperature
fell off from 167 to about 163, which is not quite enough to make a
man absolutely content. Suddenly, however, I began to shiver. There
was no breeze, but I began to shiver.

"It is getting cooler," I thought, as the chill came on, and I rose
and looked at the thermometer. It still registered the highest
possible point, and the mercury was rebelliously trying to break
through the top of the glass tube and take a stroll on the roof.

"That's queer," I said to myself. "It's as hot as ever, and yet I'm
shivering. I wonder if my goose is cooked? I've certainly got a
chill."

I jumped back into bed and pulled the sheet up over me; but still I
shivered. Then I pulled the blanket up, but the chill continued. I
couldn't seem to get warm again. Then came the counterpane, and
finally I had to put on my bath-robe--a fuzzy woollen affair, which
in midwinter I had sometimes found too warm for comfort. Even then I
was not sufficiently bundled up, so I called for an extra blanket,
two afghans, and the hot-water bag.

Everybody in the house thought I had gone mad, and I wondered myself
if perhaps I hadn't, when all of a sudden I perceived, off in the
corner, the Awful Thing, and perceiving it, I knew all.

I was being haunted, and the physical repugnance of which I have
spoken was on. The cold shiver, the invariable accompaniment of the
ghostly visitant, had come, and I assure you I never was so glad of
anything in my life. It has always been said of me by my critics
that I am raw; I was afraid that after that night they would say I
was half baked, and I would far rather be the one than the other;
and it was the Awful Thing that saved me. Realizing this, I spoke to
it gratefully.

"You are a heaven-born gift on a night like this," said I, rising up
and walking to its side.

"I am glad to be of service to you," the Awful Thing replied,
smiling at me so yellowly that I almost wished the author of the
_Blue-Button of Cowardice_ could have seen it.

"It's very good of you," I put in.

"Not at all," replied the Thing; "you are the only man I know who
doesn't think it necessary to prevaricate about ghosts every time he
gets an order for a Christmas story. There have been more lies told
about us than about any other class of things in existence, and we
are getting a trifle tired of it. We may have lost our corporeal
existence, but some of our sensitiveness still remains."

"Well," said I, rising and lighting the gas-logs--for I was on the
very verge of congealment--"I am sure I am pleased if you like my
stories."

"Oh, as for that, I don't think much of them," said the Awful Thing,
with a purple display of candor which amused me, although I cannot
say that I relished it; "but you never lie about us. You are not at
all interesting, but you are truthful, and we spooks hate libellers.
Just because one happens to be a thing is no reason why writers
should libel it, and that's why I have always respected you. We
regard you as a sort of spook Boswell. You may be dull and stupid,
but you tell the truth, and when I saw you in imminent danger of
becoming a mere grease spot, owing to the fearful heat, I decided to
help you through. That's why I'm here. Go to sleep now. I'll stay
here and keep you shivering until daylight anyhow. I'd stay longer,
but we are always laid at sunrise."

"Like an egg," I said, sleepily.

"Tutt!" said the ghost. "Go to sleep, If you talk I'll have to go."

And so I dropped off to sleep as softly and as sweetly as a tired
child. In the morning I awoke refreshed. The rest of my family were
prostrated, but I was fresh. The Awful Thing was gone, and the room
was warming up again; and if it had not been for the tinkling ice in
my water-pitcher, I should have suspected it was all a dream. And so
throughout the whole sizzling summer the friendly spectre stood by
me and kept me cool, and I haven't a doubt that it was because of
his good offices in keeping me shivering on those fearful August
nights that I survived the season, and came to my work in the autumn
as fit as a fiddle--so fit, indeed, that I have not written a poem
since that has not struck me as being the very best of its kind, and
if I can find a publisher who will take the risk of putting those
poems out, I shall unequivocally and without hesitation acknowledge,
as I do here, my debt of gratitude to my friends in the spirit
world.

Manifestations of this nature, then, are harmful, as I have already
observed, only when the person who is haunted yields to his physical
impulses. Fought stubbornly inch by inch with the will, they can be
subdued, and often they are a boon. I think I have proved both these
points. It took me a long time to discover the facts, however, and
my discovery came about in this way. It may perhaps interest you to
know how I made it. I encountered at the English home of a wealthy
friend at one time a "presence" of an insulting turn of mind. It was
at my friend Jarley's little baronial hall, which he had rented from
the Earl of Brokedale the year Mrs. Jarley was presented at court.
The Countess of Brokedale's social influence went with the château
for a slightly increased rental, which was why the Jarleys took it.
I was invited to spend a month with them, not so much because Jarley
is fond of me as because Mrs. Jarley had a sort of an idea that, as
a writer, I might say something about their newly acquired glory in
some American Sunday newspaper; and Jarley laughingly assigned to me
the "haunted chamber," without at least one of which no baronial
hall in the old country is considered worthy of the name.

[Illustration: 'THE FRIENDLY SPECTRE STOOD BY ME']

"It will interest you more than any other," Jarley said; "and if it
has a ghost, I imagine you will be able to subdue him."

I gladly accepted the hospitality of my friend, and was delighted at
his consideration in giving me the haunted chamber, where I might
pursue my investigations into the subject of phantoms undisturbed.
Deserting London, then, for a time, I ran down to Brokedale Hall,
and took up my abode there with a half-dozen other guests. Jarley,
as usual since his sudden "gold-fall," as Wilkins called it, did
everything with a lavish hand. I believe a man could have got
diamonds on toast if he had chosen to ask for them. However, this is
apart from my story.

I had occupied the haunted chamber about two weeks before anything
of importance occurred, and then it came--and a more unpleasant,
ill-mannered spook never floated in the ether. He materialized about
3 A.M. and was unpleasantly sulphurous to one's perceptions. He sat
upon the divan in my room, holding his knees in his hands, leering
and scowling upon me as though I were the intruder, and not he.

"Who are you?" I asked, excitedly, as in the dying light of the log
fire he loomed grimly up before me.

"None of your business," he replied, insolently, showing his teeth
as he spoke. "On the other hand, who are you? This is my room, and
not yours, and it is I who have the right to question. If you have
any business here, well and good. If not, you will oblige me by
removing yourself, for your presence is offensive to me."

"I am a guest in the house," I answered, restraining my impulse to
throw the inkstand at him for his impudence. "And this room has been
set apart for my use by my host."

"One of the servant's guests, I presume?" he said, insultingly, his
lividly lavender-like lip upcurling into a haughty sneer, which was
maddening to a self-respecting worm like myself.

I rose up from my bed, and picked up the poker to bat him over the
head, but again I restrained myself. It will not do to quarrel, I
thought. I will be courteous if he is not, thus giving a dead
Englishman a lesson which wouldn't hurt some of the living.

"No," I said, my voice tremulous with wrath--"no; I am the guest of
my friend Mr. Jarley, an American, who--"

"Same thing," observed the intruder, with a yellow sneer. "Race of
low-class animals, those Americans--only fit for gentlemen's
stables, you know."

This was too much. A ghost may insult me with impunity, but when he
tackles my people he must look out for himself. I sprang forward
with an ejaculation of wrath, and with all my strength struck at him
with the poker, which I still held in my hand. If he had been
anything but a ghost, he would have been split vertically from top
to toe; but as it was, the poker passed harmlessly through his misty
make-up, and rent a great gash two feet long in Jarley's divan. The
yellow sneer faded from his lips, and a maddening blue smile took
its place.

"Humph!" he observed, nonchalantly. "What a useless ebullition, and
what a vulgar display of temper! Really you are the most humorous
insect I have yet encountered. From what part of the States do you
come? I am truly interested to know in what kind of soil exotics of
your peculiar kind are cultivated. Are you part of the fauna or the
flora of your tropical States--or what?"

And then I realized the truth. There is no physical method of
combating a ghost which can result in his discomfiture, so I
resolved to try the intellectual. It was a mind-to-mind contest, and
he was easy prey after I got going. I joined him in his blue smile,
and began to talk about the English aristocracy; for I doubted not,
from the spectre's manner, that he was or had been one of that
class. He had about him that haughty lack of manners which bespoke
the aristocrat. I waxed very eloquent when, as I say, I got my mind
really going. I spoke of kings and queens and their uses in no
uncertain phrases, of divine right, of dukes, earls, marquises--of
all the pompous establishments of British royalty and nobility--with
that contemptuously humorous tolerance of a necessary and somewhat
amusing evil which we find in American comic papers. We had a battle
royal for about one hour, and I must confess he was a foeman worthy
of any man's steel, so long as I was reasonable in my arguments; but
when I finally observed that it wouldn't be ten years before Barnum
and Bailey's Greatest Show on Earth had the whole lot engaged for
the New York circus season, stalking about the Madison Square Garden
arena, with the Prince of Wales at the head beating a tomtom, he
grew iridescent with wrath, and fled madly through the wainscoting
of the room. It was purely a mental victory. All the physical
possibilities of my being would have exhausted themselves futilely
before him; but when I turned upon him the resources of my fancy, my
imagination unrestrained, and held back by no sense of responsibility,
he was as a child in my hands, obstreperous but certain to be subdued.
If it were not for Mrs. Jarley's wrath--which, I admit, she tried to
conceal--over the damage to her divan, I should now look back upon
that visitation as the most agreeable haunting experience of my life; at
any rate, it was at that time that I first learned how to handle ghosts,
and since that time I have been able to overcome them without trouble--
save in one instance, with which I shall close this chapter of my
reminiscences, and which I give only to prove the necessity of
observing strictly one point in dealing with spectres.

[Illustration: "HE FLED MADLY THROUGH THE WAINSCOTING OF THE ROOM"]

It happened last Christmas, in my own home. I had provided as a
little surprise for my wife a complete new solid silver service
marked with her initials. The tree had been prepared for the
children, and all had retired save myself. I had lingered later than
the others to put the silver service under the tree, where its happy
recipient would find it when she went to the tree with the little
ones the next morning. It made a magnificent display: the two dozen
of each kind of spoon, the forks, the knives, the coffee-pot, water
-urn, and all; the salvers, the vegetable-dishes, olive-forks,
cheese-scoops, and other dazzling attributes of a complete service,
not to go into details, presented a fairly scintillating picture
which would have made me gasp if I had not, at the moment when my
own breath began to catch, heard another gasp in the corner
immediately behind me. Turning about quickly to see whence it came,
I observed a dark figure in the pale light of the moon which
streamed in through the window.

"Who are you?" I cried, starting back, the physical symptoms of a
ghostly presence manifesting themselves as usual.

"I am the ghost of one long gone before," was the reply, in
sepulchral tones.

I breathed a sigh of relief, for I had for a moment feared it was a
burglar.

"Oh!" I said. "You gave me a start at first. I was afraid you were a
material thing come to rob me." Then turning towards the tree, I
observed, with a wave of the hand, "Fine lay out, eh?"

"Beautiful," he said, hollowly. "Yet not so beautiful as things I've
seen in realms beyond your ken."

And then he set about telling me of the beautiful gold and silver
ware they used in the Elysian Fields, and I must confess Monte
Cristo would have had a hard time, with Sindbad the Sailor to help,
to surpass the picture of royal magnificence the spectre drew. I
stood inthralled until, even as he was talking, the clock struck
three, when he rose up, and moving slowly across the floor, barely
visible, murmured regretfully that he must be off, with which he
faded away down the back stairs. I pulled my nerves, which were
getting rather strained, together again, and went to bed.

[Illustration: "THEN HE SAT ABOUT TELLING ME OF THE BEAUTIFUL GOLD
AND SILVER WARE THEY USE IN THE ELYSIAN FIELDS."]

_Next morning every bit of that silver-ware was gone_; and, what is
more, three weeks later I found the ghost's picture in the Rogues'
Gallery in New York as that of the cleverest sneak-thief in the
country.

All of which, let me say to you, dear reader, in conclusion, proves
that when you are dealing with ghosts you mustn't give up all your
physical resources until you have definitely ascertained that the
thing by which you are confronted, horrid or otherwise, is a ghost,
and not an all too material rogue with a light step, and a
commodious jute bag for plunder concealed beneath his coat.

"How to tell a ghost?" you ask.

Well, as an eminent master of fiction frequently observes in his
writings, "that is another story," which I shall hope some day to
tell for your instruction and my own aggrandizement.




THE MYSTERY OF MY GRANDMOTHER'S HAIR SOFA


It happened last Christmas Eve, and precisely as I am about to set
it forth. It has been said by critics that I am a romancer of the
wildest sort, but that is where my critics are wrong. I grant that
the experiences through which I have passed, some of which have
contributed to the gray matter in my hair, however little they may
have augmented that within my cranium--experiences which I have from
time to time set forth to the best of my poor abilities in the
columns of such periodicals as I have at my mercy--have been of an
order so excessively supernatural as to give my critics a basis for
their aspersions; but they do not know, as I do, that that basis is
as uncertain as the shifting sands of the sea, inasmuch as in the
setting forth of these episodes I have narrated them as faithfully
as the most conscientious realist could wish, and am therefore
myself a true and faithful follower of the realistic school. I
cannot be blamed because these things happen to me. If I sat down in
my study to imagine the strange incidents to which I have in the
past called attention, with no other object in view than to make my
readers unwilling to retire for the night, to destroy the peace of
mind of those who are good enough to purchase my literary wares, or
to titillate till tense the nerve tissue of the timid who come to
smile and who depart unstrung, then should I deserve the severest
condemnation; but these things I do not do. I have a mission in life
which I hold as sacred as my good friend Mr. Howells holds his. Such
phases of life as I see I put down faithfully, and if the Fates in
their wisdom have chosen to make of me the Balzac of the
Supernatural, the Shakespeare of the Midnight Visitation, while
elevating Mr. Howells to the high office of the Fielding of
Massachusetts and its adjacent States, the Smollett of Boston, and
the Sterne of Altruria, I can only regret that the powers have dealt
more graciously with him than with me, and walk my little way as
gracefully as I know how. The slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune I am prepared to suffer in all meekness of spirit; I accept
them because it seems to me to be nobler in the mind so to do rather
than by opposing to end them. And so to my story. I have prefaced it
at such length for but one reason, and that is that I am aware that
there will be those who will doubt the veracity of my tale, and I am
anxious at the outset to impress upon all the unquestioned fact that
what I am about to tell is the plain, unvarnished truth, and, as I
have already said, it happened last Christmas Eve.

I regret to have to say so, for it sounds so much like the
description given to other Christmas Eves by writers with a less
conscientious regard for the truth than I possess, but the facts
must be told, and I must therefore state that it was a wild and
stormy night. The winds howled and moaned and made all sorts of
curious noises, soughing through the bare limbs of the trees,
whistling through the chimneys, and, with reckless disregard of my
children's need of rest, slamming doors until my house seemed to be
the centre of a bombardment of no mean order. It is also necessary
to state that the snow, which had been falling all day, had clothed
the lawns and house-tops in a dazzling drapery of white, and, not
content with having done this to the satisfaction of all, was still
falling, and, happily enough, as silently as usual. Were I the "wild
romancer" that I have been called, I might have had the snow fall
with a thunderous roar, but I cannot go to any such length. I love
my fellow-beings, but there is a limit to my philanthropy, and I
shall not have my snow fall noisily just to make a critic happy. I
might do it to save his life, for I should hate to have a man die
for the want of what I could give him with a stroke of my pen, and
without any special effort, but until that emergency arises I shall
not yield a jot in the manner of the falling of my snow.

Occasionally a belated home-comer would pass my house, the sleigh
-bells strung about the ample proportions of his steed jingling loud
above the roaring of the winds. My family had retired, and I sat
alone in the glow of the blazing log--a very satisfactory gas
affair--on the hearth. The flashing jet flames cast the usual
grotesque shadows about the room, and my mind had thereby been
reduced to that sensitive state which had hitherto betokened the
coming of a visitor from other realms--a fact which I greatly
regretted, for I was in no mood to be haunted. My first impulse,
when I recognized the on-coming of that mental state which is
evidenced by the goosing of one's flesh, if I may be allowed the
expression, was to turn out the fire and go to bed. I have always
found this the easiest method of ridding myself of unwelcome ghosts,
and, conversely, I have observed that others who have been haunted
unpleasantly have suffered in proportion to their failure to take
what has always seemed to me to be the most natural course in the
world--to hide their heads beneath the bed-covering. Brutus, when
Caesar's ghost appeared beside his couch, before the battle of
Philippi, sat up and stared upon the horrid apparition, and suffered
correspondingly, when it would have been much easier and more
natural to put his head under his pillow, and so shut out the
unpleasant spectacle. That is the course I have invariably pursued,
and it has never failed me. The most luminous ghost man ever saw is
utterly powerless to shine through a comfortably stuffed pillow, or
the usual Christmas-time quota of woollen blankets. But upon this
occasion I preferred to await developments. The real truth is that I
was about written out in the matter of visitations, and needed a
reinforcement of my uncanny vein, which, far from being varicose,
had become sclerotic, so dry had it been pumped by the demands to
which it had been subjected by a clamorous, mystery-loving public. I
had, I may as well confess it, run out of ghosts, and had come down
to the writing of tales full of the horror of suggestion, leaving my
readers unsatisfied through my failure to describe in detail just
what kind of looking thing it was that had so aroused their
apprehension; and one editor had gone so far as to reject my last
ghost-story because I had worked him up to a fearful pitch of
excitement, and left him there without any reasonable way out. I was
face to face with a condition--which, briefly, was that hereafter
that desirable market was closed to the products of my pen unless my
contributions were accompanied by a diagram which should make my
mysteries so plain that a little child could understand how it all
came to pass. Hence it was that, instead of following my own
convenience and taking refuge in my spectre-proof couch, I stayed
where I was. I had not long to wait. The dial in my fuel-meter
below-stairs had hardly had time to register the consumption of
three thousand feet of gas before the faint sound of a bell reached
my straining ears--which, by-the-way, is an expression I profoundly
hate, but must introduce because the public demands it, and a ghost
-story without straining ears having therefore no chance of
acceptance by a discriminating editor. I started from my chair and
listened intently, but the ringing had stopped, and I settled back
to the delights of a nervous chill, when again the deathly silence
of the night--the wind had quieted in time to allow me the use of
this faithful, overworked phrase--was broken by the tintinnabulation
of the bell. This time I recognized it as the electric bell operated
by a push-button upon the right side of my front door. To rise and
rush to the door was the work of a moment. It always is. In another
instant I had flung it wide. This operation was singularly easy,
considering that it was but a narrow door, and width was the last
thing it could ever be suspected of, however forcible the fling.
However, I did as I have said, and gazed out into the inky blackness
of the night. As I had suspected, there was no one there, and I was
at once convinced that the dreaded moment had come. I was certain
that at the instant of my turning to re-enter my library I should
see something which would make my brain throb madly and my pulses
start. I did not therefore instantly turn, but let the wind blow the
door to with a loud clatter, while I walked quickly into my dining
-room and drained a glass of cooking-sherry to the dregs. I do not
introduce the cooking-sherry here for the purpose of eliciting a
laugh from the reader, but in order to be faithful to life as we
live it. All our other sherry had been used by the queen of the
kitchen for cooking purposes, and this was all we had left for the
table. It is always so in real life, let critics say what they will.

[Illustration: "THERE WAS NO ONE THERE"]

This done, I returned to the library, and sustained my first shock.
The unexpected had happened. There was still no one there. Surely
this ghost was an original, and I began to be interested.

"Perhaps he is a modest ghost," I thought, "and is a little shy
about manifesting his presence. That, indeed, would be original,
seeing how bold the spectres of commerce usually are, intruding
themselves always upon the privacy of those who are not at all
minded to receive them."

Confident that something would happen, and speedily at that, I sat
down to wait, lighting a cigar for company; for burning gas-logs are
not as sociable as their hissing, spluttering originals, the genuine
logs, in a state of ignition. Several times I started up nervously,
feeling as if there was something standing behind me about to place
a clammy hand upon my shoulder, and as many times did I resume my
attitude of comfort, disappointed. Once I seemed to see a minute
spirit floating in the air before me, but investigation showed that
it was nothing more than the fanciful curling of the clouds of smoke
I had blown from my lips. An hour passed and nothing occurred, save
that my heart from throbbing took to leaping in a fashion which
filled me with concern. A few minutes later, however, I heard a
strange sound at the window, and my leaping heart stood still. The
strain upon my tense nerves was becoming unbearable.

[Illustration: "I DRAINED A GLASS OF COOKING SHERRY TO THE DREGS"]

"At last!" I whispered to myself, hoarsely, drawing a deep breath,
and pushing with all my force into the soft upholstered back of my
chair. Then I leaned forward and watched the window, momentarily
expecting to see it raised by unseen hands; but it never budged.
Then I watched the glass anxiously, half hoping, half fearing to see
something pass through it; but nothing came, and I began to get
irritable.

I looked at my watch, and saw that it was half-past one o'clock.

"Hang you!" I cried, "whatever you are, why don't you appear, and be
done with it? The idea of keeping a man up until this hour of the
night!"

Then I listened for a reply; but there was none.

"What do you take me for?" I continued, querulously. "Do you suppose
I have nothing else to do but to wait upon your majesty's pleasure?
Surely, with all the time you've taken to make your début, you must
be something of unusual horror."

Again there was no answer, and I decided that petulance was of no
avail. Some other tack was necessary, and I decided to appeal to his
sympathies--granting that ghosts have sympathies to appeal to, and I
have met some who were so human in this respect that I have found it
hard to believe that they were truly ghosts.

"I say, old chap," I said, as genially as I could, considering the
situation--I was nervous, and the amount of gas consumed by the logs
was beginning to bring up visions of bankruptcy before my eyes--
"hurry up and begin your haunting--there's a good fellow. I'm a
father--please remember that--and this is Christmas Eve. The
children will be up in about three hours, and if you've ever been a
parent yourself you know what that means. I must have some rest, so
come along and show yourself, like the good spectre you are, and let
me go to bed."

I think myself it was a very moving address, but it helped me not a
jot. The thing must have had a heart of stone, for it never made
answer.

"What?" said I, pretending to think it had spoken and I had not
heard distinctly; but the visitant was not to be caught napping,
even though I had good reason to believe that he had fallen asleep.
He, she, or it, whatever it was, maintained a silence as deep as it
was aggravating. I smoked furiously on to restrain my growing wrath.
Then it occurred to me that the thing might have some pride, and I
resolved to work on that.

"Of course I should like to write you up," I said, with a sly wink
at myself. "I imagine you'd attract a good deal of attention in the
literary world. Judging from the time it takes you to get ready, you
ought to make a good magazine story--not one of those comic ghost
-tales that can be dashed off in a minute, and ultimately get
published in a book at the author's expense. You stir so little
that, as things go by contraries, you'll make a stirring tale.
You're long enough, I might say, for a three-volume novel--but--ah--
I can't do you unless I see you. You must be seen to be appreciated.
I can't imagine you, you know. Let's see, now, if I can guess what
kind of a ghost you are. Um! You must be terrifying in the extreme--
you'd make a man shiver in mid-August in mid-Africa. Your eyes are
unfathomably green. Your smile would drive the sanest mad. Your
hands are cold and clammy as a--ah--as a hot-water bag four hours
after."

And so I went on for ten minutes, praising him up to the skies, and
ending up with a pathetic appeal that he should manifest his
presence. It may be that I puffed him up so that he burst, but,
however that may be, he would not condescend to reply, and I grew
angry in earnest.

"Very well," I said, savagely, jumping up from my chair and turning
off the gas-log. "Don't! Nobody asked you to come in the first
place, and nobody's going to complain if you sulk in your tent like
Achilles. I don't want to see you. I could fake up a better ghost
than you are anyhow--in fact, I fancy that's what's the matter with
you. You know what a miserable specimen you are--couldn't frighten a
mouse if you were ten times as horrible. You're ashamed to show
yourself--and I don't blame you. I'd be that way too if I were you."

I walked half-way to the door, momentarily expecting to have him
call me back; but he didn't. I had to give him a parting shot.

"You probably belong to a ghost union--don't you? That's your
secret? Ordered out on strike, and won't do any haunting after
sundown unless some other employer of unskilled ghosts pays his
spooks skilled wages."

I had half a notion that the word "spook" would draw him out, for I
have noticed that ghosts do not like to be called spooks any more
than negroes like to be called "niggers." They consider it vulgar.
He never yielded in his reserve, however, and after locking up I
went to bed.

For a time I could not sleep, and I began to wonder if I had been
just, after all. Possibly there was no spirit within miles of me.
The symptoms were all there, but might not that have been due to my
depressed condition--for it does depress a writer to have one of his
best veins become sclerotic--I asked myself, and finally, as I went
off to sleep, I concluded that I had been in the wrong all through,
and had imagined there was something there when there really was
not.

"Very likely the ringing of the bell was due to the wind," I said,
as I dozed off. "Of course it would take a very heavy wind to blow
the button in, but then--" and then I fell asleep, convinced that no
ghost had ventured within a mile of me that night. But when morning
came I was undeceived. Something must have visited us that Christmas
Eve, and something very terrible; for while I was dressing for
breakfast I heard my wife calling loudly from below.

[Illustration: "IT HAD TURNED WHITE"]

"Henry!" she cried. "Please come down here at once."

"I can't. I'm only half shaved," I answered.

"Never mind that," she returned. "Come at once."

So, with the lather on one cheek and a cut on the other, I went
below.

"What's the matter?" I asked.

"Look at that!" she said, pointing to my grandmother's hair-sofa,
which stood in the hall just outside of my library door.

It had been black when we last saw it, but as I looked I saw that a
great change had come over it.

_It had turned white in a single night!_

Now I can't account for this strange incident, nor can any one else,
and I do not intend to try. It is too awful a mystery for me to
attempt to penetrate, but the sofa is there in proof of all that I
have said concerning it, and any one who desires can call and see it
at any time. It is not necessary for them to see me; they need only
ask to see the sofa, and it will be shown.

We have had it removed from the hall to the white-and-gold parlor,
for we cannot bear to have it stand in any of the rooms we use.




THE MYSTERY OF BARNEY O'ROURKE


A very irritating thing has happened. My hired man, a certain Barney
O'Rourke, an American citizen of much political influence, a good
gardener, and, according to his lights, a gentleman, has got very
much the best of me, and all because of certain effusions which from
time to time have emanated from my pen. It is not often that one's
literary chickens come home to roost in such a vengeful fashion as
some of mine have recently done, and I have no doubt that as this
story progresses he who reads will find much sympathy for me rising
up in his breast. As the matter stands, I am torn with conflicting
emotions. I am very fond of Barney, and I have always found him
truthful hitherto, but exactly what to believe now I hardly know.

The main thing to bring my present trouble upon me, I am forced to
believe, is the fact that my house has been in the past, and may
possibly still be, haunted. Why my house should be haunted at all I
do not know, for it has never been the scene of any tragedy that I
am aware of. I built it myself, and it is paid for. So far as I am
aware, nothing awful of a material nature has ever happened within
its walls, and yet it appears to be, for the present at any rate, a
sort of club-house for inconsiderate if not strictly horrid things,
which is a most unfair dispensation of the fates, for I have not
deserved it. If I were in any sense a Bluebeard, and spent my days
cutting ladies' throats as a pastime; if I had a pleasing habit of
inviting friends up from town over Sunday, and dropping them into
oubliettes connecting my library with dark, dank, and snaky
subterranean dungeons; if guests who dine at my house came with a
feeling that the chances were, they would never return to their
families alive--it might be different. I shouldn't and couldn't
blame a house for being haunted if it were the dwelling-place of a
bloodthirsty ruffian such as I have indicated, but that is just what
it is not. It is not the home of a lover of fearful crimes. I would
not walk ten feet for the pleasure of killing any man, no matter who
he is. On the contrary, I would walk twenty feet to avoid doing it,
if the emergency should ever arise, aye, even if it were that fiend
who sits next me at the opera and hums the opera through from
beginning to end. There have been times, I must confess, when I have
wished I might have had the oubliettes to which I have referred
constructed beneath my library and leading to the coal-bins or to
some long-forgotten well, but that was two or three years ago, when
I was in politics for a brief period, and delegations of willing and
thirsty voters were daily and nightly swarming in through every one
of the sixteen doors on the ground-floor of my house, which my
architect, in a riotous moment, smuggled into the plans in the guise
of "French windows." I shouldn't have minded then if the earth had
opened up and swallowed my whole party, so long as I did not have to
go with them, but under such provocation as I had I do not feel that
my residence is justified in being haunted after its present fashion
because such a notion entered my mind. We cannot help our thoughts,
much less our notions, and punishment for that which we cannot help
is not in strict accord with latter-day ideas of justice. It may
occur to some hypercritical person to suggest that the English
language has frequently been murdered in my den, and that it is its
horrid corse which is playing havoc at my home, crying out to heaven
and flaunting its bloody wounds in the face of my conscience, but I
can pass such an aspersion as that by with contemptuous silence, for
even if it were true it could not be set down as wilful
assassination on my part, since no sane person who needs a language
as much as I do would ever in cold blood kill any one of the many
that lie about us. Furthermore, the English language is not dead. It
may not be met with often in these days, but it is still encountered
with sufficient frequency in the works of Henry James and Miss Libby
to prove that it still lives; and I am told that one or two members
of our consular service abroad can speak it--though as for this I
cannot write with certainty, for I have never encountered one of
these exceptions to the general rule.

[Illustration: "IT IS NOT OFTEN THAT ONE'S LITERARY CHICKENS COME
HOME TO ROOST"]

The episode with which this narrative has to deal is interesting in
some ways, though I doubt not some readers will prove sceptical as
to its realism. There are suspicious minds in the world, and with
these every man who writes of truth must reckon. To such I have only
to say that it is my desire and intention to tell the truth as
simply as it can be told by James, and as truthfully as Sylvanus
Cobb ever wrote!

Now, then, the facts of my story are these:

In the latter part of last July, expecting a meeting of friends at
my house in connection with a question of the good government of the
city in which I honestly try to pay my taxes, I ordered one hundred
cigars to be delivered at my residence. I ordered several other
things at the same time, but they have nothing whatever to do with
this story, because they were all--every single bottle of them--
consumed at the meeting; but of the cigars, about which the strange
facts of my story cluster, at the close of the meeting a goodly two
dozen remained. This is surprising, considering that there were
quite six of us present, but it is true. Twenty-four by actual count
remained when the last guest left me. The next morning I and my
family took our departure for a month's rest in the mountains. In
the hurry of leaving home, and the worry of looking after three
children and four times as many trunks, I neglected to include the
cigars in my impedimenta, leaving them in the opened box upon my
library table. It was careless of me, no doubt, but it was an
important incident, as the sequel shows. The incidents of the stay
in the hills were commonplace, but during my absence from home
strange things were going on there, as I learned upon my return.

The place had been left in charge of Barney O'Rourke, who, upon my
arrival, assured me that everything was all right, and I thanked and
paid him.

"Wait a minute, Barney," I said, as he turned to leave me; "I've got
a cigar for you." I may mention incidentally that in the past I had
kept Barney on very good terms with his work by treating him in a
friendly, sociable way, but, to my great surprise, upon this
occasion he declined advances.

His face flushed very red as he observed that he had given up
smoking.

"Well, wait a minute, anyhow," said I. "There are one or two things
I want to speak to you about." And I went to the table to get a
cigar for myself.

_The box was empty!_

Instantly the suspicion which has doubtless flashed through the mind
of the reader flashed through my own--Barney had been tempted, and
had fallen. I recalled his blush, and on the moment realized that in
all my vast experience with hired men in the past I had never seen
one blush before. The case was clear. My cigars had gone to help
Barney through the hot summer.

"Well, I declare!" I cried, turning suddenly upon him. "I left a lot
of cigars here when I went away, Barney."

"I know ye did, sorr," said Barney, who had now grown white and
rigid. "I saw them meself, sorr. There was twinty-foor of 'em."

"You counted them, eh?" I asked, with an elevation of my eyebrows
which to those who know me conveys the idea of suspicion.

"I did, sorr. In your absence I was responsible for everyt'ing here,
and the mornin' ye wint awaa I took a quick invintery, sorr, of the
removables," he answered, fingering his cap nervously. "That's how
it was, sorr, and thim twinty-foor segyars was lyin' there in the
box forninst me eyes."

"And how do you account for the removal of these removables, as you
call them, Barney?" I asked, looking coldly at him. He saw he was
under suspicion, and he winced, but pulled himself together in an
instant.

"I expected the question, sorr," he said, calmly, "and I have me
answer ready. Thim segyars was shmoked, sorr."

"Doubtless," said I, with an ill-suppressed sneer. "And by whom?
Cats?" I added, with a contemptuous shrug of my shoulders.

His answer overpowered me, it was so simple, direct, and unexpected.

"Shpooks," he replied, laconically.

I gasped in astonishment, and sat down. My knees simply collapsed
under me, and I could no more have continued to stand up than fly.

"What?" I cried, as soon as I had recovered sufficiently to gasp out
the word.

"Shpooks," replied Barney. "Ut came about like this, sorr. It was
the Froiday two wakes afther you left, I became un'asy loike along
about nine o'clock in the avenin', and I fought I'd come around here
and see if everything was sthraight. Me wife sez ut's foolish of me,
sorr, and I sez maybe so, but I can't get ut out o' me head thot
somet'ing's wrong.

"'Ye locked everything up safe whin ye left?' sez she.

"'I always does,' sez I.

"'Thin ut's a phwhim,' sez she.

"'No,' sez I. 'Ut's a sinsation. If ut was a phwim, ut'd be youse as
would hov' it'; that's what I sez, sevarely loike, sorr, and out I
shtarts. It was tin o'clock whin I got here. The noight was dark and
blow-in' loike March, rainin' and t'underin' till ye couldn't hear
yourself t'ink.

"I walked down the walk, sorr, an' barrin' the t'under everyt'ing
was quiet. I troid the dures. All toight as a politician. Shtill,
t'inks I, I'll go insoide. Quiet as a lamb ut was, sorr; but on a
suddent, as I was about to go back home again, I shmelt shmoke!"

"Fire?" I cried, excitedly.

"I said shmoke, sorr," said Barney, whose calmness was now beautiful
to look upon, he was so serenely confident of his position.

"Doesn't smoke involve a fire?" I demanded.

"Sometimes," said Barney. "I t'ought ye meant a conflagrashun, sorr.
The shmoke I shmelt was segyars."

"Ah," I observed. "I am glad you are coming to the point. Go on.
There _is_ a difference."

"There is thot," said Barney, pleasantly, he was getting along so
swimmingly. "This shmoke, as I say, was segyar shmoke, so I gropes
me way cautious loike up the back sthairs and listens by the library
dure. All quiet as a lamb. Thin, bold loike, I shteps into the room,
and nearly drops wid the shcare I have on me in a minute. The room
was dark as a b'aver hat, sorr, but in different shpots ranged round
in the chairs was six little red balls of foire!"

"Barney!" I cried.

"Thrue, sorr," said he. "And tobacky shmoke rollin' out till you'd
'a' t'ought there was a foire in a segyar-store! Ut queered me,
sorr, for a minute, and me impulse is to run; but I gets me courage
up, springs across the room, touches the electhric button, an' bzt!
every gas-jet on the flure loights up!"

"That was rash, Barney," I put in, sarcastically.

"It was in your intherest, sorr," said he, impressively.

"And you saw what?" I queried, growing very impatient.

"What I hope niver to see again, sorr," said Barney, compressing his
lips solemnly. "_Six impty chairs,_ sorr, wid six segyars as hoigh
up from the flure as a man's mout', puffin' and a-blowin' out shmoke
loike a chimbley! An' ivery oncet in a whoile the segyars would go
down kind of an' be tapped loike as if wid a finger of a shmoker,
and the ashes would fall off onto the flure!"

"Well?" said I. "Go on. What next?"

"I wanted to run awaa, sorr, but I shtood rutted to the shpot wid
th' surproise I had on me, until foinally ivery segyar was burnt to
a shtub and trun into the foireplace, where I found 'em the nixt
mornin' when I came to clane up, provin' ut wasn't ony dhrame I'd
been havin'."

I arose from my chair and paced the room for two or three minutes,
wondering what I could say. Of course the man was lying, I thought.
Then I pulled myself together.

"Barney," I said, severely, "what's the use? Do you expect me to
believe any such cock-and-bull story as that?"

"No, sorr," said he. "But thim's the facts."

"Do you mean to say that this house of mine is haunted?" I cried.

[Illustration: "'SIX IMPTY CHAIRS, SORR'"]

"I don't know," said Barney, quietly. "I didn't t'ink so before."

"Before? Before what? When?" I asked.

"Whin you was writin' shtories about ut, sorr," said Barney,
respectfully. "You've had a black horse-hair sofy turn white in a
single noight, sorr, for the soight of horror ut's witnessed. You've
had the hair of your own head shtand on ind loike tinpenny nails at
what you've seen here in this very room, yourself, sorr. You've had
ghosts doin' all sorts of t'ings in the shtories you've been writin'
for years, and _you've always swore they was thrue, sorr_. I didn't
believe 'em when I read 'em, but whin I see thim segyars bein'
shmoked up before me eyes by invishible t'ings, I sez to meself, sez
I, the boss ain't such a dommed loiar afther all. I've follyd your
writin', sorr, very careful and close loike; an I don't see how,
afther the tales you've told about your own experiences right here,
you can say consishtently that this wan o' mine ain't so!"

"But why, Barney," I asked, to confuse him, "when a thing like this
happened, didn't you write and tell me?"

Barney chuckled as only one of his species can chuckle.

"Wroite an' tell ye?" he cried. "Be gorry, sorr, if I could wroite
at all at all, ut's not you oi'd be wroitin' that tale to, but to
the edithor of the paper that you wroite for. A tale loike that is
wort' tin dollars to any man, eshpecially if ut's thrue. But I niver
learned the art!"

And with that Barney left me overwhelmed. Subsequently I gave him
the ten dollars which I think his story is worth, but I must confess
that I am in a dilemma. After what I have said about my supernatural
guests, I cannot discharge Barney for lying, but I'll be blest if I
can quite believe that his story is accurate in every respect.

If there should happen to be among the readers of this tale any who
have made a sufficiently close study of the habits of hired men and
ghosts to be able to shed any light upon the situation, nothing
would please me more than to hear from them.

I may add, in closing, that Barney has resumed smoking.




THE EXORCISM THAT FAILED

I--A JUBILEE EXPERIENCE


It has happened again. I have been haunted once more, and this time
by the most obnoxious spook I have ever had the bliss of meeting. He
is homely, squat, and excessively vulgar in his dress and manner. I
have met cockneys in my day, and some of the most offensive
varieties at that, but this spook absolutely outcocknifies them all,
and the worst of it is I can't seem to rid myself of him. He has
pursued me like an avenging angel for quite six months, and every
plan of exorcism that I have tried so far has failed, including the
receipt given me by my friend Peters, who, next to myself, knows
more about ghosts that any man living. It was in London that I first
encountered the vulgar little creature who has made my life a sore
trial ever since, and with whom I am still coping to the best of my
powers.

Starting out early in the morning of June 21, last summer, to
witness the pageant of her Majesty Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee,
I secured a good place on the corner of Northumberland Avenue and
Trafalgar Square. There were two rows of people ahead of me, but I
did not mind that. Those directly before me were short, and I could
easily see over their heads, and, furthermore, I was protected from
the police, who in London are the most dangerous people I have ever
encountered, not having the genial ways of the Irish bobbies who
keep the New York crowds smiling; who, when you are pushed into the
line of march, merely punch you in a ticklish spot with the end of
their clubs, instead of smashing your hair down into your larynx
with their sticks, as do their London prototypes.

It was very comforting to me, having witnessed the pageant of 1887,
when the Queen celebrated her fiftieth anniversary as a potentate,
and thereby learned the English police system of dealing with
crowds, to know that there were at least two rows of heads to be
split open before my turn came, and I had formed the good resolution
to depart as soon as the first row had been thus treated, whether I
missed seeing the procession or not.

I had not been long at my post when the crowds concentrating on the
line of march, coming up the avenue from the Embankment, began to
shove intolerably from the rear, and it was as much as I could do to
keep my place, particularly in view of the fact that the undersized
cockney who stood in front of me appeared to offer no resistance to
the pressure of my waistcoat against his narrow little back. It
seemed strange that it should be so, but I appeared, despite his
presence, to have nothing of a material nature ahead of me, and I
found myself bent at an angle of seventy-five degrees, my feet
firmly planted before me like those of a balky horse, restraining
the onward tendency of the mob back of me.

Strong as I am, however, and stubborn, I am not a stone wall ten
feet thick at the base, and the pressure brought to bear upon my
poor self was soon too great for my strength, and I gradually
encroached upon my unresisting friend. He turned and hurled a few
remarks at me that are not printable, yet he was of no more
assistance in withstanding the pressure than a marrowfat pea well
cooked would have been.

"I'm sorry," I said, apologetically, "but I can't help it. If these
policemen would run around to the rear and massacre some of the
populace who are pushing me, I shouldn't have to shove you."

"Well, all I've got to say," he retorted, "is that if you don't keep
your carcass out of my ribs I'll haunt you to your dying day."

"If you'd only put up a little backbone yourself you'd make it
easier for me," I replied, quite hotly. "What are you, anyhow, a
jelly-fish or an India-rubber man?" He hadn't time to answer, for
just as I spoke an irresistible shove from the crowd pushed me slap
up against the man in the front row, and I was appalled to find the
little fellow between us bulging out on both sides of me, crushed
longitudinally from top to toe, so that he resembled a paper doll
before the crease is removed from its middle, three-quarters open.
"Great heavens!" I muttered. "What have I struck?"

[Illustration: "'L LUL LET ME OUT!' HE GASPED "]

"L-lul-let me out!" he gasped. "Don't you see you are squ-queezing
my figure out of shape? Get bub-back, blank it!"

"I can't," I panted. "I'm sorry, but--"

"Sorry be hanged!" he roared. "This is my place, you idiot--"

This was too much for me, and in my inability to kick him with my
foot I did it with my knee, and then, if I had not been excited, I
should have learned the unhappy truth. My knee went straight through
him and shoved the man ahead into the coat-tails of the bobbie in
front. It was fortunate for me that it happened as it did, for the
front-row man was wrathful enough to have struck me; but the police
took care of him; and as he was carried away on a stretcher, the
little jelly-fish came back into his normal proportions, like an
inflated India-rubber toy.

"What the deuce are you, anyhow?" I cried, aghast at the spectacle.

"You'll find out before you are a year older!" he wrathfully
answered. "I'll show you a shoving trick or two that you won't like,
you blooming Yank!"

It made me excessively angry to be called a blooming Yank. I am a
Yankee, and I have been known to bloom, but I can't stand having a
low-class Britisher apply that term to me as if it were an
opprobrious thing to be, so I tried once more to kick him with my
knee. Again my knee passed through him, and this time took the
policeman himself in the vicinity of his pistol-pocket. The irate
officer turned quickly, raised his club, and struck viciously, not
at the little creature, but at me. He didn't seem to see the jelly
-fish. And then the horrid truth flashed across my mind. The thing in
front of me was a ghost--a miserable relic of some bygone pageant,
and visible only to myself, who have an eye to that sort of thing.
Luckily the bobbie missed his stroke, and as I apologized, telling
him I had St. Vitus's dance and could not control my unhappy leg,
accompanying the apology with a half sovereign--both of which were
accepted--peace reigned, and I shortly had the bliss of seeing the
whole sovereign ride by--that is, I was told that the lady behind
the parasol, which obscured everything but her elbow, was her
Majesty the Queen.

Nothing more of interest happened between this and the end of the
procession, although the little spook in front occasionally turned
and paid me a compliment which would have cost any material creature
his life. But that night something of importance did happen, and it
has been going on ever since. The unlovely creature turned up in my
lodgings just as I was about to retire, and talked in his rasping
voice until long after four o'clock. I ordered him out, and he
declined to go. I struck at him, but it was like hitting smoke.

"All right," said I, putting on my clothes. "If you won't get out, I
will."

"That's exactly what I intended you to do," he said. "How do you
like being shoved, eh? Yesterday was the 21st of June. I shall keep
shoving you along, even as you shoved me, for exactly one year."

"Humph!" I retorted. "You called me a blooming Yank yesterday. I am.
I shall soon be out of your reach in the great and glorious United
States."

"Oh, as for that," he answered, calmly, "I can go to the United
States. There are steamers in great plenty. I could even get myself
blown across on a gale, if I wanted to--only gales are not always
convenient. Some of 'em don't go all the way through, and
connections are hard to make. A gale I was riding on once stopped in
mid-ocean, and I had to wait a week before another came along, and
it landed me in Africa instead of at New York."

"Got aboard the wrong gale, eh?" said I, with a laugh.

"Yes," he answered.

"Didn't you drown?" I cried, somewhat interested.

"Idiot!" he retorted. "Drown? How could I? You can't drown a ghost!"

"See here," said I, "if you call me an idiot again, I'll--I'll--"

"What?" he put in, with a grin. "Now just what will you do? You're
clever, but _I'm a ghost!"_

[Illustration: "I SHALL KEEP SHOVING YOU FOR EXACTLY ONE YEAR"]

"You wait and see!" said I, rushing angrily from the room. It was a
very weak retort, and I frankly admit that I am ashamed of it, but
it was the best I had at hand at the moment. My stock of repartee,
like most men's vitality, is at its lowest ebb at four o'clock in
the morning.

For three or four hours I wandered aimlessly about the city, and
then returned to my room, and found it deserted; but in the course
of my peregrinations I had acquired a most consuming appetite.
Usually I eat very little breakfast, but this morning nothing short
of a sixteen-course dinner could satisfy my ravening; so instead of
eating my modest boiled egg, I sought the Savoy, and at nine o'clock
entered the breakfast-room of that highly favored caravansary.
Imagine my delight, upon entering, to see, sitting near one of the
windows, my newly made acquaintances of the steamer, the Travises of
Boston, Miss Travis looking more beautiful than ever and quite as
haughty, by whom I was invited to join them. I accepted with
alacrity, and was just about to partake of a particularly nice melon
when who should walk in but that vulgar little spectre, hat jauntily
placed on one side of his head, check-patterned trousers loud enough
to wake the dead, and a green plaid vest about his middle that would
be an indictable offence even on an American golf links.

"Thank Heaven they can't see the brute!" I muttered as he
approached.

"Hullo, old chappie!" he cried, slapping me on my back. "Introduce
me to your charming friends," and with this he gave a horrible low
-born smirk at Miss Travis, to whom, to my infinite sorrow, by some
accursed miracle, he appeared as plainly visible as he was to me.

"Really," said Mrs. Travis, turning coldly to me, "we--we can't, you
know--we--Come, Eleanor. We will leave this _gentleman_ with his
_friend_, and have our breakfast sent to our rooms."

And with that they rose up and scornfully departed. The creature
then sat down in Miss Travis's chair and began to devour her roll.

"See here," I cried, finally, "what the devil do you mean?"

"Shove number two," he replied, with his unholy smirk. "Very
successful, eh? Werl, just you wait for number three. It will be
what you Americans call a corker. By-bye."

And with that he vanished, just in time to spare me the humiliation
of shying a pot of coffee at his head. Of course my appetite
vanished with him, and my main duty now seemed to be to seek out the
Travises and explain; so leaving the balance of my breakfast
untasted, I sought the office, and sent my card up to Mrs. Travis.
The response was immediate.

"The loidy says she's gone out, sir, and ain't likely to be back,"
remarked the top-lofty buttons, upon his return.

I was so maddened by this slight, and so thoroughly apprehensive of
further trouble from the infernal shade, that I resolved without
more ado to sneak out of England and back to America before the
deadly blighting thing was aware of my intentions. I immediately
left the Savoy, and sought the office of the Green Star Line,
secured a room on the steamer sailing the next morning--the
_Digestic_--from Liverpool, and was about packing up my belongings,
when _it_ turned up again.

"Going away, eh?"

"Yes," I replied, shortly, and then I endeavored to deceive him.
"I've been invited down to Leamington to spend a week with my old
friend Dr. Liverton."

"Oh, indeed!" he observed. "Thanks for the address. I will not
neglect you during your stay there. Be prepared for a shove that
will turn your hair gray. _Au revoir._"

And he vanished, muttering the address I had given him--"Dr.
Liverton, Leamington--Dr. Liverton." To which he added, "I won't
forget _that,_ not by a jugful."

I chuckled softly to myself as he disappeared. "He's clever, but--
there are others," I said, delighted at the ease with which I had
rid myself of him; and then eating a hearty luncheon, I took the
train to Liverpool, where next morning I embarked on the _Digestic_
for New York.




II--AN UNHAPPY VOYAGE


The sense of relief that swept over me when the great anchor of the
_Digestic_ came up from the unstrained quality of the Mersey, and I
thought of the fact that shortly a vast ocean would roll between me
and that fearful spook, was one of the most delightful emotions that
it has ever been my good fortune to experience. Now all seemed
serene, and I sought my cabin belowstairs, whistling gayly; but,
alas! how fleeting is happiness, even to a whistler!

As I drew near to the room which I had fondly supposed was to be my
own exclusively I heard profane remarks issuing therefrom. There was
condemnation of the soap; there was perdition for the lighting
apparatus; there were maledictions upon the location of the port,
and the bedding was excommunicate.

"This is strange," said I to the steward. "I have engaged this room
for the passage. I hear somebody in there."

"Not at all, sir," said he, opening the door; "it is empty." And to
him it undoubtedly appeared to be so.

"But," I cried, "didn't you hear anything?"

"Yes, I did," he said, candidly; "but I supposed you was a
ventriloquist, sir, and was a-puttin' up of a game on me."

Here the steward smiled, and I was too angry to retort. And then--
Well, you have guessed it. _He_ turned up--and more vulgar than
ever.

"Hullo!" he said, nonchalantly, fooling with a suit-case. "Going
over?"

"Oh no!" I replied, sarcastic. "Just out for a swim. When we get off
the Banks I'm going to jump overboard and swim to the Azores on a
wager."

"How much?" he asked.

"Five bob," said I, feeling that he could not grasp a larger amount.

"Humph!" he ejaculated. "I'd rather drive a cab--as I used to."

"Ah?" said I. "That's what you were, eh? A cab-driver. Takes a
mighty mind to be that, eh? Splendid intellectual effort to drive a
cab from the Reform Club to the Bank, eh?"

I had hoped to wither him.

"Oh, I don't know," he answered, suavely. "I'll tell you this,
though: I'd rather go from the Club to the Bank on my hansom with me
holding the reins than try to do it with Mr. Gladstone or the Prince
o' Wiles on the box."

"Prince o' Wiles?" I said, with a withering manner.

"That's what I said," he retorted. "You would call him Prince of
Whales, I suppose--like a Yank, a blooming Yank--because you think
Britannia rules the waves."

I had to laugh; and then a plan of conciliation suggested itself. I
would jolly him, as my political friends have it.

"Have a drink?" I asked.

"No, thanks; I don't indulge," he replied. "Let me offer you a
cigar."

I accepted, and he extracted a very fair-looking weed from his box,
which he handed me. I tried to bite off the end, succeeding only in
biting my tongue, whereat the presence roared with laughter.

"What's the joke now?" I queried, irritated.

"You," he answered. "The idea of any one's being fool enough to try
to bite off the end of a spook cigar strikes me as funny."

From that moment all thought of conciliation vanished, and I
resorted to abuse.

"You are a low-born thing!" I shouted. "And if you don't get out of
here right away I'll break every bone in your body."

"Very well," he answered, coolly, scribbling on a pad close at hand.
"There's the address."

"What address?" I asked.

"Of the cemetery where those bones you are going to break are to be
found. You go in by the side gate, and ask any of the grave-diggers
where--"

"You infernal scoundrel!" I shrieked, "this is my room. I have
bought and paid for it, and I intend to have it. Do you hear?"

His response was merely the clapping of his hands together, and in a
stage-whisper, leaning towards me, he said:

"Bravo! Bravo! You are great. I think you could do Lear. Say those
last words again, will you?"

His calmness was too much for me, and I lost all control of myself.
Picking up the water-bottle, I hurled it at him with all the force
at my command. It crashed through him and struck the mirror over the
wash-stand, and as the shattered glass fell with a loud noise to the
floor the door to my state-room opened, and the captain of the ship,
flanked by the room steward and the doctor, stood at the opening.

"What's all this about?" said the captain, addressing me.

"I have engaged this room for myself alone," I said, trembling in my
rage, "and I object to that person's presence." Here I pointed at
the intruder.

"What person's presence?" demanded the captain, looking at the spot
where the haunting thing sat grinning indecently.

"What person?" I roared, forgetting the situation for the moment.
"Why, him--it--whatever you choose to call it. He's settled down
here, and has been black-guarding me for twenty minutes, and, damn
it, captain, I won't stand it!"

"It's a clear case," said the captain, with a sigh, turning and
addressing the doctor. "Have you a strait-jacket?"

"Thank you, captain," said I, calming down. "It's what he ought to
have, but it won't do any good. You see, he's not a material thing.
He's buried in Kensal Green Cemetery, and so the strait-jacket won't
help us."

Here the doctor stepped into the room and took me gently by the arm.
"Take off your clothes," he said, "and lie down. You need quiet."

"I?" I demanded, not as yet realizing my position. "Not by a long
shot. Fire _him_ out. That's all I ask."

"Take off your clothes and get into that bed," repeated the doctor,
peremptorily. Then he turned to the captain and asked him to detail
two of his sailors to help him. "He's going to be troublesome," he
added, in a whisper. "Mad as a hatter."

I hesitate, in fact decline, to go through the agony of what
followed again by writing of it in detail. Suffice it to say that
the doctor persisted in his order that I should undress and go to
bed, and I, conscious of the righteousness of my position, fought
this determination, until, with the assistance of the steward and
the two able-bodied seamen detailed by the captain at the doctor's
request, I was forcibly unclad and thrown into the lower berth and
strapped down. My wrath knew no bounds, and I spoke my mind as
plainly as I knew how. It is a terrible thing to be sane, healthy,
fond of deck-walking, full of life, and withal unjustly strapped to
a lower berth below the water-line on a hot day because of a little
beast of a cockney ghost, and I fairly howled my sentiments.

[Illustration: "I WAS FORCIBLY UNCLAD"]

On the second day from Liverpool two maiden ladies in the room next
mine made representations to the captain which resulted in my
removal to the steerage. They couldn't consent, they said, to listen
to the shrieks of the maniac in the adjoining room.

And then, when I found myself lying on a cot in the steerage, still
strapped down, who should appear but my little spectre.

"Well," he said, sitting on the edge of the cot, "what do you think
of it now, eh? Ain't I a shover from Shoverville on the Push?"

"It's all right," I said, contemptuously. "But I'll tell you one
thing, Mr. Spook: when I die and have a ghost of my own, that ghost
will seek you out, and, by thunder, if it doesn't thrash the life
out of you, I'll disown it!"

It seemed to me that he paled a bit at this, but I was too tired to
gloat over a little thing like that, so I closed my eyes and went to
sleep. A few days later I was so calm and rational that the doctor
released me, and for the remainder of my voyage I was as free as any
other person on board, except that I found myself constantly under
surveillance, and was of course much irritated by the notion that my
spacious stateroom was not only out of my reach, but probably in the
undisputed possession of the cockney ghost.

After seven days of ocean travel New York was reached, and I was
allowed to step ashore without molestation. But my infernal friend
turned up on the pier, and added injury to insult by declaring in my
behalf certain dutiable articles in my trunks, thereby costing me
some dollars which I should much rather have saved. Still, after the
incidents of the voyage, I thought it well to say nothing, and
accepted the hardships of the experience in the hope that in the far
distant future my spook would meet his and thrash the very death out
of him.

Well, things went on. The cockney spook left me to my own devices
until November, when I had occasion to lecture at a certain college
in the Northwest. I travelled from my home to the distant platform,
went upon it, was introduced by the proper functionary, and began my
lecture. In the middle of the talk, who should appear in a vacant
chair well down towards the stage but the cockney ghost, with a
guffaw at a strong and not humorous point, which disconcerted me! I
broke down and left the platform, and in the small room at the side
encountered him.

"Shove the fourth!" he cried, and vanished.

It was then that I consulted Peters as to how best to be rid of him.

"There is no use of talking about it," I said to Peters, "the man is
ruining me. Socially with the Travises I am an outcast, and I have
no doubt they will tell about it, and my ostracism will extend. On
the _Digestic_ my sanity is seriously questioned, and now for the
first time in my life, before some two thousand people, I break down
in a public lecture which I have delivered dozens of times hitherto
without a tremor. The thing cannot go on."

"I should say not," Peters answered. "Maybe I can help you to get
rid of him, but I'm not positive about it; my new scheme isn't as
yet perfected. Have you tried the fire-extinguisher treatment?"

I will say here, that Peters upon two occasions has completely
annihilated unpleasant spectres by turning upon them the colorless
and odorless liquids whose chemical action is such that fire cannot
live in their presence.

"Fire, the vital spark, is the essential element of all these
chaps," said he, "and if you can turn the nozzle of your
extinguisher on that spook your ghost simply goes out."

"No, I haven't," I replied; "but I will the first chance I get." And
I left him, hopeful if not confident of a successful exorcism.

On my return home I got out two of the extinguishers which were left
in my back hall for use in case of an emergency, and tested one of
them on the lawn. I merely wished to ascertain if it would work with
spirit, and it did; it went off like a sodawater fountain loaded
with dynamite, and I felt truly happy for the first time in many
days.

"The vulgar little beast would better keep away from me now," I
laughed. But my mirth was short-lived. Whether or not the obnoxious
little chap had overheard, or from some hidden coign had watched my
test of the fire-extinguisher I don't know, but when he came to my
den that night he was amply protected against the annihilating
effects of the liquid by a flaring plaid mackintosh, with a toque
for his head, and the minute I started the thing squirting he turned
his back and received the charge harmless on his shoulders. The only
effect of the experiment was the drenching and consequent ruin of a
pile of MSS. I had been at work on all day, which gave me another
grudge against him. When the extinguisher had exhausted itself, the
spectre turned about and fairly raised the ceiling with his guffaws,
and when he saw my ruined pages upon the desk his mirth became
convulsive.

"De-lightful!" he cried. "For an impromptu shove wherein I turn over
the shoving to you in my own behalf, I never saw it equalled.
Wouldn't be a bad thing if all writers would wet down their MSS. the
same way, now would it?"

But I was too indignant to reply, and too chagrined over my failure
to remain within-doors, so I rushed out and paced the fields for two
hours. When I returned, he had gone.

III--THE SPIRIT TRIES TO MAKE REPARATION

Three weeks later he turned up once more. "Great Heavens!" I cried;
"you back again?"

"Yes," he answered; "and I've come to tell you I'm mighty sorry
about those ruined MSS. of yours. It is too bad that your whole
day's work had to go for nothing."

[Illustration: "HE WAS AMPLY PROTECTED"]

"I think so myself," I retorted, coldly. "It's rather late in the
day for you to be sorry, though. If you'll show your sincerity by
going away and never crossing my path again, I may believe in you."

"Ah!" he said, "I've shown it in another way. Indeed I have. You
know I have some conscience, though, to tell the truth, I haven't
made much use of it. This time, however, as I considered the
situation, a little voice rose up within me and said: 'It's all
right, old chap, to be rough on this person; make him mad and shove
him every which way; but don't destroy his work. His work is what he
lives by--'"

"Yes," I interrupted, "and after what I told you on the steamer
about what I would do to you when we got on even terms, you are not
anxious to have me die. I know just how you feel. No thing likes to
contemplate that paralysis that will surely fall upon you when my
ghost begins to get in its fine work. I'm putting it in training
now."

"You poor droll mortal!" laughed the cockney. "You poor droll
mortal! As if I could ever be afraid of that! What is the matter
with my going into training myself? Two can train, you know--even
three. You almost make me feel sorry I tried to remedy the loss of
those MSS."

Somehow or other a sense of some new misfortune came upon me.

"What?" I said, nervously.

"I say I'm almost sorry I tried to remedy the loss of those
manuscripts. Composition, particularly poetry, is devilish hard for
me--I admit it--and when I think of how I toiled over my substitutes
for your ruined stuff, and see how very ungrateful you are, I grudge
the effort."

"I don't understand you," I said, anxiously. "What do you mean?"

"I mean that I have written and sent out to the editors of the
papers you write for a half a dozen poems and short stories."

"What has all that got to do with me?" I demanded.

"A great deal," he said. "You'll get the pay. _I signed your name to
'em_."

"Y--you--you--you--did what?" I cried.

"Signed your name to 'em. There was a sonnet to 'A Coal Grab'--that
was the longest of the lot. I think it will cover at least six
magazine pages--"

"But," I cried, "a sonnet never contains more than fourteen lines--
you--fool!"

"Oh yes, it does," he replied, calmly. "This one of yours had over
four hundred. And then I wrote a three-page quatrain on
'Immortality,' which, if I do say it, is the funniest thing I ever
read. I sent that to the _Weekly Methodist_."

"Good Lord, good Lord, good Lord!" I moaned. "A three-page
quatrain!"

"Yes," he observed, calmly lighting one of his accursed cigars. "And
you'll get all the credit."

A ray of hope entered my soul, and it enabled me to laugh
hysterically. "They'll know it isn't mine," said I. "They know my
handwriting at the office of the _Weekly Methodist_."

"No doubt," said he, dashing all my hopes to the ground. "But--ah--
to remedy that drawback I took pains to find out what type-writer
you used, and I had my quatrain copied on one of the same make."

"But the letter--the note with the manuscript?" I put in.

"Oh, I got over that very easily," he said. "I had that written also
on the machine, on thin paper, and traced your signature at the
bottom. It will be all right, my dear fellow. They'll never
suspect."

And then, looking at the spirit-watch which he carried in his
spectral fob-pocket, he vanished, leaving me immersed in the deepest
misery of my life. Not content with ruining me socially, and as a
lecturer; not satisfied with destroying me mentally on the seas, he
had now attacked me on my most vulnerable point, my literary
aspirations. I could not rest until I had read his "three-page
quatrain" on "Immortality." Vulgar as I knew him to be, I felt
confident that over my name something had gone out which even in my
least self-respecting moods I could not tolerate. The only comfort
that came to me was that his verses and his type-writing and his
tracings of my autograph would be as spectral to others as to the
eye not attuned to the seeing of ghosts. I was soon to be
undeceived, however, for the next morning's mail brought to my home
a dozen packages from my best "consumers," containing the maudlin
frivolings of this--this--this--well, there is no polite word to
describe him in any known tongue. I shall have to study the Aryan
language--or Kipling--to find an epithet strong enough to apply to
this especial case. Every point, every single detail, about these
packages was convincing evidence of their contents having been of my
own production. The return envelopes were marked at the upper corner
with my name and address. The handwriting upon them was manifestly
mine, although I never in my life penned those particular
superscriptions. Within these envelopes were, I might say, pounds of
MSS., apparently from my own typewriting machine, and signed in an
autograph which would have deceived even myself.

And the stuff!

Stuff is not the word--in fact, there is no word in any language,
however primitive and impolite, that will describe accurately the
substance of those pages. And with each came a letter from the
editor of the periodical to which the tale or poem had been sent
_advising me to stop work for a while_, and one _suggested the
Keeley cure!_

Immediately I sat down and wrote to the various editors to whom
these productions had been submitted, explaining all--and every one
of them came back to me unopened, with the average statement that
until I had rested a year they really hadn't the time to read what I
wrote; and my best friend among them, the editor of the _Weekly
Methodist_, took the trouble to telegraph to my brother the
recommendation that I should be looked after. And out of the
mistaken kindness of his heart, he printed a personal in his next
issue to the effect that his "valued contributor, Mr. Me, the public
would regret to hear, was confined to his house by a sudden and
severe attack of nervous prostration," following it up with an
estimate of my career, which bore every mark of having been saved up
to that time for use as an obituary.

And as I read the latter--the obituary--over, with tears in my eyes,
what should I hear but the words, spoken at my back, clearly, but in
unmistakable cockney accents,

"Shove the fifth!" followed by uproarious laughter. I grabbed up the
ink-bottle and threw it with all my strength back of me, and
succeeded only in destroying the wall-paper.




IV--THE FAILURE


The destruction of the wall-paper, not to mention the wiping out in
a moment of my means of livelihood, made of the fifth shove an
intolerable nuisance. Controlling myself with difficulty, I put on
my hat and rushed to the telegraph office, whence I despatched a
message, marked "Rush," to Peters.

"For Heaven's sake, complete your exorcism and bring it here at
once," I wired him. "Answer collect."

Peters by no means soothed my agitation by his immediate and
extremely flippant response.

"I don't know why you wish me to answer collect, but I suppose you
do. So I answer as you request: Collect. What is it you are going to
collect? Your scattered faculties?" he telegraphed. It was a mean
sort of a telegram to send to a man in my unhappy state, and if he
hadn't prepaid it I should never have forgiven him. I was mad enough
when I received it, and a hot retort was about to go back, when the
bothersome spook turned up and drew my mind off to other things.

"Well, what do you think of me?" he said, ensconcing himself calmly
on my divan. "Pretty successful shover myself, eh?" Then he turned
his eye to the inkspots on the wall. "Novel design in decoration,
that. You ought to get employment in some wall-paper house. Given an
accurate aim and plenty of ink, you can't be beaten for vigorous
spatter-work."

I pretended to ignore his presence, and there was a short pause,
after which he began again:

"Sulky, eh? Oh, well, I don't blame you. There's nothing in this
world that can so harrow up one's soul as impotent wrath. I've heard
of people bursting with it. I've had experiences in the art of
irritation before this case. There was a fellow once hired my cab
for an hour. Drove him all about London, and then he stopped in at a
chop-house, leaving me outside. I waited and waited and waited, but
he never came back. Left by the back door, you know. Clever trick,
and for a while the laugh was on me; but when I got to the point
where I could haunt him, I did it to the Regent's taste. I found him
three years after my demise, and through the balance of his life
pursued him everywhere with a phantom cab. If he went to church, I'd
drive my spectre rig right down the middle aisle after him. If he
called on a girl, there was the cab drawn up alongside of him in the
parlor all the time, the horse stamping his foot and whinnying like
all possessed. Of course no one else saw me or the horse or the cab,
but he did--and, Lord! how mad he was, and how hopeless! Finally, in
a sudden surge of wrath at his impotence, he burst, just like a
soap-bubble. It was most amusing. Even the horse laughed."

"Thanks for the story," said I, wishing to anger him by my
nonchalance. "I'll write it up."

"Do," he said. "It will make a clever sixth shove for me. People say
your fancies are too wild and extravagant even now. A story like
that will finish you at once."

"Again, thanks," said I, very calmly. "This time for the hint.
Acting on your advice, I won't write it up."

"Don't," he retorted. "And be forever haunted with the idea. Either
way, it suits me."

And he vanished once more.

The next morning Peters arrived at my house.

"I've come," he said, as he entered my den. "The scheme is perfected
at last, and possibly you can use it. You need help of some kind. I
can see that, just by reading your telegram. You're nervous as a
cat. How do you heat your house?"

"What's that got to do with it?" I demanded, irritably. "You can't
evaporate the little cuss."

"Don't want to," Peters replied. "That's been tried before, and it
doesn't work. My scheme is a better one than that. Did you ever
notice, while smoking in a house that is heated by a hot-air
furnace, how, when a cloud of smoke gets caught in the current of
air from the register, it is mauled and twisted until it gets free,
or else is torn entirely apart?"

"Yes, I have," said I. "What of it?"

"Well, what's the matter with being genial with your old cockney
until he gets in the habit of coming here every night, and bide your
time until, without his knowing it, you can turn a blast from the
furnace on him that will simply rend him to pieces?"

"By Jove!" I cried, delightedly. "You are a genius, old chap."

I rose and shook his hand until he remonstrated.

"Save your energy for him," said he. "You'll need it. It won't be a
pleasant spectacle to witness when, in his struggles to get away, he
is gradually dismembered. It will be something like the drawing and
quartering punishment of olden times."

I shuddered as I thought of it, and for a moment was disposed to
reject the plan, but my weakness left me as I thought of the ruin
that stared me in the face.

"Oh, I don't know," I said, shaking my head. "It will have its
pleasurable side, however fearsome it may prove as a sight. This
house is just fitted for the operation, particularly on warm days. I
have seen times when the blasts of hot air from my furnace have
blown one of my poems off my table across the room."

"Great Scott!" cried Peters. "What a cyclone of an air-box you must
have!"

Fortunately the winter season was on, and we were able to test the
capacity of the furnace, with gratifying results. A soap-bubble was
blown, and allowed to float downward until the current was reached,
and the novel shapes it took, as it was blown about the room in its
struggles to escape before it burst, were truly wonderful. I doubted
not for an instant, from what I then saw, that the little cad of a
spectre that was ruining my life would soon meet his Nemesis. So
convinced was I of the ultimate success of the plan that I could
hardly wait patiently for his coming. I became morbidly anxious for
the horrid spectacle which I should witness as his body was torn
apart and gradually annihilated by the relentless output of my
furnace flues. To my great annoyance, it was two weeks before he
turned up again, and I was beginning to fear that he had in some
wise got wind of my intentions, and was turning my disappointment
over his absence into the sixth of his series of "shoves." Finally,
however, my anxiety was set at rest by his appearance on a night
especially adapted to a successful issue of the conspiracy. It was
blowing great guns from the west, and the blasts of air,
intermittent in their force, that came up through the flues were
such that under other circumstances they would have annoyed me
tremendously. Almost everything in the line of the current that
issued from the register and passed diagonally across the room to my
fireplace, and so on up the chimney, was disturbed. The effect upon
particles of paper and the fringes on my chairs was almost that of a
pneumatic tube on substances placed within it, and on one or two
occasions I was seriously apprehensive of the manner in which the
flames on the hearth leaped upward into the sooty heights of my
chimney flues.

But when, as happened shortly, I suddenly became conscious that my
spectre cockney had materialized, all my fears for the safety of my
house fled, and I surreptitiously turned off the heat, so that once
he got within range of the register I could turn it on again, and
his annihilation would be as instantaneous as what my newspaper
friends call an electrocution. And that was precisely where I made
my mistake, although I must confess that what ensued when I got the
nauseating creature within range was most delightful.

"Didn't expect me back, eh?" he said, as he materialized in my
library. "Missed me, I suppose, eh?"

"I've missed you like the deuce!" I replied, cordially, holding out
my hand as if welcoming him back, whereat he frowned suspiciously.
"Now that I'm reconciled to your system, and know that there is no
possible escape for me, I don't seem to feel so badly. How have you
been, and what have you been doing?"

"Bah!" he retorted. "What's up now? You know mighty well you don't
like me any better than you ever did. What funny little game are you
trying to work on me now, eh?"

"Really, 'Arry," I replied, "you wrong me--and, by-the-way, excuse
me for calling you 'Arry. It is the most appropriate name I can
think of at the moment."

"Call me what you blooming please," he answered. "But remember you
can't soft-soap me into believing you like me. B-r-r-r-r!" he added,
shivering. "It's beastly cold in here. What you been doing--storing
ice?"

"Well--there's a fire burning over there in the fireplace," said I,
anxious to get him before the open chimney-place; for, by a natural
law, that was directly in the line of the current.

He looked at me suspiciously, and then at the fireplace with equal
mistrust; then he shrugged his shoulders with a mocking laugh that
jarred.

"Humph!" he said. "What's your scheme? Got some patent explosive
logs, full of chemicals, to destroy me?"

I laughed. "How suspicious you are!" I said.

"Yes--I always am of suspicious characters," he replied, planting
himself immediately in front of the register, desirous no doubt of
acting directly contrary to my suggestion.

My opportunity had come more easily than I expected.

"There isn't any heat here," said he.

"It's turned off. I'll turn it on for you," said I, scarcely able to
contain myself with excitement--and I did.

Well, as I say, the spectacle was pleasing, but it did not work as I
had intended. He was caught in the full current, not in any of the
destroying eddyings of the side upon which I had counted to twist
his legs off and wring his neck. Like the soap-bubble it is true, he
was blown into various odd fantastic shapes, such as crullers
resolve themselves into when not properly looked after, but there
was no dismembering of his body. He struggled hard to free himself,
and such grotesque attitudes as his figure assumed I never saw even
in one of Aubrey Beardsley's finest pictures; and once, as his leg
and right arm verged on the edge of one of the outside eddies, I
hoped to see these members elongated like a piece of elastic until
they snapped off; but, with a superhuman struggle, he got them free,
with the loss only of one of his fingers, by which time the current
had blown him across the room and directly in front of my fender. To
keep from going up the chimney, he tried to brace himself against
this with his feet, but missing the rail, as helpless as a feather,
he floated, toes first, into the fireplace, and thence, kicking,
struggling, and swearing profanely, disappeared into the flue.

It was too exciting a moment for me to laugh over my triumph, but
shortly there came a nervous reaction which made me hysterical as I
thought of his odd appearance; and then following close upon this
came the dashing of my hopes.

An infernal misplaced, uncalled-for back gust, a diversion in which,
thanks to an improper construction, my chimney frequently indulges,
blew the unhappy creature back into the room again, strained,
sprained, panting, minus the finger he had lost, and so angry that
he quivered all over.

What his first words were I shall not repeat. They fairly seethed
out of his turned and twisted soul, hissing like the escape-valve of
an ocean steamer, and his eyes, as they fell upon mine, actually
burned me.

"This settles it," he hissed, venomously. "I had intended letting
you off with one more shove, but now, after your dastardly attempt
to rend me apart with your damned hot-air furnace, I shall haunt you
to your dying day; I shall haunt you so terribly that years before
your final exit from this world you will pray for death. As a shover
you have found me equal to everything, but since you prefer
twisting, twisting be it. You shall hear from me again!"

He vanished, and, I must confess it, I threw myself upon my couch,
weeping hot tears of despair.

Peters's scheme had failed, and I was in a far worse position than
ever. Shoving I can stand, but the brief exhibition of twisting that
I had had in watching his struggles with that awful cyclonic blast
from below convinced me that there was something in life even more
to be dreaded than the shoving he and I had been indulging in.

But there was a postscript, and now all is well again, because--but
let us reserve the wherefore of the postscript for another,
concluding chapter.




V--POSTSCRIPT


So hopeless was my estate now become that, dreading more than ever
that which the inscrutable future held for me, I sat down and framed
an advertisement, which I contemplated putting in all the
newspapers, weeklies, and monthly periodicals, offering a handsome
reward for any suggestion which might result in ridding me of the
cockney ghost. The inventive mind of man has been able to cope
successfully with rats and mice and other household pests. Why,
then, should there not be somewhere in the world a person of
sufficient ingenuity to cope with an obnoxious spirit? If rat
-dynamite and rough on June-bugs were possible, why was it not likely
that some as yet unknown person had turned his attention to
spectrology, and evolved something in the nature of rough on ghosts,
spectremelinite, or something else of an effective nature, I asked
myself. It seemed reasonable to suppose that out of the millions of
people in the world there were others than Peters and myself who had
made a study of ghosts and methods of exorcising them, and if these
persons could only be reached I might yet escape. Accordingly, I
penned the advertisement about as follows:

  WANTED, by a young and rising author,
     who is pursued by a vindictive spirit,

                A GHOST CURE.

    A liberal reward will be paid to any wizard,
  recognized or unrecognized, who will, before
  February I, 1898, send to me a detailed statement
  of a

              GUARANTEED METHOD

  of getting rid of

                   SPOOKS.

  It is agreed that these communications shall
  be regarded as strictly confidential until such
  a time as through their medium the spirit is
  effectually

                    LAID,

 after which time the cure will be exploited

               FREE OF CHARGE

  in the best advertising mediums of the day.

To this I appended an assumed name and a temporary address, and was
about to send it out, when my friend Wilkins, a millionaire student
of electricity, living in Florida, invited me to spend my Christmas
holidays with him on Lake Worth.

"I've got a grand scheme," he wrote, "which I am going to test, and
I'd like to have you present at the trial. Come down, if you can,
and see my new electric sailboat and all-around dynamic Lone
Fisherman."

The idea took hold of me at once. In my nervous state the change of
scene would do me good. Besides, Wilkins was a delightful companion.

So, forgetting my woes for the moment, I packed my trunk and started
South for Wilkins's Island. It was upon this trip that the vengeful
spirit put in his first twist, for at Jacksonville I was awakened in
the middle of the night by a person, whom I took to be the
conductor, who told me to change cars. This I did, and falling
asleep in the car to which I had changed, waked up the next morning
to find myself speeding across the peninsula instead of going
downward towards the Keys, as I should have done, landing eventually
at a small place called Homosassa, on the Gulf coast.

Of course it was not the conductor of the first train who, under
cover of the darkness, had led me astray, but the pursuing spirit,
as I found out when, bewildered, I sat upon the platform of the
station at Homosassa, wondering how the deuce I had got there. He
turned up at that moment, and frankly gloated over the success of
what he called shove the seventh, and twist the first.

"Nice place, this," said he, with a nauseating smirk. "So close to
Lake Worth--eh? Only two days' ride on the choo-choo, if you make
connections, and when changing take the right trains."

I pretended not to see him, and began to whistle the intermezzo from
"Cavalleria Rusticana," to show how little I cared.

"Good plan, old chap," said he; "but it won't work. I know you are
put out, in spite of the tunefulness of your soul. But wait for my
second twist. You'll wish you'd struck a cyclone instead when that
turn comes."

It was, as he suggested, at least two days before I was able to get
to Wilkins at Lake Worth; but after I got there the sense of
annoyance and the deep dejection into which I was plunged wore away,
as well it might, for the test which I was invited to witness was
most interesting. The dynamic Lone Fisherman was wonderful enough,
but the electric sail-boat was a marvel. The former was very simple.
It consisted of a reel operated by electricity, which, the moment a
blue-fish struck the skid at the end of the line, reeled the fish
in, and flopped it into a basket as easily and as surely as you
please; but the principle of the sailboat was new.

"I don't need a breeze to sail anywhere," said Wilkins, as he hauled
up the mainsail, which flapped idly in the still air. "For you see,"
he added, touching a button alongside of the tiller, "this button
sets that big electric fan in the stern revolving, and the result is
an artificial breeze which distends the sail, and there you are."

It was even as he said. A huge fan with a dozen flanges in the stern
began to revolve with wonderful rapidity; in an instant the sails
bellied out, and the _Horace J._, as his boat was named, was
speeding through the waters before the breeze thus created in
record-breaking fashion.

"By Jove, Billie," I said, "this is a dandy!"

"Isn't it!" cried an old familiar voice at my elbow.

I turned as if stung. The spirit was with me again, prepared, I
doubted not, for his second twist. I sprang from my seat, a sudden
inspiration flashing upon me, jumped back of the revolving fan, and
turning the full force of the wind it created upon my vindictive
visitant, blew him fairly and squarely into the bulging sail.

"There, blast your cockney eyes!" I cried; "take that."

He tried to retort, but without avail. The wind that emanated from
the fan fairly rammed his words back into his throat every time he
opened his mouth to speak, and there he lay, flat against the
canvas, fluttering like a leaf, powerless to escape.

"Hot air doesn't affect you much, you transparent jackass!" I
roared. "Let me see how a stiff nor'easter suits your style of
beauty."

I will not bore the reader with any further details of the Lake
Worth experience. Suffice it to say that for five hours I kept the
miserable thing a pneumatic prisoner in the concave surface of the
sail. Try as he would, he could not escape, and finally, when
Wilkins and I went ashore for the night, and the cockney ghost was
released, he vanished, using unutterable language, and an idea came
to me, putting which into operation, I at last secured immunity from
his persecutions.

Returning to New York three days later, I leased a small office in a
fire-proof power building not far from Madison Square, fitted it up
as if for my own use, and had placed in the concealment of a closet
at its easterly end the largest electric fan I could get. It was ten
feet in diameter, and was provided with sixteen flanges. When it was
in motion not a thing could withstand the blast that came from it.
Tables, chairs, even a cut-glass inkstand weighing two pounds, were
blown with a crash against the solid stone and iron construction
back of the plaster of my walls. And then I awaited his coming.

Suffice it to say that he came, sat down calmly and unsuspecting in
the chair I had had made for his especial benefit, and then the
moment he began to revile me I turned on the power, the fan began to
revolve, the devastating wind rushed down upon him with a roar,
pinned him to the wall like a butterfly on a cork, and he was at
last my prisoner--and he is my prisoner still. For three weeks has
that wheel been revolving night and day, and despite all his cunning
he cannot creep beyond its blustering influence, nor shall he ever
creep therefrom while I have six hundred dollars per annum to pay
for the rent and cost of power necessary to keep the fan going.
Every once in a while I return and gloat over him; and I can tell by
the movement of his lips that he is trying to curse me, but he
cannot, for, even as Wilkins's fan blew his words of remonstrance
back into his throat, so does my wheel, twice as powerful, keep his
torrent of invective from greeting my ear.

[Illustration: "PINNED HIM TO THE WALL LIKE A BUTTERFLY ON A CORK"]

I should be happy to prove the truth of all this by showing any
curious-minded reader the spectacle which gives me so much joy, but
I fear to do so lest the owners of the building, discovering the
uses to which their office has been put, shall require me to vacate
the premises.

Of course he may ultimately escape, through some failure of the
machine to operate, but it is guaranteed to run five years without a
break, so for that period at least I am safe, and by that time it
may be that he will be satisfied to call things square. I shall be
satisfied if he is.

Meanwhile, I devote my successful plan to the uses of all who may be
troubled as I was, finding in their assumed gratitude a sufficient
compensation for my ingenuity.




THURLOW'S CHRISTMAS STORY

I


(_Being the Statement of Henry Thurlow Author, to George Currier,
Editor of the "Idler," a Weekly Journal of Human Interest_.)

I have always maintained, my dear Currier, that if a man wishes to
be considered sane, and has any particular regard for his reputation
as a truth-teller, he would better keep silent as to the singular
experiences that enter into his life. I have had many such
experiences myself; but I have rarely confided them in detail, or
otherwise, to those about me, because I know that even the most
trustful of my friends would regard them merely as the outcome of an
imagination unrestrained by conscience, or of a gradually weakening
mind subject to hallucinations. I know them to be true, but until
Mr. Edison or some other modern wizard has invented a search-light
strong enough to lay bare the secrets of the mind and conscience of
man, I cannot prove to others that they are not pure fabrications,
or at least the conjurings of a diseased fancy. For instance, no man
would believe me if I were to state to him the plain and
indisputable fact that one night last month, on my way up to bed
shortly after midnight, having been neither smoking nor drinking, I
saw confronting me upon the stairs, with the moonlight streaming
through the windows back of me, lighting up its face, a figure in
which I recognized my very self in every form and feature. I might
describe the chill of terror that struck to the very marrow of my
bones, and wellnigh forced me to stagger backward down the stairs,
as I noticed in the face of this confronting figure every indication
of all the bad qualities which I know myself to possess, of every
evil instinct which by no easy effort I have repressed heretofore,
and realized that that _thing_ was, as far as I knew, entirely
independent of my true self, in which I hope at least the moral has
made an honest fight against the immoral always. I might describe
this chill, I say, as vividly as I felt it at that moment, but it
would be of no use to do so, because, however realistic it might
prove as a bit of description, no man would believe that the
incident really happened; and yet it did happen as truly as I write,
and it has happened a dozen times since, and I am certain that it
will happen many times again, though I would give all that I possess
to be assured that never again should that disquieting creation of
mind or matter, whichever it may be, cross my path. The experience
has made me afraid almost to be alone, and I have found myself
unconsciously and uneasily glancing at my face in mirrors, in the
plate-glass of show-windows on the shopping streets of the city,
fearful lest I should find some of those evil traits which I have
struggled to keep under, and have kept under so far, cropping out
there where all the world, all _my_ world, can see and wonder at,
having known me always as a man of right doing and right feeling.
Many a time in the night the thought has come to me with prostrating
force, what if that thing were to be seen and recognized by others,
myself and yet not my whole self, my unworthy self unrestrained and
yet recognizable as Henry Thurlow.

I have also kept silent as to that strange condition of affairs
which has tortured me in my sleep for the past year and a half; no
one but myself has until this writing known that for that period of
time I have had a continuous, logical dream-life; a life so vivid
and so dreadfully real to me that I have found myself at times
wondering which of the two lives I was living and which I was
dreaming; a life in which that other wicked self has dominated, and
forced me to a career of shame and horror; a life which, being taken
up every time I sleep where it ceased with the awakening from a
previous sleep, has made me fear to close my eyes in forgetfulness
when others are near at hand, lest, sleeping, I shall let fall some
speech that, striking on their ears, shall lead them to believe that
in secret there is some wicked mystery connected with my life. It
would be of no use for me to tell these things. It would merely
serve to make my family and my friends uneasy about me if they were
told in their awful detail, and so I have kept silent about them. To
you alone, and now for the first time, have I hinted as to the
troubles which have oppressed me for many days, and to you they are
confided only because of the demand you have made that I explain to
you the extraordinary complication in which the Christmas story sent
you last week has involved me. You know that I am a man of dignity;
that I am not a school-boy and a lover of childish tricks; and
knowing that, your friendship, at least, should have restrained your
tongue and pen when, through the former, on Wednesday, you accused
me of perpetrating a trifling, and to you excessively embarrassing,
practical joke--a charge which, at the moment, I was too overcome to
refute; and through the latter, on Thursday, you reiterated the
accusation, coupled with a demand for an explanation of my conduct
satisfactory to yourself, or my immediate resignation from the staff
of the _Idler_. To explain is difficult, for I am certain that you
will find the explanation too improbable for credence, but explain I
must. The alternative, that of resigning from your staff, affects
not only my own welfare, but that of my children, who must be
provided for; and if my post with you is taken from me, then are all
resources gone. I have not the courage to face dismissal, for I have
not sufficient confidence in my powers to please elsewhere to make
me easy in my mind, or, if I could please elsewhere, the certainty
of finding the immediate employment of my talents which is necessary
to me, in view of the at present overcrowded condition of the
literary field.

To explain, then, my seeming jest at your expense, hopeless as it
appears to be, is my task; and to do so as completely as I can, let
me go back to the very beginning.

In August you informed me that you would expect me to provide, as I
have heretofore been in the habit of doing, a story for the
Christmas issue of the _Idler_; that a certain position in the make
-up was reserved for me, and that you had already taken steps to
advertise the fact that the story would appear. I undertook the
commission, and upon seven different occasions set about putting the
narrative into shape. I found great difficulty, however, in doing
so. For some reason or other I could not concentrate my mind upon
the work. No sooner would I start in on one story than a better one,
in my estimation, would suggest itself to me; and all the labor
expended on the story already begun would be cast aside, and the new
story set in motion. Ideas were plenty enough, but to put them
properly upon paper seemed beyond my powers. One story, however, I
did finish; but after it had come back to me from my typewriter I
read it, and was filled with consternation to discover that it was
nothing more nor less than a mass of jumbled sentences, conveying no
idea to the mind--a story which had seemed to me in the writing to
be coherent had returned to me as a mere bit of incoherence--
formless, without ideas--a bit of raving. It was then that I went to
you and told you, as you remember, that I was worn out, and needed a
month of absolute rest, which you granted. I left my work wholly,
and went into the wilderness, where I could be entirely free from
everything suggesting labor, and where no summons back to town could
reach me. I fished and hunted. I slept; and although, as I have
already said, in my sleep I found myself leading a life that was not
only not to my taste, but horrible to me in many particulars, I was
able at the end of my vacation to come back to town greatly
refreshed, and, as far as my feelings went, ready to undertake any
amount of work. For two or three days after my return I was busy
with other things. On the fourth day after my arrival you came to
me, and said that the story must be finished at the very latest by
October 15th, and I assured you that you should have it by that
time. That night I set about it. I mapped it out, incident by
incident, and before starting up to bed had actually written some
twelve or fifteen hundred words of the opening chapter--it was to be
told in four chapters. When I had gone thus far I experienced a
slight return of one of my nervous chills, and, on consulting my
watch, discovered that it was after midnight, which was a sufficient
explanation of my nervousness: I was merely tired. I arranged my
manuscripts on my table so that I might easily take up the work the
following morning. I locked up the windows and doors, turned out the
lights, and proceeded up-stairs to my room.

[Illustration: "FACE TO FACE"]

_It was then that I first came face to face with myself--that other
self, in which I recognized, developed to the full, every bit of my
capacity for an evil life._

Conceive of the situation if you can. Imagine the horror of it, and
then ask yourself if it was likely that when next morning came I
could by any possibility bring myself to my work-table in fit
condition to prepare for you anything at all worthy of publication
in the _Idler._ I tried. I implore you to believe that I did not
hold lightly the responsibilities of the commission you had
intrusted to my hands. You must know that if any of your writers has
a full appreciation of the difficulties which are strewn along the
path of an editor, _I_, who have myself had an editorial experience,
have it, and so would not, in the nature of things, do anything to
add to your troubles. You cannot but believe that I have made an
honest effort to fulfil my promise to you. But it was useless, and
for a week after that visitation was it useless for me to attempt
the work. At the end of the week I felt better, and again I started
in, and the story developed satisfactorily until--_it_ came again.
That figure which was my own figure, that face which was the evil
counterpart of my own countenance, again rose up before me, and once
more was I plunged into hopelessness.

Thus matters went on until the 14th day of October, when I received
your peremptory message that the story must be forthcoming the
following day. Needless to tell you that it was not forthcoming; but
what I must tell you, since you do not know it, is that on the
evening of the 15th day of October a strange thing happened to me,
and in the narration of that incident, which I almost despair of
your believing, lies my explanation of the discovery of October
16th, which has placed my position with you in peril.

At half-past seven o'clock on the evening of October 15th I was
sitting in my library trying to write. I was alone. My wife and
children had gone away on a visit to Massachusetts for a week. I had
just finished my cigar, and had taken my pen in hand, when my front
-door bell rang. Our maid, who is usually prompt in answering
summonses of this nature, apparently did not hear the bell, for she
did not respond to its clanging. Again the bell rang, and still did
it remain unanswered, until finally, at the third ringing, I went to
the door myself. On opening it I saw standing before me a man of, I
should say, fifty odd years of age, tall, slender, pale-faced, and
clad in sombre black. He was entirely unknown to me. I had never
seen him before, but he had about him such an air of pleasantness
and wholesomeness that I instinctively felt glad to see him, without
knowing why or whence he had come.

"Does Mr. Thurlow live here?" he asked.

You must excuse me for going into what may seem to you to be petty
details, but by a perfectly circumstantial account of all that
happened that evening alone can I hope to give a semblance of truth
to my story, and that it must be truthful I realize as painfully as
you do.

"I am Mr. Thurlow," I replied.

"Henry Thurlow, the author?" he said, with a surprised look upon his
face.

"Yes," said I; and then, impelled by the strange appearance of
surprise on the man's countenance, I added, "don't I look like an
author?"

He laughed, and candidly admitted that I was not the kind of looking
man he had expected to find from reading my books, and then he
entered the house in response to my invitation that he do so. I
ushered him into my library, and, after asking him to be seated,
inquired as to his business with me.

His answer was gratifying at least He replied that he had been a
reader of my writings for a number of years, and that for some time
past he had had a great desire, not to say curiosity, to meet me and
tell me how much he had enjoyed certain of my stories.

"I'm a great devourer of books, Mr. Thurlow," he said, "and I have
taken the keenest delight in reading your verses and humorous
sketches. I may go further, and say to you that you have helped me
over many a hard place in my life by your work. At times when I have
felt myself worn out with my business, or face to face with some
knotty problem in my career, I have found much relief in picking up
and reading your books at random. They have helped me to forget my
weariness or my knotty problems for the time being; and to-day,
finding myself in this town, I resolved to call upon you this
evening and thank you for all that you have done for me."

Thereupon we became involved in a general discussion of literary men
and their works, and I found that my visitor certainly did have a
pretty thorough knowledge of what has been produced by the writers
of to-day. I was quite won over to him by his simplicity, as well as
attracted to him by his kindly opinion of my own efforts, and I did
my best to entertain him, showing him a few of my little literary
treasures in the way of autograph letters, photographs, and
presentation copies of well-known books from the authors themselves.
From this we drifted naturally and easily into a talk on the methods
of work adopted by literary men. He asked me many questions as to my
own methods; and when I had in a measure outlined to him the manner
of life which I had adopted, telling him of my days at home, how
little detail office-work I had, he seemed much interested with the
picture--indeed, I painted the picture of my daily routine in almost
too perfect colors, for, when I had finished, he observed quietly
that I appeared to him to lead the ideal life, and added that he
supposed I knew very little unhappiness.

The remark recalled to me the dreadful reality, that through some
perversity of fate I was doomed to visitations of an uncanny order
which were practically destroying my usefulness in my profession and
my sole financial resource.

"Well," I replied, as my mind reverted to the unpleasant predicament
in which I found myself, "I can't say that I know little
unhappiness. As a matter of fact, I know a great deal of that
undesirable thing. At the present moment I am very much embarrassed
through my absolute inability to fulfil a contract into which I have
entered, and which should have been filled this morning. I was due
to-day with a Christmas story. The presses are waiting for it, and I
am utterly unable to write it."

He appeared deeply concerned at the confession. I had hoped, indeed,
that he might be sufficiently concerned to take his departure, that
I might make one more effort to write the promised story. His
solicitude, however, showed itself in another way. Instead of
leaving me, he ventured the hope that he might aid me.

"What kind of a story is it to be?" he asked.

"Oh, the usual ghostly tale," I said, "with a dash of the Christmas
flavor thrown in here and there to make it suitable to the season."

"Ah," he observed. "And you find your vein worked out?"

It was a direct and perhaps an impertinent question; but I thought
it best to answer it, and to answer it as well without giving him
any clew as to the real facts. I could not very well take an entire
stranger into my confidence, and describe to him the extraordinary
encounters I was having with an uncanny other self. He would not
have believed the truth, hence I told him an untruth, and assented
to his proposition.

"Yes," I replied, "the vein is worked out. I have written ghost
stories for years now, serious and comic, and I am to-day at the end
of my tether--compelled to move forward and yet held back."

"That accounts for it," he said, simply. "When I first saw you to
-night at the door I could not believe that the author who had
provided me with so much merriment could be so pale and worn and
seemingly mirthless. Pardon me, Mr. Thurlow, for my lack of
consideration when I told you that you did not appear as I had
expected to find you."

I smiled my forgiveness, and he continued:

"It may be," he said, with a show of hesitation--"it may be that I
have come not altogether inopportunely. Perhaps I can help you."

I smiled again. "I should be most grateful if you could," I said.

"But you doubt my ability to do so?" he put in. "Oh--well--yes--of
course you do; and why shouldn't you? Nevertheless, I have noticed
this: At times when I have been baffled in my work a mere hint from
another, from one who knew nothing of my work, has carried me on to
a solution of my problem. I have read most of your writings, and I
have thought over some of them many a time, and I have even had
ideas for stories, which, in my own conceit, I have imagined were
good enough for you, and I have wished that I possessed your
facility with the pen that I might make of them myself what I
thought you would make of them had they been ideas of your own."

The old gentleman's pallid face reddened as he said this, and while
I was hopeless as to anything of value resulting from his ideas, I
could not resist the temptation to hear what he had to say further,
his manner was so deliciously simple, and his desire to aid me so
manifest. He rattled on with suggestions for a half-hour. Some of
them were good, but none were new. Some were irresistibly funny, and
did me good because they made me laugh, and I hadn't laughed
naturally for a period so long that it made me shudder to think of
it, fearing lest I should forget how to be mirthful. Finally I grew
tired of his persistence, and, with a very ill-concealed impatience,
told him plainly that I could do nothing with his suggestions,
thanking him, however, for the spirit of kindliness which had
prompted him to offer them. He appeared somewhat hurt, but
immediately desisted, and when nine o'clock came he rose up to go.
As he walked to the door he seemed to be undergoing some mental
struggle, to which, with a sudden resolve, he finally succumbed,
for, after having picked up his hat and stick and donned his
overcoat, he turned to me and said:

"Mr. Thurlow, I don't want to offend you. On the contrary, it is my
dearest wish to assist you. You have helped me, as I have told you.
Why may I not help you?"

[Illustration: "HE RATTLED ON FOR HALF AN HOUR"]

"I assure you, sir--" I began, when he interrupted me.

"One moment, please," he said, putting his hand into the inside
pocket of his black coat and extracting from it an envelope
addressed to me. "Let me finish: it is the whim of one who has an
affection for you. For ten years I have secretly been at work myself
on a story. It is a short one, but it has seemed good to me. I had a
double object in seeking you out to-night. I wanted not only to see
you, but to read my story to you. No one knows that I have written
it; I had intended it as a surprise to my--to my friends. I had
hoped to have it published somewhere, and I had come here to seek
your advice in the matter. It is a story which I have written and
rewritten and rewritten time and time again in my leisure moments
during the ten years past, as I have told you. It is not likely that
I shall ever write another. I am proud of having done it, but I
should be prouder yet if it--if it could in some way help you. I
leave it with you, sir, to print or to destroy; and if you print it,
to see it in type will be enough for me; to see your name signed to
it will be a matter of pride to me. No one will ever be the wiser,
for, as I say, no one knows I have written it, and I promise you
that no one shall know of it if you decide to do as I not only
suggest but ask you to do. No one would believe me after it has
appeared as _yours,_ even if I should forget my promise and claim it
as my own. Take it. It is yours. You are entitled to it as a slight
measure of repayment for the debt of gratitude I owe you."

He pressed the manuscript into my hands, and before I could reply
had opened the door and disappeared into the darkness of the street.
I rushed to the sidewalk and shouted out to him to return, but I
might as well have saved my breath and spared the neighborhood, for
there was no answer. Holding his story in my hand, I re-entered the
house and walked back into my library, where, sitting and reflecting
upon the curious interview, I realized for the first time that I was
in entire ignorance as to my visitor's name and address.

[Illustration: "THE DEMON VANISHED"]

I opened the envelope hoping to find them, but they were not there.
The envelope contained merely a finely written manuscript of thirty
odd pages, unsigned.

And then I read the story. When I began it was with a half-smile
upon my lips, and with a feeling that I was wasting my time. The
smile soon faded, however; after reading the first paragraph there
was no question of wasted time. The story was a masterpiece. It is
needless to say to you that I am not a man of enthusiasms. It is
difficult to arouse that emotion in my breast, but upon this
occasion I yielded to a force too great for me to resist. I have
read the tales of Hoffmann and of Poe, the wondrous romances of De
La Motte Fouque, the unfortunately little-known tales of the
lamented Fitz-James O'Brien, the weird tales of writers of all
tongues have been thoroughly sifted by me in the course of my
reading, and I say to you now that in the whole of my life I never
read one story, one paragraph, one line, that could approach in
vivid delineation, in weirdness of conception, in anything, in any
quality which goes to make up the truly great story, that story
which came into my hands as I have told you. I read it once and was
amazed. I read it a second time and was--tempted. It was mine. The
writer himself had authorized me to treat it as if it were my own;
had voluntarily sacrificed his own claim to its authorship that he
might relieve me of my very pressing embarrassment. Not only this;
he had almost intimated that in putting my name to his work I should
be doing him a favor. Why not do so, then, I asked myself; and
immediately my better self rejected the idea as impossible. How
could I put out as my own another man's work and retain my self
-respect? I resolved on another and better course--to send you the
story in lieu of my own with a full statement of the circumstances
under which it had come into my possession, when that demon rose up
out of the floor at my side, this time more evil of aspect than
before, more commanding in its manner. With a groan I shrank back
into the cushions of my chair, and by passing my hands over my eyes
tried to obliterate forever the offending sight; but it was useless.
The uncanny thing approached me, and as truly as I write sat upon
the edge of my couch, where for the first time it addressed me.

"Fool!" it said, "how can you hesitate? Here is your position: you
have made a contract which must be filled; you are already behind,
and in a hopeless mental state. Even granting that between this and
to-morrow morning you could put together the necessary number of
words to fill the space allotted to you, what kind of a thing do you
think that story would make? It would be a mere raving like that
other precious effort of August. The public, if by some odd chance
it ever reached them, would think your mind was utterly gone; your
reputation would go with that verdict. On the other hand, if you do
not have the story ready by to-morrow, your hold on the _Idler_ will
be destroyed. They have their announcements printed, and your name
and portrait appear among those of the prominent contributors. Do
you suppose the editor and publisher will look leniently upon your
failure?"

"Considering my past record, yes," I replied. "I have never yet
broken a promise to them."

"Which is precisely the reason why they will be severe with you.
You, who have been regarded as one of the few men who can do almost
any kind of literary work at will--you, of whom it is said that your
'brains are on tap'--will they be lenient with _you?_ Bah! Can't you
see that the very fact of your invariable readiness heretofore is
going to make your present unreadiness a thing incomprehensible?"

"Then what shall I do?" I asked. "If I can't, I can't, that is all."

"You can. There is the story in your hands. Think what it will do
for you. It is one of the immortal stories--"

"You have read it, then?" I asked.

"Haven't you?"

"Yes--but--"

"It is the same," it said, with a leer and a contemptuous shrug.
"You and I are inseparable. Aren't you glad?" it added, with a laugh
that grated on every fibre of my being. I was too overwhelmed to
reply, and it resumed: "It is one of the immortal stories. We agree
to that. Published over your name, your name will live. The stuff
you write yourself will give you present glory; but when you have
been dead ten years people won't remember your name even--unless I
get control of you, and in that case there is a very pretty though
hardly a literary record in store for you."

Again it laughed harshly, and I buried my face in the pillows of my
couch, hoping to find relief there from this dreadful vision.

"Curious," it said. "What you call your decent self doesn't dare
look me in the eye! What a mistake people make who say that the man
who won't look you in the eye is not to be trusted! As if mere
brazenness were a sign of honesty; really, the theory of decency is
the most amusing thing in the world. But come, time is growing
short. Take that story. The writer gave it to you. Begged you to use
it as your own. It is yours. It will make your reputation, and save
you with your publishers. How can you hesitate?"

"I shall not use it!" I cried, desperately.

"You must--consider your children. Suppose you lose your connection
with these publishers of yours?"

"But it would be a crime."

"Not a bit of it. Whom do you rob? A man who voluntarily came to
you, and gave you that of which you rob him. Think of it as it is--
and act, only act quickly. It is now midnight."

The tempter rose up and walked to the other end of the room, whence,
while he pretended to be looking over a few of my books and
pictures, I was aware he was eyeing me closely, and gradually
compelling me by sheer force of will to do a thing which I abhorred.
And I--I struggled weakly against the temptation, but gradually,
little by little, I yielded, and finally succumbed altogether.
Springing to my feet, I rushed to the table, seized my pen, and
signed my name to the story.

"There!" I said. "It is done. I have saved my position and made my
reputation, and am now a thief!"

[Illustration: "DOESN'T DARE TO LOOK ME IN THE EYE"]

"As well as a fool," said the other, calmly. "You don't mean to say
you are going to send that manuscript in as it is?"

"Good Lord!" I cried. "What under heaven have you been trying to
make me do for the last half hour?"

"Act like a sane being," said the demon. "If you send that
manuscript to Currier he'll know in a minute it isn't yours. He
knows you haven't an amanuensis, and that handwriting isn't yours.
Copy it."

"True!" I answered. "I haven't much of a mind for details to-night.
I will do as you say."

I did so. I got out my pad and pen and ink, and for three hours
diligently applied myself to the task of copying the story. When it
was finished I went over it carefully, made a few minor corrections,
signed it, put it in an envelope, addressed it to you, stamped it,
and went out to the mail-box on the corner, where I dropped it into
the slot, and returned home. When I had returned to my library my
visitor was still there.

"Well," it said, "I wish you'd hurry and complete this affair. I am
tired, and wish to go."

"You can't go too soon to please me," said I, gathering up the
original manuscripts of the story and preparing to put them away in
my desk.

"Probably not," it sneered. "I'll be glad to go too, but I can't go
until that manuscript is destroyed. As long as it exists there is
evidence of your having appropriated the work of another. Why, can't
you see that? Burn it!"

"I can't see my way clear in crime!" I retorted. "It is not in my
line."

Nevertheless, realizing the value of his advice, I thrust the pages
one by one into the blazing log fire, and watched them as they
flared and flamed and grew to ashes. As the last page disappeared in
the embers the demon vanished. I was alone, and throwing myself down
for a moment's reflection upon my couch, was soon lost in sleep.

It was noon when I again opened my eyes, and, ten minutes after I
awakened, your telegraphic summons reached me.

"Come down at once," was what you said, and I went; and then came
the terrible _dénouement,_ and yet a _dénouement_ which was pleasing
to me since it relieved my conscience. You handed me the envelope
containing the story.

"Did you send that?" was your question.

"I did--last night, or rather early this morning. I mailed it about
three o'clock," I replied.

"I demand an explanation of your conduct," said you.

"Of what?" I asked.

"Look at your so-called story and see. If this is a practical joke,
Thurlow, it's a damned poor one."

I opened the envelope and took from it the sheets I had sent you--
twenty-four of them.

_They were every one of them as blank as when they left the paper
-mill!_

You know the rest. You know that I tried to speak; that my utterance
failed me; and that, finding myself unable at the time to control my
emotions, I turned and rushed madly from the office, leaving the
mystery unexplained. You know that you wrote demanding a
satisfactory explanation of the situation or my resignation from
your staff.

This, Currier, is my explanation. It is all I have. It is absolute
truth. I beg you to believe it, for if you do not, then is my
condition a hopeless one. You will ask me perhaps for a _résumé_ of
the story which I thought I had sent you.

It is my crowning misfortune that upon that point my mind is an
absolute blank. I cannot remember it in form or in substance. I have
racked my brains for some recollection of some small portion of it
to help to make my explanation more credible, but, alas! it will not
come back to me. If I were dishonest I might fake up a story to suit
the purpose, but I am not dishonest. I came near to doing an
unworthy act; I did do an unworthy thing, but by some mysterious
provision of fate my conscience is cleared of that.

Be sympathetic Currier, or, if you cannot, be lenient with me this
time. _Believe, believe, believe_, I implore you. Pray let me hear
from you at once.

(Signed) HENRY THURLOW.

[Illustration: "'LOOK AT YOUR SO CALLED STORY AND SEE'"]




II


(_Being a Note from George Currier, Editor of the "Idler" to Henry
Thurlow, Author_.)

Your explanation has come to hand. As an explanation it isn't worth
the paper it is written on, but we are all agreed here that it is
probably the best bit of fiction you ever wrote. It is accepted for
the Christmas issue. Enclosed please find check for one hundred
dollars.

Dawson suggests that you take another month up in the Adirondacks.
You might put in your time writing up some account of that dream
-life you are leading while you are there. It seems to me there are
possibilities in the idea. The concern will pay all expenses. What
do you say?

(Signed) Yours ever, G. C. THE DAMPMERE MYSTERY

Dawson wished to be alone; he had a tremendous bit of writing to do,
which could not be done in New York, where his friends were
constantly interrupting him, and that is why he had taken the little
cottage at Dampmere for the early spring months. The cottage just
suited him. It was remote from the village of Dampmere, and the
rental was suspiciously reasonable; he could have had a ninety-nine
years' lease of it for nothing, had he chosen to ask for it, and
would promise to keep the premises in repair; but he was not aware
of that fact when he made his arrangements with the agent. Indeed,
there was a great deal that Dawson was not aware of when he took the
place. If there hadn't been he never would have thought of going
there, and this story would not have been written.

It was late in March when, with his Chinese servant and his mastiff,
he entered into possession and began the writing of the story he had
in mind. It was to be the effort of his life. People reading it
would forget Thackeray and everybody else, and would, furthermore,
never wish to see another book. It was to be the literature of all
time--past and present and future; in it all previous work was to be
forgotten, all future work was to be rendered unnecessary.

For three weeks everything went smoothly enough, and the work upon
the great story progressed to the author's satisfaction; but as
Easter approached something queer seemed to develop in the Dampmere
cottage. It was undefinable, intangible, invisible, but it was
there. Dawson's hair would not stay down. When he rose up in the
morning he would find every single hair on his head standing erect,
and plaster it as he would with his brushes dipped in water, it
could not be induced to lie down again. More inconvenient than this,
his silken mustache was affected in the same way, so that instead of
drooping in a soft fascinating curl over his lip, it also rose up
like a row of bayonets and lay flat against either side of his nose;
and with this singular hirsute affliction there came into Dawson's
heart a feeling of apprehension over something, he knew not what,
that speedily developed into an uncontrollable terror that pervaded
his whole being, and more thoroughly destroyed his ability to work
upon his immortal story than ten inconsiderate New York friends
dropping in on him in his busy hours could possibly have done.

"What the dickens is the matter with me?" he said to himself, as for
the sixteenth time he brushed his rebellious locks. "What has come
over my hair? And what under the sun am I afraid of? The idea of a
man of my size looking under the bed every night for--for something--
burglar, spook, or what I don't know. Waking at midnight shivering
with fear, walking in the broad light of day filled with terror; by
Jove! I almost wish I was Chung Lee down in the kitchen, who goes
about his business undisturbed."

[Illustration: "IT WAS TO BE THE EFFORT OF HIS LIFE"]

Having said this, Dawson looked about him nervously. If he had
expected a dagger to be plunged into his back by an unseen foe he
could not have looked around more anxiously; and then he fled,
actually fled in terror into the kitchen, where Chung Lee was
preparing his dinner. Chung was only a Chinaman, but he was a living
creature, and Dawson was afraid to be alone.

"Well, Chung," he said, as affably as he could, "this is a pleasant
change from New York, eh?"

"Plutty good," replied Chung, with a vacant stare at the pantry
door. "Me likes Noo Lork allee same. Dampeemere kind of flunny,
Mister Dawson."

"Funny, Chung?" queried Dawson, observing for the first time that
the Chinaman's queue stood up as straight as a garden stake, and
almost scraped the ceiling as its owner moved about. "Funny?"

"Yeppee, flunny," returned Chung, with a shiver. "Me no likee. Me
flightened."

"Oh, come!" said Dawson, with an affected lightness. "What are you
afraid of?"

"Slumting," said Chung. "Do' know what. Go to bled; no sleepee;
pigtail no stay down; heart go thump allee night."

"By Jove !" thought Dawson; "he's got it too!"

"Evlyting flunny here," resumed Chung.

"Jack he no likee too."

Jack was the mastiff.

"What's the matter with Jack?" queried Dawson. "You don't mean to
say Jack's afraid?"

"Do' know if he 'flaid," said Chung, "He growl most time."

Clearly there was no comfort for Dawson here. To rid him of his
fears it was evident that Chung could be of no assistance, and
Chung's feeling that even Jack was affected by the uncanny something
was by no means reassuring. Dawson went out into the yard and
whistled for the dog, and in a moment the magnificent animal came
bounding up. Dawson patted him on the back, but Jack, instead of
rejoicing as was his wont over this token of his master's affection,
gave a yelp of pain, which was quite in accord with Dawson's own
feelings, for gentle though the pat was, his hand after it felt as
though he had pressed it upon a bunch of needles.

"What's the matter, old fellow?" said Dawson, ruefully rubbing the
palm of his hand. "Did I hurt you?"

The dog tried to wag his tail, but unavailingly, and Dawson was
again filled with consternation to observe that even as Chung's
queue stood high, even as his own hair would not lie down, so it was
with Jack's soft furry skin. Every hair on it was erect, from the
tip of the poor beast's nose to the end of his tail, and so stiff
withal that when it was pressed from without it pricked the dog
within.

"There seems to be some starch in the air of Dampmere," said Dawson,
thoughtfully, as he turned and walked slowly into the house. "I
wonder what the deuce it all means?"

And then he sought his desk and tried to write, but he soon found
that he could not possibly concentrate his mind upon his work. He
was continually oppressed by the feeling that he was not alone. At
one moment it seemed as if there were a pair of eyes peering at him
from the northeast corner of the room, but as soon as he turned his
own anxious gaze in that direction the difficulty seemed to lie in
the southwest corner.

"Bah!" he cried, starting up and stamping his foot angrily upon the
floor. "The idea! I, Charles Dawson, a man of the world, scared by--
by--well, by nothing. I don't believe in ghosts--and yet--at times I
do believe that this house is haunted. My hair seems to feel the
same way. It stands up like stubble in a wheat-field, and one might
as well try to brush the one as the other. At this rate nothing'll
get done. I'll go to town and see Dr. Bronson. There's something the
matter with me."

So off Dawson went to town.

"I suppose Bronson will think I'm a fool, but I can prove all I say
by my hair," he said, as he rang the doctor's bell. He was instantly
admitted, and shortly after describing his symptoms he called the
doctor's attention to his hair.

If he had pinned his faith to this, he showed that his faith was
misplaced, for when the doctor came to examine it, Dawson's hair was
lying down as softly as it ever had. The doctor looked at Dawson for
a moment, and then, with a dry cough, he said:

[Illustration: "WHEN HE ROSE UP IN THE MORNING HE WOULD FIND EVERY
SINGLE HAIR ON HIS HEAD STANDING ERECT"]

"Dawson, I can conclude one of two things from what you tell me.
Either Dampmere is haunted, which you and I as sane men can't
believe in these days, or else you are playing a practical joke on
me. Now I don't mind a practical joke at the club, my dear fellow,
but here, in my office hours, I can't afford the time to like
anything of the sort. I speak frankly with you, old fellow. I have
to. I hate to do it, but, after all, you've brought it on yourself."

"Doctor," Dawson rejoined, "I believe I'm a sick man, else this
thing wouldn't have happened. I solemnly assure you that I've come
to you because I wanted a prescription, and because I believe myself
badly off."

"You carry it off well, Dawson," said the doctor, severely, "but
I'll prescribe. Go back to Dampmere right away, and when you've seen
the ghost, telegraph me and I'll come down."

With this Bronson bowed Dawson out, and the latter, poor fellow,
soon found himself on the street utterly disconsolate. He could not
blame Bronson. He could understand how Bronson could come to believe
that, with his hair as the only witness to his woes, and a witness
that failed him at the crucial moment, Bronson should regard his
visit as the outcome of some club wager, in many of which he had
been involved previously.

"I guess his advice is good," said he, as he walked along. "I'll go
back right away--but meanwhile I'll get Billie Perkins to come out
and spend the night with me, and we'll try it on him. I'll ask him
out for a few days."

Suffice it to say that Perkins accepted, and that night found the
two eating supper together outwardly serene. Perkins was quite
interested when Chung brought in the supper.

"Wears his queue Pompadour, I see," he said, as he glanced at
Chung's extraordinary head-dress.

[Illustration: "'WEARS HIS QUEUE POMPADOUR, I SEE'"]

"Yes," said Dawson, shortly.

"You wear your hair that way yourself," he added, for he was pleased
as well as astonished to note that Perkins's hair was manifesting an
upward tendency.

"Nonsense," said Perkins. "It's flat as a comic paper."

"Look at yourself in the glass," said Dawson.

Perkins obeyed. There was no doubt about it. His hair was rising! He
started back uneasily.

"Dawson," he cried, "what is it? I've felt queer ever since I
entered your front door, and I assure you I've been wondering why
you wore your mustache like a pirate all the evening."

"I can't account for it. I've got the creeps myself," said Dawson,
and then he told Perkins all that I have told you.

"Let's--let's go back to New York," said Perkins.

"Can't," replied Dawson. "No train."

"Then," said Perkins, with a shiver, "let's go to bed."

The two men retired, Dawson to the room directly over the parlor,
Perkins to the apartment back of it. For company they left the gas
burning, and in a short time were fast asleep. An hour later Dawson
awakened with a start. Two things oppressed him to the very core of
his being. First, the gas was out; and second, Perkins had
unmistakably groaned.

He leaped from his bed and hastened into the next room.

"Perkins," he cried, "are you ill?"

"Is that you, Dawson?" came a voice from the darkness.

"Yes. Did--did you put out the gas?"

"No."

"Are you ill?"

"No; but I'm deuced uncomfortable What's this mattress stuffed with--
needles?"

"Needles? No. It's a hair mattress. Isn't it all right?"

"Not by a great deal. I feel as if I had been sleeping on a
porcupine. Light up the gas and let's see what the trouble is."

Dawson did as he was told, wondering meanwhile why the gas had gone
out. No one had turned it out, and yet the key was unmistakably
turned; and, what was worse, on ripping open Perkins's mattress, a
most disquieting state of affairs was disclosed.

_Every single hair in it was standing on end!_

A half-hour later four figures were to be seen wending their way
northward through the darkness--two men, a huge mastiff, and a
Chinaman. The group was made up of Dawson, his guest, his servant,
and his dog. Dampmere was impossible; there was no train until
morning, but not one of them was willing to remain a moment longer
at Dampmere, and so they had to walk.

"What do you suppose it was?" asked Perkins, as they left the third
mile behind them.

"I don't know," said Dawson; "but it must be something terrible. I
don't mind a ghost that will make the hair of living beings stand on
end, but a nameless invisible something that affects a mattress that
way has a terrible potency that I have no desire to combat. It's a
mystery, and, as a rule, I like mysteries, but the mystery of
Dampmere I'd rather let alone."

"Don't say a word about the--ah--the mattress, Charlie," said
Perkins, after awhile. "The fellows'll never believe it."

"No. I was thinking that very same thing," said Dawson.

And they were both true to Dawson's resolve, which is possibly why
the mystery of Dampmere has never been solved.

If any of my readers can furnish a solution, I wish they would do
so, for I am very much interested in the case, and I truly hate to
leave a story of this kind in so unsatisfactory a condition.

A ghost story without any solution strikes me as being about as
useful as a house without a roof.




CARLETON BARKER, FIRST AND SECOND


My first meeting with Carleton Barker was a singular one. A friend
and I, in August, 18--, were doing the English Lake District on
foot, when, on nearing the base of the famous Mount Skiddaw, we
observed on the road, some distance ahead of us, limping along and
apparently in great pain, the man whose subsequent career so sorely
puzzled us. Noting his very evident distress, Parton and I quickened
our pace and soon caught up with the stranger, who, as we reached
his side, fell forward upon his face in a fainting condition--as
well he might, for not only must he have suffered great agony from a
sprained ankle, but inspection of his person disclosed a most
extraordinary gash in his right arm, made apparently with a sharp
knife, and which was bleeding most profusely. To stanch the flow of
blood was our first care, and Parton, having recently been graduated
in medicine, made short work of relieving the sufferer's pain from
his ankle, bandaging it about and applying such soothing properties
as he had in his knapsack--properties, by the way, with which,
knowing the small perils to which pedestrians everywhere are liable,
he was always provided.

Our patient soon recovered his senses and evinced no little
gratitude for the service we had rendered him, insisting upon our
accepting at his hands, merely, he said, as a souvenir of our good
-Samaritanship, and as a token of his appreciation of the same, a
small pocket-flask and an odd diamond-shaped stone pierced in the
centre, which had hung from the end of his watch-chain, held in
place by a minute gold ring. The flask became the property of
Parton, and to me fell the stone, the exact hue of which I was never
able to determine, since it was chameleonic in its properties. When
it was placed in my hands by our "grateful patient" it was blood
-red; when I looked upon it on the following morning it was of a
livid, indescribable hue, yet lustrous as an opal. To-day it is
colorless and dull, as though some animating quality that it had
once possessed had forever passed from it.

"You seem to have met with an accident," said Parton, when the
injured man had recovered sufficiently to speak.

"Yes," he said, wincing with pain, "I have. I set out for Saddleback
this morning--I wished to visit the Scales Tarn and get a glimpse of
those noonday stars that are said to make its waters lustrous, and--"

"And to catch the immortal fish?" I queried.

"No," he replied, with a laugh. "I should have been satisfied to see
the stars--and I did see the stars, but not the ones I set out to
see. I have always been more or less careless of my safety, walking
with my head in the clouds and letting my feet look out for
themselves. The result was that I slipped on a moss-covered stone
and fell over a very picturesque bit of scenery on to some more
stones that, unfortunately, were not moss-covered."

"But the cut in your arm?" said Parton, suspiciously. "That looks as
if somebody else had given it to you."

The stranger's face flushed as red as could be considering the
amount of blood he had lost, and a look of absolute devilishness
that made my flesh creep came into his eyes. For a moment he did not
speak, and then, covering the delay in his answer with a groan of
anguish, he said:

"Oh, that! Yes--I--I did manage to cut myself rather badly and--"

"I don't see how you could, though," insisted Parton. "You couldn't
reach that part of yourself with a knife, if you tried."

"That's just the reason why you should see for yourself that it was
caused by my falling on my knife. I had it grasped in my right hand,
intending to cut myself a stick, when I slipped. As I slipped it
flew from my hand and I landed on it, fortunately on the edge and
not on the point," he explained, his manner far from convincing,
though the explanation seemed so simple that to doubt it were
useless.

"Did you recover the knife?" asked Parton. "It must have been a
mighty sharp one, and rather larger than most people carry about
with them on excursions like yours."

"I am not on the witness-stand, sir," returned the other, somewhat
petulantly, "and so I fail to see why you should question me so
closely in regard to so simple a matter--as though you suspected me
of some wrongdoing."

"My friend is a doctor," I explained; for while I was quite as much
interested in the incident, its whys and wherefores, as was Parton,
I had myself noticed that he was suspicious of his chance patient,
and seemingly not so sympathetic as he would otherwise have been.
"He regards you as a case."

"Not at all," returned Parton. "I am simply interested to know how
you hurt yourself--that is all. I mean no offence, I am sure, and if
anything I have said has hurt your feelings I apologize."

"Don't mention it, doctor," replied the other, with an uneasy smile,
holding his left hand out towards Parton as he spoke. "I am in great
pain, as you know, and perhaps I seem irritable. I'm not an amiable
man at best; as for the knife, in my agony I never thought to look
for it again, though I suppose if I had looked I should not have
found it, since it doubtless fell into the underbrush out of sight.
Let it rest there. It has not done me a friendly service to-day and
I shall waste no tears over it."

With which effort at pleasantry he rose with some difficulty to his
feet, and with the assistance of Parton and myself walked on and
into Keswick, where we stopped for the night. The stranger
registered directly ahead of Parton and myself, writing the words,
"Carleton Barker, Calcutta," in the book, and immediately retired to
his room, nor did we see him again that night. After supper we
looked for him, but as he was nowhere to be seen, we concluded that
he had gone to bed to seek the recuperation of rest. Parton and I
lit our cigars and, though somewhat fatigued by our exertions,
strolled quietly about the more or less somnolent burg in which we
were, discussing the events of the day, and chiefly our new
acquaintance.

"I don't half like that fellow," said Parton, with a dubious shake
of the head. "If a dead body should turn up near or on Skiddaw
to-morrow morning, I wouldn't like to wager that Mr. Carleton Barker
hadn't put it there. He acted to me like a man who had something to
conceal, and if I could have done it without seeming ungracious, I'd
have flung his old flask as far into the fields as I could. I've
half a mind to show my contempt for it now by filling it with some
of that beastly claret they have at the _table d'hôte_ here, and
chucking the whole thing into the lake. It was an insult to offer
those things to us."

"I think you are unjust, Parton," I said. "He certainly did look as
if he had been in a maul with somebody. There was a nasty scratch on
his face, and that cut on the arm was suspicious; but I can't see
but that his explanation was clear enough. Your manner was too
irritating. I think if I had met with an accident and was assisted
by an utter stranger who, after placing me under obligations to him,
acted towards me as though I were an unconvicted criminal, I'd be as
mad as he was; and as for the insult of his offering, in my eyes
that was the only way he could soothe his injured feelings. He was
angry at your suspicions, and to be entirely your debtor for
services didn't please him. His gift to me was made simply because
he did not wish to pay you in substance and me in thanks."

"I don't go so far as to call him an unconvicted criminal, but I'll
swear his record isn't clear as daylight, and I'm morally convinced
that if men's deeds were written on their foreheads Carleton Barker,
esquire, would wear his hat down over his eyes. I don't like him. I
instinctively dislike him. Did you see the look in his eyes when I
mentioned the knife?"

"I did," I replied. "And it made me shudder."

"It turned every drop of blood in my veins cold," said Parton. "It
made me feel that if he had had that knife within reach he would
have trampled it to powder, even if every stamp of his foot cut his
flesh through to the bone. Malignant is the word to describe that
glance, and I'd rather encounter a rattle-snake than see it again."

Parton spoke with such evident earnestness that I took refuge in
silence. I could see just where a man of Parton's temperament--which
was cold and eminently judicial even when his affections were
concerned--could find that in Barker at which to cavil, but, for all
that, I could not sympathize with the extreme view he took of his
character. I have known many a man upon whose face nature has set
the stamp of the villain much more deeply than it was impressed upon
Barker's countenance, who has lived a life most irreproachable,
whose every act has been one of unselfishness and for the good of
mankind; and I have also seen outward appearing saints whose every
instinct was base; and it seemed to me that the physiognomy of the
unfortunate victim of the moss-covered rock and vindictive knife was
just enough of a medium between that of the irredeemable sinner and
the sterling saint to indicate that its owner was the average man in
the matter of vices and virtues. In fact, the malignancy of his
expression when the knife was mentioned was to me the sole point
against him, and had I been in his position I do not think I should
have acted very differently, though I must add that if I thought
myself capable of freezing any person's blood with an expression of
my eyes I should be strongly tempted to wear blue glasses when in
company or before a mirror.

"I think I'll send my card up to him, Jack," I said to Parton, when
we had returned to the hotel, "just to ask how he is. Wouldn't you?"

"No!" snapped Parton. "But then I'm not you. You can do as you
please. Don't let me influence you against him--if he's to your
taste."

"He isn't at all to my taste," I retorted. "I don't care for him
particularly, but it seems to me courtesy requires that we show a
little interest in his welfare."

"Be courteous, then, and show your interest," said Parton. "I don't
care as long as I am not dragged into it."

I sent my card up by the boy, who, returning in a moment, said that
the door was locked, adding that when he had knocked upon it there
came no answer, from which he presumed that Mr. Barker had gone to
sleep.

"He seemed all right when you took his supper to his room?" I
queried.

"He said he wouldn't have any supper. Just wanted to be left alone,"
said the boy.

"Sulking over the knife still, I imagine," sneered Parton; and then
he and I retired to our room and prepared for bed.

I do not suppose I had slept for more than an hour when I was
awakened by Parton, who was pacing the floor like a caged tiger, his
eyes all ablaze, and laboring under an intense nervous excitement.

"What's the matter, Jack?" I asked, sitting up in bed.

"That d--ned Barker has upset my nerves," he replied. "I can't get
him out of my mind."

"Oh, pshaw!" I replied. "Don't be silly. Forget him."

"Silly?" he retorted, angrily. "Silly? Forget him? Hang it, I would
forget him if he'd let me--but he won't."

"What has he got to do with it?"

"More than is decent," ejaculated Parton. "More than is decent. He
has just been peering in through that window there, and he means no
good."

"Why, you're mad," I remonstrated. "He couldn't peer in at the
window--we are on the fourth floor, and there is no possible way in
which he could reach the window, much less peer in at it."

"Nevertheless," insisted Parton, "Carleton Barker for ten minutes
previous to your waking was peering in at me through that window
there, and in his glance was that same malignant, hateful quality
that so set me against him to-day--and another thing, Bob," added
Parton, stopping his nervous walk for a moment and shaking his
finger impressively at me--"another thing which I did not tell you
before because I thought it would fill you with that same awful
dread that has come to me since meeting Barker--the blood from that
man's arm, the blood that stained his shirt-sleeve crimson, that
besmeared his clothes, spurted out upon my cuff and coat-sleeve when
I strove to stanch its flow!"

"Yes, I remember that," said I.

"And now look at my cuff and sleeve!" whispered Parton, his face
grown white.

I looked.

There was no stain of any sort whatsoever upon either!

Certainly there must have been something wrong about Carleton
Barker.




II


The mystery of Carleton Barker was by no means lessened when next
morning it was found that his room not only was empty, but that, as
far as one could judge from the aspect of things therein, it had not
been occupied at all. Furthermore, our chance acquaintance had
vanished, leaving no more trace of his whereabouts than if he had
never existed.

"Good riddance," said Parton. "I am afraid he and I would have come
to blows sooner or later, because the mere thought of him was
beginning to inspire me with a desire to thrash him. I'm sure he
deserves a trouncing, whoever he is."

I, too, was glad the fellow had passed out of our ken, but not for
the reason advanced by Parton. Since the discovery of the stainless
cuff, where marks of blood ought by nature to have been, I goose
-fleshed at the mention of his name. There was something so
inexpressibly uncanny about a creature having a fluid of that sort
in his veins. In fact, so unpleasantly was I impressed by that
episode that I was unwilling even to join in a search for the
mysteriously missing Barker, and by common consent Parton and I
dropped him entirely as a subject for conversation.

We spent the balance of our week at Keswick, using it as our head
-quarters for little trips about the surrounding country, which is
most charmingly adapted to the wants of those inclined to
pedestrianism, and on Sunday evening began preparations for our
departure, discarding our knickerbockers and resuming the
habiliments of urban life, intending on Monday morning to run up to
Edinburgh, there to while away a few days before starting for a
short trip through the Trossachs.

While engaged in packing our portmanteaux there came a sharp knock
at the door, and upon opening it I found upon the hall floor an
envelope addressed to myself. There was no one anywhere in the hall,
and, so quickly had I opened the door after the knock, that fact
mystified me. It would hardly have been possible for any person,
however nimble of foot, to have passed out of sight in the period
which had elapsed between the summons and my response.

"What is it?" asked Parton, observing that I was slightly agitated.

"Nothing," I said, desirous of concealing from him the matter that
bothered me, lest I should be laughed at for my pains. "Nothing,
except a letter for me."

"Not by post, is it?" he queried; to which he added, "Can't be.
There is no mail here to-day. Some friend?"

"I don't know," I said, trying, in a somewhat feminine fashion, to
solve the authorship of the letter before opening it by staring at
the superscription. "I don't recognize the handwriting at all."

I then opened the letter, and glancing hastily at the signature was
filled with uneasiness to see who my correspondent was.

"It's from that fellow Barker," I said.

"Barker!" cried Parton. "What on earth has Barker been writing to
you about?"

"He is in trouble," I replied, as I read the letter.

"Financial, I presume, and wants a lift?" suggested Parton.

"Worse than that," said I, "he is in prison in London."

"Wha-a-at?" ejaculated Parton. "In prison in London? What for?"

"On suspicion of having murdered an innkeeper in the South of
England on Tuesday, August 16th."

"Well, I'm sorry to say that I believe he was guilty," returned
Parton, without reflecting that the 16th day of August was the day
upon which he and I had first encountered Barker.

"That's your prejudice, Jack," said I. "If you'll think a minute
you'll know he was innocent. He was here on August 16th--last
Tuesday. It was then that you and I saw him for the first time
limping along the road and bleeding from a wound in the shoulder."

"Was Tuesday the 16th?" said Parton, counting the days backward on
his fingers. "That's a fact. It was--but it's none of my affair
anyhow. It is too blessed queer for me to mix myself up in it, and I
say let him languish in jail. He deserved it for something, I am
sure-"

"Well, I'm not so confoundedly heartless," I returned, pounding the
table with my fist, indignant that Parton should allow his
prejudices to run away with his sense of justice. "I'm going to
London to do as he asks."

"What does he want you to do? Prove an alibi?"

"Precisely; and I'm going and you're going, and I shall see if the
landlord here won't let me take one of his boys along to support our
testimony--at my own expense if need be."

"You're right, old chap," returned Parton, after a moment of
internal struggle. "I suppose we really ought to help the fellow out
of his scrape; but I'm decidedly averse to getting mixed up in an
affair of any kind with a man like Carleton Barker, much less in an
affair with murder in it. Is he specific about the murder?"

"No. He refers me to the London papers of the 17th and 18th for
details. He hadn't time to write more, because he comes up for
examination on Tuesday morning, and as our presence is essential to
his case he was necessarily hurried."

"It's deucedly hard luck for us," said Parton, ruefully. "It means
no Scotland this trip."

"How about Barker's luck?" I asked. "He isn't fighting for a
Scottish trip--he's fighting for his life."

And so it happened that on Monday morning, instead of starting for
Edinburgh, we boarded the train for London at Car-lisle. We tried to
get copies of the newspapers containing accounts of the crime that
had been committed, but our efforts were unavailing, and it was not
until we arrived in London and were visited by Barker's attorneys
that we obtained any detailed information whatsoever of the murder;
and when we did get it we were more than ever regretful to be mixed
up in it, for it was an unusually brutal murder. Strange to say, the
evidence against Barker was extraordinarily convincing, considering
that at the time of the commission of the crime he was hundreds of
miles from the scene. There was testimony from railway guards,
neighbors of the murdered innkeeper, and others, that it was Barker
and no one else who committed the crime. His identification was
complete, and the wound in his shoulder was shown almost beyond the
possibility of doubt to have been inflicted by the murdered man in
self-defence.

"Our only hope," said the attorney, gravely, "is in proving an
alibi. I do not know what to believe myself, the chain of evidence
against my client is so complete; and yet he asserts his innocence,
and has stated to me that you two gentlemen could assist in proving
it. If you actually encountered Carleton Barker in the neighborhood
of Keswick on the 16th of this month, the whole case against him
falls to the ground. If not, I fear his outlook has the gallows at
the small end of the perspective."

"We certainly did meet a Carleton Barker at Keswick on Tuesday,
August 16th," returned Parton; "and he was wounded in the shoulder,
and his appearance was what might have been expected of one who had
been through just such a frightful murder as we understand this to
have been; but this was explained to us as due to a fall over rocks
in the vicinity of the Scales Tarn--which was plausible enough to
satisfy my friend here."

"And not yourself?" queried the attorney.

"Well, I don't see what that has to do with it," returned Parton.
"As to the locality there is no question. He was there. We saw him,
and others saw him, and we have taken the trouble to come down here
to state the fact, and have brought with us the call-boy from the
hotel, who can support our testimony if it is not regarded as
sufficient. I advise you, however, as attorney for Barker, not to
inquire too deeply into that matter, because I am convinced that if
he isn't guilty of this crime--as of course he is not--he hasn't the
cleanest record in the world. He has bad written on every line of
his face, and there were one or two things connected with our
meeting with him that mightn't be to his taste to have mentioned in
court."

"I don't need advice, thank you," said the attorney, dryly. "I wish
simply to establish the fact of his presence at Keswick at the hour
of 5 P.M. on Tuesday, August 16th. That was the hour at which the
murder is supposed--in fact, is proved--to have been committed. At
5.30, according to witnesses, my client was seen in the
neighborhood, faint with loss of blood from a knife-wound in the
shoulder. Barker has the knife-wound, but he might have a dozen of
them and be acquitted if he wasn't in Frewenton on the day in
question."

"You may rely upon us to prove that," said I. "We will swear to it.
We can produce tangible objects presented to us on that afternoon by
Barker--"

"I can't produce mine," said Parton. "I threw it into the lake."

"Well, I can produce the stone he gave me," said I, "and I'll do it
if you wish."

"That will be sufficient, I think," returned the attorney. "Barker
spoke especially about that stone, for it was a half of an odd
souvenir of the East, where he was born, and he fortunately has the
other half. The two will fit together at the point where the break
was made, and our case will be complete."

The attorney then left us. The following day we appeared at the
preliminary examination, which proved to be the whole examination as
well, since, despite the damning circumstantial evidence against
Barker, evidence which shook my belief almost in the veracity of my
own eyes, our plain statements, substantiated by the evidence of the
call-boy and the two halves of the oriental pebble, one in my
possession and the other in Barker's, brought about the discharge of
the prisoner from custody; and the "Frewenton Atrocity" became one
of many horrible murders, the mystery of which time alone, if
anything, could unravel.

After Barker was released he came to me and thanked me most
effusively for the service rendered him, and in many ways made
himself agreeable during the balance of our stay in London. Parton,
however, would have nothing to do with him, and to me most of his
attentions were paid. He always had a singularly uneasy way about
him, as though he were afraid of some impending trouble, and finally
after a day spent with him slumming about London--and a more perfect
slummer no one ever saw, for he was apparently familiar with every
one of the worst and lowest resorts in all of London as well as on
intimate terms with leaders in the criminal world--I put a few
questions to him impertinently pertinent to himself. He was
surprisingly frank in his answers. I was quite prepared for a more
or less indignant refusal when I asked him to account for his
intimacy with these dregs of civilization.

"It's a long story," he said, "but I'll tell it to you. Let us run
in here and have a chop, and I'll give you some account of myself
over a mug of ale."

We entered one of the numerous small eating-houses that make London
a delight to the lover of the chop in the fulness of its glory. When
we were seated and the luncheon ordered Barker began.

"I have led a very unhappy life. I was born in India thirty-nine
years ago, and while my every act has been as open and as free of
wrong as are those of an infant, I have constantly been beset by
such untoward affairs as this in which you have rendered such
inestimable service. At the age of five, in Calcutta, I was in peril
of my liberty on the score of depravity, although I never committed
any act that could in any sense be called depraved. The main cause
of my trouble at that time was a small girl of ten whose sight was
partially destroyed by the fiendish act of some one who, according
to her statement, wantonly hurled a piece of broken glass into one
of her eyes. The girl said it was I who did it, although at the time
it was done, according to my mother's testimony, I was playing in
her room and in her plain view. That alone would not have been a
very serious matter for me, because the injured child might have
been herself responsible for her injury, but in a childish spirit of
fear, afraid to say so, and, not realizing the enormity of the
charge, have laid it at the door of any one of her playmates she saw
fit. She stuck to her story, however, and there were many who
believed that she spoke the truth and that my mother, in an endeavor
to keep me out of trouble, had stated what was not true."

"But you were innocent, of course?" I said.

"I am sorry you think it necessary to ask that," he replied, his
pallid face flushing with a not unnatural indignation; "and I
decline to answer it," he added. "I have made a practice of late,
when I am in trouble or in any way under suspicion, to let others do
my pleading and prove my innocence. But you didn't mean to be like
your friend Parton, I know, and I cannot be angry with a man who has
done so much for me as you have--so let it pass. I was saying that
standing alone the accusation of that young girl would not have been
serious in its effects in view of my mother's testimony, had not a
seeming corroboration come three days later, when another child was
reported to have been pushed over an embankment and maimed for life
by no less a person than my poor innocent self. This time I was
again, on my mother's testimony, at her side; but there were
witnesses of the crime, and they every one of them swore to my
guilt, and as a consequence we found it advisable to leave the home
that had been ours since my birth, and to come to England. My father
had contemplated returning to his own country for some time, and the
reputation that I had managed unwittingly to build up for myself in
Calcutta was of a sort that made it easier for him to make up his
mind. He at first swore that he would ferret out the mystery in the
matter, and would go through Calcutta with a drag-net if necessary
to find the possible other boy who so resembled me that his
outrageous acts were put upon my shoulders; but people had be-gun to
make up their minds that there was not only something wrong about
me, but that my mother knew it and had tried to get me out of my
scrapes by lying--so there was nothing for us to do but leave."

"And you never solved the mystery?" I queried.

"Well, not exactly," returned Barker, gazing abstractedly before
him. "Not exactly; but I have a theory, based upon the bitterest
kind of experience, that I know what the trouble is."

"You have a double?" I asked.

"You are a good guesser," he replied; "and of all unhanged criminals
he is the very worst."

There was a strange smile on his lips as Carleton Barker said this.
His tone was almost that of one who was boasting--in fact, so
strongly was I impressed with his appearance of conceit when he
estimated the character of his double, that I felt bold enough to
say:

"You seem to be a little proud of it, in spite of all."

Barker laughed.

"I can't help it, though he has kept me on tenter-hooks for a
lifetime," he said. "We all feel a certain amount of pride in the
success of those to whom we are related, either by family ties or
other shackles like those with which I am bound to my murderous
_alter ego_. I knew an Englishman once who was so impressed with the
notion that he resembled the great Napoleon that he conceived the
most ardent hatred for his own country for having sent the
illustrious Frenchman to St. Helena. The same influence--a very
subtle one--I feel. Here is a man who has maimed and robbed and
murdered for years, and has never yet been apprehended. In his
chosen calling he has been successful, and though I have been put to
my trumps many a time to save my neck from the retribution that
should have been his, I can't help admiring the fellow, though I'd
kill him if he stood before me!"

"And are you making any effort to find him?"

"I am, of course," said Barker; "that has been my life-work. I am
fortunately possessed of means enough to live on, so that I can
devote all my time to unravelling the mystery. It is for this reason
that I have acquainted myself with the element of London with which,
as you have noticed, I am very familiar. The life these criminals
are leading is quite as revolting to me as it is to you, and the
scenes you and I have witnessed together are no more unpleasant to
you than they are to me; but what can I do? The man lives and must
be run down. He is in England, I am certain. This latest diversion
of his has convinced me of that."

"Well," said I, rising, "you certainly have my sympathy, Mr. Barker,
and I hope your efforts will meet with success. I trust you will
have the pleasure of seeing the other gentleman hanged."

"Thank you," he said, with a queer look in his eyes, which, as I
thought it over afterwards, did not seem to be quite as appropriate
to his expression of gratitude as it might have been.




III


When Barker and I parted that day it was for a longer period than
either of us dreamed, for upon my arrival at my lodgings I found
there a cable message from New York, calling me back to my labors.
Three days later I sailed for home, and five years elapsed before I
was so fortunate as to renew my acquaintance with foreign climes.
Occasionally through these years Parton and I discussed Barker, and
at no time did my companion show anything but an increased animosity
towards our strange Keswick acquaintance. The mention of his name
was sufficient to drive Parton from the height of exuberance to a
state of abject depression.

"I shall not feel easy while that man lives," he said. "I think he
is a minion of Satan. There is nothing earthly about him."

"Nonsense," said I. "Just because a man has a bad face is no reason
for supposing him a villain or a supernatural creature."

"No," Parton answered; "but when a man's veins hold blood that
saturates and leaves no stain, what are we to think?"

I confessed that this was a point beyond me, and, by mutual consent,
we dropped the subject.

One night Parton came to my rooms white as a sheet, and so agitated
that for a few minutes he could not speak. He dropped, shaking like
a leaf, into my reading-chair and buried his face in his hands. His
attitude was that of one frightened to the very core of his being.
When I questioned him first he did not respond. He simply groaned. I
resumed my reading for a few moments, and then looking up observed
that Parton had recovered somewhat and was now gazing abstractedly
into the fire.

"Well," I said, "feeling better?"

"Yes," he answered, slowly. "But it was a shock."

"What was?" I asked. "You've told me nothing as yet."

"I've seen Barker."

"No!" I cried. "Where?"

"In a back alley down-town, where I had to go on a hospital call.
There was a row in a gambling-hell in Hester Street. Two men were
cut and I had to go with the ambulance. Both men will probably die,
and no one can find any trace of the murderer; but I know who he is.
He was Carleton Barker and no one else. I passed him in the alley on
the way in, and I saw him in the crowd when I came out."

"Was he alone in the alley?" I asked. Parton groaned again.

"That's the worst of it," said he. "He was not alone. He was with
Carleton Barker."

"You speak in riddles," said I.

"I saw in riddles," said Parton; "for as truly as I sit here there
were two of them, and they stood side by side as I passed through,
alike as two peas, and crime written on the pallid face of each."

"Did Barker recognize you?"

"I think so, for as I passed he gasped--both of them gasped, and as
I stopped to speak to the one I had first recognized he had vanished
as completely as though he had never been, and as I turned to
address the other he was shambling off into the darkness as fast as
his legs could carry him."

I was stunned. Barker had been mysterious enough in London. In New
York with his double, and again connected with an atrocity, he
became even more so, and I began to feel somewhat towards him as had
Parton from the first. The papers next morning were not very
explicit on the subject of the Hester Street trouble, but they
confirmed Parton's suspicions in his and my own mind as to whom the
assassins were. The accounts published simply stated that the
wounded men, one of whom had died in the night and the other of whom
would doubtless not live through the day, had been set upon and
stabbed by two unknown Englishmen who had charged them with cheating
at cards; that the assailants had disappeared, and that the police
had no clew as to their whereabouts.

Time passed and nothing further came to light concerning the
Barkers, and gradually Parton and I came to forget them. The
following summer I went abroad again, and then came the climax to
the Barker episode, as we called it. I can best tell the story of
that climax by printing here a letter written by myself to Parton.
It was penned within an hour of the supreme moment, and while it
evidences my own mental perturbation in its lack of coherence, it is
none the less an absolutely truthful account of what happened. The
letter is as follows:

"LONDON, July 18, 18--.

"My Dear Parton,--You once said to me that you could not breathe
easily while this world held Carleton Barker living. You may now
draw an easy breath, and many of them, for the Barker episode is
over. Barker is dead, and I flatter myself that I am doing very well
myself to live sanely after the experiences of this morning.

"About a week after my arrival in England a horrible tragedy was
enacted in the Seven Dials district. A woman was the victim, and a
devil in human form the perpetrator of the crime. The poor creature
was literally hacked to pieces in a manner suggesting the hand of
Jack the Ripper, but in this instance the murderer, unlike Jack, was
caught red-handed, and turned out to be no less a person than
Carleton Barker. He was tried and convicted, and sentenced to be
hanged at twelve o'clock to-day.

"When I heard of Barker's trouble I went, as a matter of curiosity
solely, to the trial, and discovered in the dock the man you and I
had encountered at Keswick. That is to say, he resembled our friend
in every possible respect. If he were not Barker he was the most
perfect imitation of Barker conceivable. Not a feature of our Barker
but was reproduced in this one, even to the name. But he failed to
recognize me. He saw me, I know, because I felt his eyes upon me,
but in trying to return his gaze I quailed utterly before him. I
could not look him in the eye without a feeling of the most deadly
horror, but I did see enough of him to note that he regarded me only
as one of a thousand spectators who had flocked into the court-room
during the progress of the trial. If it were our Barker who sat
there his dissemblance was remarkable. So coldly did he look at me
that I began to doubt if he really were the man we had met; but the
events of this morning have changed my mind utterly on that point.
He was the one we had met, and I am now convinced that his story to
me of his double was purely fictitious, and that from beginning to
end there has been but one Barker.

"The trial was a speedy one. There was nothing to be said in behalf
of the prisoner, and within five days of his arraignment he was
convicted and sentenced to the extreme penalty--that of hanging--and
noon to-day was the hour appointed for the execution. I was to have
gone to Richmond to-day by coach, but since Barker's trial I have
been in a measure depressed. I have grown to dislike the man as
thoroughly as did you, and yet I was very much affected by the
thought that he was finally to meet death upon the scaffold. I could
not bring myself to participate in any pleasures on the day of his
execution, and in consequence I gave up my Richmond journey and
remained all morning in my lodgings trying to read. It was a
miserable effort. I could not concentrate my mind upon my book--no
book could have held the slightest part of my attention at that
time. My thoughts were all for Carleton Barker, and I doubt if, when
the clock hands pointed to half after eleven, Barker himself was
more apprehensive over what was to come than I. I found myself
holding my watch in my hand, gazing at the dial and counting the
seconds which must intervene before the last dreadful scene of a
life of crime. I would rise from my chair and pace my room nervously
for a few minutes; then I would throw myself into my chair again and
stare at my watch. This went on nearly all the morning--in fact,
until ten minutes before twelve, when there came a slight knock at
my door. I put aside my nervousness as well as I could, and, walking
to the door, opened it.

"I wonder that I have nerve to write of it, Parton, but there upon
the threshold, clad in the deepest black, his face pallid as the
head of death itself and his hands shaking like those of a palsied
man, stood no less a person than Carleton Barker!

"I staggered back in amazement and he followed me, closing the door
and locking it behind him.

"'What would you do?' I cried, regarding his act with alarm, for,
candidly, I was almost abject with fear.

"'Nothing--to you!' he said. 'You have been as far as you could be
my friend. The other, your companion of Keswick'--meaning you, of
course--'was my enemy.'

"I was glad you were not with us, my dear Parton. I should have
trembled for your safety.

"'How have you managed to escape?' I asked.

"'I have not escaped,' returned Barker. 'But I soon shall be free
from my accursed double.'

"Here he gave an unearthly laugh and pointed to the clock.

"'Ha, ha!' he cried. 'Five minutes more--five minutes more and I
shall be free.'

"'Then the man in the dock was not you?' I asked.

"'The man in the dock,' he answered, slowly, 'is even now mounting
the gallows, whilst I stand here.'

"He trembled a little as he spoke, and lurched forward like a
drunken man; but he soon recovered himself, grasping the back of my
chair convulsively with his long white fingers.

"'In two minutes more,' he whispered, 'the rope will be adjusted
about his neck; the black cap is even now being drawn over his
cursed features, and--'

"Here he shrieked with laughter, and, rushing to the window, thrust
his head out and literally sucked the air into his lungs, as a man
with a parched throat would have drank water. Then he turned and,
tottering back to my side, hoarsely demanded some brandy.

"It was fortunately at hand, and precisely as the big bells in
Westminster began to sound the hour of noon, he caught up the goblet
and held it aloft.

"'To him!' he cried.

"And then, Parton, standing before me in my lodgings, as truly as I
write, he remained fixed and rigid until the twelfth stroke of the
bells sounded, when he literally faded from my sight, and the
goblet, falling to the floor, was shattered into countless atoms!"

THE END



