
CHAPTER I. A NOVEL CASE


“Talking of sudden disappearances the one you mention of Hannah in that
Leavenworth case of ours, is not the only remarkable one which has come
under my direct notice. Indeed, I know of another that in some respects,
at least, surpasses that in points of interest, and if you will promise
not to inquire into the real names of the parties concerned, as the
affair is a secret, I will relate you my experience regarding it.”

The speaker was Q, the rising young detective, universally acknowledged
by us of the force as the most astute man for mysterious and
unprecedented cases, then in the bureau, always and of course excepting
Mr. Gryce; and such a statement from him could not but arouse our
deepest curiosity. Drawing up, then, to the stove around which we
were sitting in lazy enjoyment of one of those off-hours so dear to
a detective’s heart, we gave with alacrity the required promise; and
settling himself back with the satisfied air of a man who has a good
story to tell that does not entirely lack certain points redounding to
his own credit, he began:

I was one Sunday morning loitering at the ----- Precinct Station, when
the door opened and a respectable-looking middle-aged woman came in,
whose agitated air at once attracted my attention. Going up to her, I
asked her what she wanted.

“A detective,” she replied, glancing cautiously about on the faces of
the various men scattered through the room. “I don’t wish anything said
about it, but a girl disappeared from our house last night, and”--she
stopped here, her emotion seeming to choke her--“and I want some one to
look her up,” she went on at last with the most intense emphasis.

“A girl? what kind of a girl; and what house do you mean when you say
our house?”

She looked at me keenly before replying. “You are a young man,” said
she; “isn’t there some one here more responsible than yourself that I
can talk to?”

I shrugged my shoulders and beckoned to Mr. Gryce who was just then
passing. She at once seemed to put confidence in him. Drawing him aside,
she whispered a few low eager words which I could not hear. He listened
nonchalantly for a moment but suddenly made a move which I knew
indicated strong and surprised interest, though from his face--but you
know what Gryce’s face is. I was about to walk off, convinced he had
got hold of something he would prefer to manage himself, when the
Superintendent came in.

“Where is Gryce?” asked he; “tell him I want him.”

Mr. Gryce heard him and hastened forward. As he passed me, he whispered,
“Take a man and go with this woman; look into matters and send me word
if you want me; I will be here for two hours.”

I did not need a second permission. Beckoning to Harris, I reapproached
the woman. “Where do you come from,” said I, “I am to go back with you
and investigate the affair it seems.”

“Did he say so?” she asked, pointing to Mr. Gryce who now stood with his
back to us busily talking with the Superintendent.

I nodded, and she at once moved towards the door. “I come from No.----
Second Avenue: Mr. Blake’s house,” she whispered, uttering a name so
well known, I at once understood Mr. Gryce’s movement of sudden interest
“A girl--one who sewed for us--disappeared last night in a way to
alarm us very much. She was taken from her room--” “Yes,” she cried
vehemently, seeing my look of sarcastic incredulity, “taken from her
room; she never went of her own accord; and she must be found if I spend
every dollar of the pittance I have laid up in the bank against my old
age.”

Her manner was so intense, her tone so marked and her words so vehement,
I at once and naturally asked if the girl was a relative of hers that
she felt her abduction so keenly.

“No,” she replied, “not a relative, but,” she went on, looking every way
but in my face, “a very dear friend--a--a--protegee, I think they call
it, of mine; I--I--She must be found,” she again reiterated.

We were by this time in the street.

“Nothing must be said about it,” she now whispered, catching me by the
arm. “I told him so,” nodding back to the building from which we had
just issued, “and he promised secrecy. It can be done without folks
knowing anything about it, can’t it?”

“What?” I asked.

“Finding the girl.”

“Well,” said I, “we can tell you better about that when we know a few
more of the facts. What is the girl’s name and what makes you think she
didn’t go out of the house-door of her own accord?”

“Why, why, everything. She wasn’t the person to do it; then the looks of
her room, and--They all got out of the window,” she cried suddenly, “and
went away by the side gate into ------ Street.”

“They? Who do you mean by they?”

“Why, whoever they were who carried her off.”

I could not suppress the “bah!” that rose to my lips. Mr. Gryce might
have been able to, but I am not Gryce.

“You don’t believe,” said she, “that she was carried off?”

“Well, no,” said I, “not in the sense you mean.”

She gave another nod back to the police station now a block or so
distant. “He did’nt seem to doubt it at all.”

I laughed. “Did you tell him you thought she had been taken off in this
way?”

“Yes, and he said, ‘Very likely.’ And well he might, for I heard the men
talking in her room, and--”

“You heard men talking in her room--when?”

“O, it must have been as late as half-past twelve. I had been asleep and
the noise they made whispering, woke me.”

“Wait,” I said, “tell me where her room is, hers and yours.”

“Hers is the third story back, mine the front one on the same floor.”

“Who are you?” I now inquired. “What position do you occupy in Mr.
Blake’s house?”

“I am the housekeeper.”

Mr. Blake was a bachelor.

“And you were wakened last night by hearing whispering which seemed to
come from this girl’s room.”

“Yes, I at first thought it was the folks next door,--we often hear them
when they are unusually noisy,--but soon I became assured it came from
her room; and more astonished than I could say,--She is a good girl,”
 she broke in, suddenly looking at me with hotly indignant eyes,
“a--a--as good a girl as this whole city can show; don’t you dare, any
of you, to hint at anything else o--”

“Come, come,” I said soothingly, a little ashamed of my too
communicative face, “I haven’t said anything, we will take it for
granted she is as good as gold, go on.”

The woman wiped her forehead with a hand that trembled like a leaf.
“Where was I?” said she. “O, I heard voices and was surprised and got
up and went to her door. The noise I made unlocking my own must have
startled her, for all was perfectly quiet when I got there. I waited a
moment, then I turned the knob and called her: she did not reply and I
called again. Then she came to the door, but did not unlock it. ‘What is
it?’ she asked. ‘O,’ said I, ‘I thought I heard talking here and I was
frightened,’ ‘It must have been next door,’ said she. I begged pardon
and went back to my room. There was no more noise, but when in the
morning we broke into her room and found her gone, the window open and
signs of distress and struggle around, I knew I had not been mistaken;
that there were men with her when I went to her door, and that they had
carried her off--”

This time I could not restrain myself.

“Did they drop her out of the window?” I inquired.

“O,” said she, “we are building an extension, and there is a ladder
running up to the third floor, and it was by means of that they took
her.”

“Indeed! she seems at least to have been a willing victim,” I remarked.

The woman clutched my arm with a grip like iron. “Don’t you believe it,”
 gasped she, stopping me in the street where we were. “I tell you if what
I say is true, and these burglars or whatever they were, did carry her
off, it was an agony to her, an awful, awful thing that will kill her if
it has not done so already. You don’t know what you are talking about,
you never saw her--”

“Was she pretty,” I asked, hurrying the woman along, for more than one
passer-by had turned their heads to look at us. The question seemed in
some way to give her a shock.

“Ah, I don’t know,” she muttered; “some might not think so, I always
did; it depended upon the way you looked at her.”

For the first time I felt a thrill of anticipation shoot through my
veins. Why, I could not say. Her tone was peculiar, and she spoke in a
sort of brooding way as though she were weighing something in her own
mind; but then her manner had been peculiar throughout. Whatever it was
that aroused my suspicion, I determined henceforth to keep a very sharp
eye upon her ladyship. Levelling a straight glance at her face, I asked
her how it was that she came to be the one to inform the authorities of
the girl’s disappearance.

“Doesn’t Mr. Blake know anything about it?”

The faintest shadow of a change came into her manner. “Yes,” said she,
“I told him at breakfast time; but Mr. Blake doesn’t take much interest
in his servants; he leaves all such matters to me.”

“Then he does not know you have come for the police?”

“No, sir, and O, if you would be so good as to keep it from him. It is
not necessary he should know. I shall let you in the back way. Mr. Blake
is a man who never meddles with anything, and--”

“What did Mr. Blake say this morning when you told him that this
girl--By the way, what is her name?”

“Emily.”

“That this girl, Emily, had disappeared during the night?”

“Not much of anything, sir. He was sitting at the breakfast table
reading his paper, he merely looked up, frowned a little in an
absent-minded way, and told me I must manage the servants’ affairs
without troubling him.”

“And you let it drop?”

“Yes sir; Mr. Blake is not a man to speak twice to.”

I could easily believe that from what I had seen of him in public, for
though by no means a harsh looking man, he had a reserved air which if
maintained in private must have made him very difficult of approach.

We were now within a half block or so of the old-fashioned mansion
regarded by this scion of New York’s aristocracy as one of the most
desirable residences in the city; so motioning to the man who had
accompanied me to take his stand in a doorway near by and watch for
the signal I would give him in case I wanted Mr. Gryce, I turned to the
woman, who was now all in a flutter, and asked her how she proposed to
get me into the house without the knowledge of Mr. Blake.

“O sir, all you have got to do is to follow me right up the back stairs;
he won’t notice, or if he does will not ask any questions.”

And having by this time reached the basement door, she took out a key
from her pocket and inserting it in the lock, at once admitted us into
the dwelling.



CHAPTER II. A FEW POINTS


Mrs. Daniels, for that was her name, took me at once up stairs to the
third story back room. As we passed through the halls, I could not but
notice how rich, though sombre were the old fashioned walls and heavily
frescoed ceilings, so different in style and coloring from what we see
now-a-days in our secret penetrations into Fifth Avenue mansions. Many
as are the wealthy houses I have been called upon to enter in the line
of my profession, I had never crossed the threshold of such an one as
this before, and impervious as I am to any foolish sentimentalities,
I felt a certain degree of awe at the thought of invading with police
investigation, this home of ancient Knicker-bocker respectability. But
once in the room of the missing girl, every consideration fled save that
of professional pride and curiosity. For almost at first blush, I saw
that whether Mrs. Daniels was correct or not in her surmises as to the
manner of the girl’s disappearance, the fact that she had disappeared
was likely to prove an affair of some importance. For, let me state
the facts in the order in which I noticed them. The first thing that
impressed me was, that whatever Mrs. Daniels called her, this was no
sewing girl’s room into which I now stepped. Plain as was the furniture
in comparison with the elaborate richness of the walls and ceiling,
there were still scattered through the room, which was large even for
a thirty foot house, articles of sufficient elegance to make the
supposition that it was the abode of an ordinary seamstress open to
suspicion, if no more.

Mrs. Daniels, seeing my look of surprise, hastened to provide some
explanation. “It is the room which has always been devoted to sewing,”
 said she; “and when Emily came, I thought it would be easier to put up
a bed here than to send her upstairs. She was a very nice girl and
disarranged nothing.”

I glanced around on the writing-case lying open on a small table in the
centre of the room, on the vase half full of partly withered roses, on
the mantel-piece, the Shakespeare, and Macaulay’s History lying on the
stand at my right, thought my own thoughts, but said nothing.

“You found the door locked this morning?” asked I, after a moment’s
scrutiny of the room in which three facts had become manifest: first,
that the girl had not occupied the bed the night before; second, that
there had been some sort of struggle or surprise,--one of the curtains
being violently torn as if grasped by an agitated hand, to say nothing
of a chair lying upset on the floor with one of its legs broken; third,
that the departure, strange as it may seem, had been by the window.

“Yes,” returned she; “but there is a passageway leading from my room
to hers and it was by that means we entered. There was a chair placed
against the door on this side but we easily pushed it away.”

I stepped to the window and looked out. Ah, it would not be so very
difficult for a man to gain the street from that spot in a dark night,
for the roof of the newly-erected extension was almost on a level with
the window.

“Well,” said she anxiously, “couldn’t she have been got out that way?”

“More difficult things have been done,” said I; and was about to step
out upon the roof when I bethought to inquire of Mrs. Daniels if any of
the girl’s clothing was missing.

She immediately flew to the closets and thence to bureau drawers which
she turned hastily over. “No, nothing is missing but a hat and cloak
and--” She paused confusedly.

“And what?” I asked.

“Nothing,” returned she, hurriedly closing the bureau drawer; “only some
little knick-knacks.”

“Knick-knacks!” quoth I. “If she stopped for knick-knacks, she couldn’t
have gone in any very unwilling frame of mind.” And somewhat disgusted,
I was about to throw up the whole affair and leave the room. But the
indecision in Mrs. Daniels’ own face deterred me.

“I don’t understand it,” murmured she, drawing her hand across her eyes.
“I don’t understand it. But,” she went on with even an increase in her
old tone of heart-felt conviction, “no matter whether we understand it
or not, the case is serious; I tell you so, and she must be found.”

I resolved to know the nature of that must, used as few women in her
position would use it even under circumstances to all appearance more
aggravated than these.

“Why, must?” said I. “If the girl went of her own accord as some things
seem to show, why should you, no relative as you acknowledge, take the
matter so to heart as to insist she shall be followed and brought back?”

She turned away, uneasily taking up and putting down some little matters
on the table before her. “Is it not enough that I promise to pay for
all expenses which a search will occasion, without my being forced to
declare just why I should be willing to do so? Am I bound to tell you I
love the girl? that I believe she has been taken away by foul means,
and that to her great suffering and distress? that being fond of her and
believing this, I am conscientious enough to put every means I possess
at the command of those who will recover her?”

I was not satisfied with this but on that very account felt my
enthusiasm revive.

“But Mr. Blake? Surely he is the one to take this interest if anybody.”

“I have before said,” returned she, paling however as she spoke, “that
Mr. Blake takes very little interest in his servants.”

I cast another glance about the room. “How long have you been in this
house?” asked I.

“I was in the service of Mr. Blake’s father and he died a year ago.”

“Since when you have remained with Mr. Blake himself?”

“Yes sir.”

“And this Emily, when did she come here?”

“Oh it must be eleven months or so ago.”

“An Irish girl?”

“O no, American. She is not a common person, sir.”

“What do you mean by that? That she was educated, lady-like, pretty, or
what?”

“I don’t know what to say. She was educated, yes, but not as you would
call a lady educated. Yet she knew a great many things the rest of us
did’nt. She liked to read, you see, and--O sir, ask the girls about her,
I never know what to say when I am questioned.”

I scanned the gray-haired woman still more intently than I had yet done.
Was she the weak common-place creature she seemed, or had she really
some cause other than appeared for these her numerous breaks and
hesitations.

“Where did you get this girl?” I inquired. “Where did she live before
coming here?”

“I cannot say, I never asked her to talk about herself. She came to me
for work and I liked her and took her without recommendation.”

“And she has served you well?”

“Excellently.”

“Been out much? Had any visitors?”

She shook her head. “Never went out and never had any visitors.”

I own I was nonplussed, “Well,” said I, “no more of this at present.
I must first find out if she left this house alone or in company with
others.” And without further parley I stepped out upon the roof of the
extension.

As I did so I debated with myself whether the case warranted me or not
in sending for Mr. Gryce. As yet there was nothing to show that the girl
had come to any harm. A mere elopement with or without a lover to help
her, was not such a serious matter that the whole police force need
be stirred up on the subject; and if the woman had money, as she said,
ready to give the man who should discover the whereabouts of this girl,
why need that money be divided up any more than was necessary. Yet Gryce
was not one to be dallied with. He had said, send for him if the affair
seemed to call for his judgment, and somehow the affair did promise to
be a trifle complicated. I was yet undetermined when I reached the edge
of the roof.

It was a dizzy descent, but once made, escape from the yard beneath
would be easy. A man could take that road without difficulty; but a
woman! Baffled at the idea I turned thoughtfully back, when I beheld
something on the roof before me that caused me to pause and ask myself
if this was going to turn out to be a tragedy after all. It was a drop
of congealed blood. Further on towards the window was another, and
yes, further still, another and another. I even found one upon the very
window ledge itself. Bounding into the room, I searched the carpet for
further traces. It was the worst one in the world to find anything
upon of the nature of which I was seeking, being a confused pattern of
mingled drab and red, and in my difficulty I had to stoop very low.

“What are you looking for?” cried Mrs. Daniels.

I pointed to the drop on the window sill. “Do you see that?” I asked.

She uttered an exclamation and bent nearer. “Blood!” cried she, and
stood staring, with rapidly paling cheeks and trembling form. “They have
killed her and he will never--”

As she did not finish I looked up.

“Do you think it was her blood?” she whispered in a horrified tone.

“There is every reason to believe so,” rejoined I, pointing to a spot
where I had at last discovered not only one crimson drop but many,
scattered over the scarcely redder roses under my feet.

“Ah, it is worse than I thought,” murmured she. “What are you going to
do? What can we do?

“I am going to send for another detective,” returned I; and stepping to
the window I telegraphed at once to the man Harris to go for Mr. Gryce.

“The one we saw at the Station?”

I bowed assent.

Her face lost something of its drawn expression. “O I am glad; he will
do something.”

Subduing my indignation at this back thrust, I employed my time in
taking note of such details as had escaped my previous attention. They
were not many. The open writing-desk--in which, however I found no
letters or written documents of any kind, only a few sheets of paper,
with pen, ink, etc.; the brush and hairpins scattered on the bureau as
though the girl had been interrupted while arranging her hair (if she
had been interrupted); and the absence of any great pile of work such as
one would expect to see in a room set apart for sewing, were all I could
discover. Not much to help us, in case this was to prove an affair of
importance as I began to suspect.

With Mr. Gryce’s arrival, however, things soon assumed a better shape.
He came to the basement door, was ushered in by your humble servant, had
the whole matter as far as I had investigated it, at his finger-ends in
a moment, and was up-stairs and in that room before I, who am called the
quickest man in the force as you all know, could have time to determine
just what difference his presence would make to me in a pecuniary way in
event of Mrs. Daniels’ promises amounting to anything. He did not remain
there long, but when he came down I saw that his interest was in no wise
lessened.

“What kind of a looking girl was this?” he asked, hurrying up to Mrs.
Daniels who had withdrawn into a recess in the lower hall while all this
was going on. “Describe her to me, hair, eyes, complexion, etc.; you
know.”

“I--I--don’t know as I can,” she stammered reluctantly, turning very
red in the face. “I am a poor one for noticing. I will call one of the
girls, I--” She was gone before we realized she had not finished her
sentence.

“Humph!” broke from Mr. Gryce’s lips as he thoughtfully took down a vase
that stood on a bracket near by and looked into it.

I did not venture a word.

When Mrs. Daniels came back she had with her a trim-looking girl of
prepossessing appearance.

“This is Fanny,” said she; “she knows Emily well, being in the habit of
waiting on her at table; she will tell you what you want to hear. I
have explained to her,” she went on, nodding towards Mr. Gryce with a
composure such as she had not before displayed; “that you are looking
for your niece who ran away from home some time ago to go into some sort
of service.”

“Certainly, ma’am,” quoth that gentleman, bowing with mock admiration
to the gas-fixture. Then carelessly shifting his glance to the
cleaning-cloth which Fanny held rather conspicuously in her hand, he
repeated the question he had already put to Mrs. Daniels.

The girl, tossing her head just a trifle, at once replied:

“O she was good-looking enough, if that is what you mean, for them as
likes a girl with cheeks as white as this cloth was afore I rubbed the
spoons with it. As for her eyes, they was blacker than her hair, which
was the blackest I ever see. She had no flesh at all, and as for her
figure--” Fanny glanced down on her own well developed person, and gave
a shrug inexpressibly suggestive.

“Is this description true?” Mr. Gryce asked, seemingly of Mrs. Daniels,
though his gaze rested with curious intentness on the girl’s head which
was covered with a little cap.

“Sufficiently so,” returned Mrs. Daniels in a very low tone, however.
Then with a sudden display of energy, “Emily’s figure is not what
you would call plump. I have seen her--” She broke off as if a little
startled at herself and motioned Fanny to go.

“Wait a moment,” interposed Mr. Gryce in his soft way. “You said the
girl’s hair and eyes were dark; were they darker than yours?”

“O, yes sir;” replied the girl simpering, as she settled the ribbons on
her cap.

“Let me see your hair.”

She took off her cap with a smile.

“Ha, very pretty, very pretty. And the other girls? You have other girls
I suppose?”

“Two, sir;” returned Mrs. Daniels.

“How about their complexions? Are they lighter too than Emily’s?”

“Yes, sir; about like Fanny’s.”

Mr. Gryce spread his hand over his breast in a way that assured me of
his satisfaction, and allowed the girl to go.

“We will now proceed to the yard,” said he. But at that moment the door
of the front room opened and a gentleman stepped leisurely into the
hall, whom at first glance I recognized as the master of the house. He
was dressed for the street and had his hat in his hand. At the sight
we all stood silent, Mrs. Daniels flushing up to the roots of her gray
hair.

Mr. Blake is an elegant-looking man as you perhaps know; proud,
reserved, and a trifle sombre. As he turned to come towards us, the
light shining through the windows at our right, fell full upon his
face, revealing such a self-absorbed and melancholy expression, I
involuntarily drew back as if I had unwittingly intruded upon a great
man’s privacy. Mr. Gryce on the contrary stepped forward.

“Mr. Blake, I believe,” said he, bowing in that deferential way he knows
so well how to assume.

The gentleman, startled as it evidently seemed from a reverie, looked
hastily up. Meeting Mr. Gryce’s bland smile, he returned the bow, but
haughtily, and as it appeared in an abstracted way.

“Allow me to introduce myself,” proceeded my superior. “I am Mr. Gryce
from the detective bureau. We were notified this morning that a girl
in your employ had disappeared from your house last night in a somewhat
strange and unusual way, and I just stepped over with my man here, to
see if the matter is of sufficient importance to inquire into. With many
apologies for the intrusion, I stand obedient to your orders.”

With a frown expressive of annoyance, Mr. Blake glanced around and
detecting Mrs. Daniels, said: “Did you consider the affair so serious as
that?”

She nodded, seeming to find it difficult to speak.

He remained looking at her with an expression of some doubt. “I can
hardly think,” said he, “such extreme measures were necessary; the girl
will doubtless come back, or if not--” His shoulders gave a slight shrug
and he took out his gloves.

“The difficulty seems to be,” quoth Mr. Gryce eyeing those gloves with
his most intent and concentrated look, “that the girl did not go alone,
but was helped away, or forced away, by parties who had previously
broken into your house.”

“That is a strange circumstance,” remarked Mr. Blake, but still without
any appearance of interest, “and if you are sure of what you say,
demands, perhaps, some inquiry. I would not wish to put anything in the
way of justice succoring the injured. But--” again he gave that slight
shrug of the shoulders, indicative of doubt, if not indifference.

Mrs. Daniels trembled, and took a step forward. I thought she was
going to speak, but instead of that she drew back again in her strange
hesitating way.

Mr. Gryce did not seem to notice.

“Perhaps sir,” said he, “if you will step upstairs with me to the room
occupied by this girl, I may be able to show you certain evidences which
will convince you that our errand here is not one of presumption.”

“I am ready to concede that without troubling myself with proof,”
 observed the master of the house with the faintest show of asperity.
“Yet if there is anything to see of a startling nature, perhaps I had
best yield to your wishes. Whereabouts in the house is this girl’s room,
Mrs. Daniels?”

“It is--I gave her the third story back, Mr. Blake;” replied that woman,
nervously eyeing his face. “It was large and light for sewing, and she
was so nice--”

He impatiently waved his hand on which he had by this time fitted his
glove to a nicety, as if these details were an unnecessary bore to him,
and motioned her to show the way. Instantly a new feeling appeared to
seize her, that of alarm.

“I hardly think you need trouble Mr. Blake to go up-stairs,” she
murmured, turning towards Mr. Gryce. “I am sure when you tell him the
curtains were torn, and the chair upset, the window open and--”

But Mr. Gryce was already on the stairs with Mr. Blake, whom this small
opposition seemed to have at once determined.

“O my God!” she murmured to herself, “who could have foreseen this.”
 And ignoring my presence with all the egotism of extreme agitation, she
hurried past me to the room above, where I speedily joined her.



CHAPTER III. THE CONTENTS OF A BUREAU DRAWER

Mr. Blake was standing in the centre of the room when I entered,
carelessly following with his eyes the motion of Mr. Gryce’s finger as
that gentleman pointed with unwearying assiduity to the various little
details that had struck us. His hat was still in his hand, and he
presented a very formidable and imposing appearance, or so Mrs. Daniels
appeared to think as she stood watching him from the corner, whither she
had withdrawn herself.

“A forcible departure you see,” exclaimed Mr. Gryce; “she had not even
time to gather up her clothes;” and with a sudden movement he stooped
and pulled out one of the bureau drawers before the eyes of his
nonchalant listener.

Immediately a smothered exclamation struck our ears, and Mrs. Daniels
started forward.

“I pray, gentlemen,” she entreated, advancing in such a way as to place
herself against the front of the bureau in a manner to preclude the
opening of any more drawers, “that you will remember that a modest woman
such as this girl was, would hardly like to have her clothing displayed
before the eyes of strangers.”

Mr. Gryce instantly closed the drawer.

“You are right,” said he; “pardon the rough ways of a somewhat hardened
officer of the law.”

She drew up closer to the bureau, still protecting it with her meagre
but energetic form while her eyes rested with almost a savage expression
upon the master of the house as if he, and not the detective, had been
the aggressor whose advances she feared.

Mr. Blake did not return the look.

“If that is all you can show me, I think I will proceed to my
appointment,” said he. “The matter does seem to be more serious than I
thought, and if you judge it necessary to take any active measures, why,
let no consideration of my great and inherent dislike to notoriety of
any kind, interfere with what you consider your duty. As for the house,
it is at your command, under Mrs. Daniels’ direction. Good morning.” And
returning our bows with one singularly impressive for all its elegant
carelessness, he at once withdrew.

Mrs. Daniels took one long deep breath and came from the bureau.
Instantly Mr. Gryce stooped and pulled out the drawer she had so visibly
protected. A white towel met our eyes, spread neatly out at its full
length. Lifting it, we looked beneath. A carefully folded dress of dark
blue silk, to all appearance elegantly made, confronted our rather
eager eyes. Beside it, a collar of exquisite lace--I know enough of such
matters to be a judge--pricked through by a gold breast-pin of a strange
and unique pattern. A withered bunch of what appeared to have been a
bouquet of red roses, surmounted the whole, giving to the otherwise
commonplace collection the appearance of a relic from the tomb.

We both drew back in some amazement, involuntarily glancing up at Mrs.
Daniels.

“I have no explanation to give,” said that woman, with a calmness
strangely in contrast to the agitation she had displayed while Mr. Blake
had remained in the room. “That those things rich as they are, really
belonged to the girl, I have no doubt. She brought them when she came,
and they only confirm what I have before intimated: that she was no
ordinary sewing girl, but a woman who had seen better days.”

With a low “humph!” and another glance at the dark blue dress and
delicate collar, Mr. Gryce carefully replaced the cloth he had taken
from them, and softly closed the drawer without either of us having laid
a finger upon a single article. Five minutes later he disappeared from
the room.

I did not see him again till occasion took me below, when I beheld him
softly issue from Mr. Blake’s private apartment. Meeting me, he smiled,
and I saw that whether he was conscious of betraying it or not, he had
come upon some clue or at the least fashioned for himself some theory
with which he was more or less satisfied.

“An elegant apartment, that,” whispered he, nodding sideways toward the
room he had just left, “pity you haven’t time to examine it.”

“Are you sure that I haven’t?” returned I, drawing a step nearer to
escape the eyes of Mrs. Daniels who had descended after me.

“Quite sure;” and we hastened down together into the yard.

But my curiosity once aroused in this way would not let me rest. Taking
an opportunity when Mr. Gryce was engaged in banter with the girls
below, and in this way learning more in a minute of what he wanted to
know than some men would gather in an hour by that or any other method,
I stole lightly back and entered this room.

I almost started in my surprise. Instead of the luxurious apartment I
had prepared myself to behold, a plain, scantily-furnished room opened
before me, of a nature between a library and a studio. There was not
even a carpet on the polished floor, only a rug, which strange to say
was not placed in the centre of the room or even before the fireplace,
but on one side, and directly in front of a picture that almost at first
blush had attracted my attention as being the only article in the room
worth looking at. It was the portrait of a woman, handsome, haughty and
alluring; a modern beauty, with eyes of fire burning beneath high piled
locks of jetty blackness, that were only relieved from being too intense
by the scarlet hood of an opera cloak, that was drawn over them. “A
sister,” I thought to myself, “it is too modern for his mother,” and I
took a step nearer to see if I could trace any likeness in the chiselled
features of this disdainful brunette, to the more characteristic ones
of the careless gentleman who had stood but a few moments before in my
presence. As I did so, I was struck with the distance with which
the picture stood out from the wall, and thought to myself that
the awkwardness of the framing came near marring the beauty of this
otherwise lovely work of art. As for the likeness I was in search of, I
found it or thought I did, in the expression of the eyes which were
of the same color as Mr. Blake’s but more full and passionate; and
satisfied that I had exhausted all the picture could tell me, I
turned to make what other observations I could, when I was startled by
confronting the agitated countenance of Mrs. Daniels who had entered
behind me.

“This is Mr. Blake’s room,” said she with dignity; “no one ever intrudes
here but myself, not even the servants.”

“I beg pardon,” said I, glancing around in vain for the something which
had awakened that look of satisfaction in Mr. Gryce’s eyes. “I was
attracted by the beauty of this picture visible through the half open
door and stepped in to favor myself with a nearer view. It is very
lovely. A sister of Mr. Blake?”

“No, his cousin;” and she closed the door after us with an emphasis that
proclaimed she was anything but pleased.

It was my last effort to obtain information on my own account. In a few
moments later Mr. Gryce appeared from below, and a conversation ensued
with Mrs. Daniels that absorbed my whole attention.

“You are very anxious, my man here tells me, that this girl should be
found?” remarked Mr. Gryce; “so much so that you are willing to defray
all the expenses of a search?”

She bowed. “As far as I am able sir; I have a few hundreds in the
bank, you are welcome to them. I would not keep a dollar back if I
had thousands, but I am poor, and can only promise you what I myself
possess; though--” and her cheeks grew flushed and hot with an unnatural
agitation--“I believe that thousands would not be lacking if they were
found necessary. I--I could almost swear you shall have anything in
reason which you require; only the girl must be found and soon.”

“Have you thought,” proceeded Mr. Gryce, utterly ignoring the wildness
of these statements, “that the girl may come back herself if let alone?”

“She will come back if she can,” quoth Mrs. Daniels.

“Did she seem so well satisfied with her home as to warrant you in
saying that?”

“She liked her home, but she loved me,” returned the woman steadily.
“She loved me so well she would never have gone as she did without being
forced. Yes,” said she, “though she made no outcry and stopped to put
on her bonnet and shawl. She was not a girl to make a fuss. If they had
killed her outright, she would never have uttered a cry.”

“Why do you say they?”

“Because I am confident I heard more than one man’s voice in her room.”

“Humph! Would you know those voices if you heard them again?”

“No.”

There was a surprise in this last negative which Mr. Gryce evidently
noticed.

“I ask,” said he, “because I have been told that Mr. Blake lately kept a
body servant who has been seen to look at this girl more than once, when
she has passed him on the stairs.”

Mrs. Daniels’ face turned scarlet with rage and she hastily rose from
the chair. “I don’t believe it,” said she; “Henry was a man who knew his
place, and--I won’t hear such things,” she suddenly exclaimed; “Emily
was--was a lady, and--”

“Well, well,” interposed Mr. Gryce soothingly, “though the cat looks at
the king, it is no sign the king looks at the cat. We have to think of
everything you know.”

“You must never think of anything like that.”

Mr. Gryce softly ran his thumb around the brim of the hat he held in his
hand. “Mrs. Daniels,” observed he, “it would greatly facilitate matters
if you would kindly tell us why you take such an interest in this girl.
One glimpse at her real history would do more towards setting us on the
right track than anything else you could offer.”

Her face assumed an unmistakable frown. “Have I not told you,” said she,
“what is known of it? That she came to me about two years ago for work;
that I liked her, and so hired her; that she has been with us ever since
and--”

“Then you will not tell us?” exclaimed Mr. Gryce.

Her face fell and a look of hesitation crossed it.

“I doubt if we can do anything unless you do,” continued he.

Her countenance settled again into a resolved expression.

“You are mistaken,” said she; “if the girl had a secret--as nearly all
girls have, brought low as she has evidently been--it had nothing to do
with her disappearance, nor would a knowledge of it help you in any way.
I am confident of this and so shall hold my peace.”

She was not a woman to be frightened or cajoled into making revelations
she did not think necessary, and seeing it, Mr. Gryce refrained from
urging her further.

“However, you will at least tell me this,” said he, “what were the
knick-knacks she took away with her from her bureau drawer?”

“No,” said she, “for they have nothing to do with her abduction. They
were articles of positive value to her, though I assure you of little
importance to any one else. All that is shown by their disappearance is
the fact that she had a moment’s time allowed her in which to collect
what she most wanted.”

Mr. Gryce arose. “Well,” said he, “you have given us a hard sum to
work out, but I am not the man to recoil from anything hard. If I can
discover the whereabouts of this girl I will certainly do it, but you
must help me.”

“I, how?”

“By inserting a personal in the Herald. You say she loves you; and would
come back if she could. Now whether you believe it or not this is open
to doubt; therefore I would advise that you take some such means as
that to inform her of the anxiety of her friends and their desire to
communicate with her.”

“Impossible,” she cried vehemently. “I should be afraid--”

“Well?”

“I might put it that Mrs. D----, anxious about Emily, desires
information of her whereabouts--”

“Put it any way you like.”

“You had better add,” said I, speaking for the first time, “that you
would be willing to pay for information.”

“Yes,” said Mr. Gryce, “add that.”

Mrs. Daniels frowned, but made no objection, and after getting as minute
a description as possible of the clothing worn by the girl the night
before, we left the house.



CHAPTER IV. THOMPSON’S STORY


“An affair of some mystery,” remarked Mr. Gryce, as we halted at the
corner to take a final look at the house and its environs. “Why a girl
should choose such a method of descent as that,”--and he pointed to the
ladder down which we believed her to have come--“to leave a house of
which she had been an inmate for a year, baffles me, I can tell you. If
it were not for those marks of blood which betray her track, I would
be disinclined to believe any such hare-brained adventure was ever
perpetrated by a woman. As it is, what would’nt I give for her
photograph. Black hair, black eyes, white face and thin figure! what a
description whereby to find a girl in this great city of New York.
Ah!” said he with sudden gratification, “here is Mr. Blake again; his
appointment must have been a failure. Let us see if his description will
be any more definite.” And hurrying towards the advancing figure of that
gentleman, he put some questions to him.

Instantly Mr. Blake stopped, looked at him blankly for a moment, then
replied in a tone sufficiently loud for me to hear:

“I am sorry, sir, if my description could have done you any good, but I
have not the remotest idea how the girl looked. I did not know till
this morning even, that there was such a person in my house as a
sewing-woman. I leave all such domestic concerns entirely with Mrs.
Daniels.”

Mr. Gryce again bowed low and ventured another question. The answer came
as before, distinctly to my ears.

“O, I may have seen her, I can not say about that; I very often run
across the servants in the hall; but whether she is tall or short, light
or dark, pretty or ugly, I know no more than you do, sir.” Then with
a dignified nod calculated to abash a man in Mr. Gryce’s position,
inquired,

“Is that all?”

It did not seem to be, Mr. Gryce put another question.

Mr. Blake give him a surprised stare before replying, then courteously
remarked,

“I do not concern myself with servants after they have left me. Henry
was an excellent valet, but a trifle domineering, something which I
never allow in any one who approaches me. I dismissed him and that was
the end of it, I know nothing of what has become of him.”

Mr. Gryce bowed and drew back, and Mr. Blake, with the haughty step
peculiar to him, passed by him and reentered his house.

“I should not like to get into that man’s clutches,” said I, as my
superior rejoined me; “he has a way of making one appear so small.”

Mr. Gryce shot an askance look at his shadow gloomily following him
along the pavement. “Yet it may happen that you will have to run the
risk of that very experience.”

I glanced towards him in amazement.

“If the girl does not turn up of her own accord, or if we do not succeed
in getting some trace of her movements, I shall be tempted to place you
where you can study into the ways of this gentleman’s household. If the
affair is a mystery, it has its centre in that house.”

I stared at Mr. Gryce good and roundly. “You have come across
something which I have missed,” observed I, “or you could not speak so
positively.”

“I have come across nothing that was not in plain sight of any body who
had eyes to see it,” he returned shortly.

I shook my head slightly mortified.

“You had it all before you,” continued he, “and if you were not able
to pick up sufficient facts on which to base a conclusion, you mustn’t
blame me for it.”

More nettled than I would be willing to confess, I walked back with
him to the station, saying nothing then, but inwardly determined to
reestablish my reputation with Mr. Gryce before the affair was over.
Accordingly hunting up the man who had patrolled the district the night
before, I inquired if he had seen any one go in or out of the side gate
of Mr. Blake’s house on ----- street, between the hours of eleven and
one.

“No,” said he, “but I heard Thompson tell a curious story this morning
about some one he had seen.”

“What was it?”

“He said he was passing that way last night about twelve o’clock when he
remarked standing under the lamp on the corner of Second Avenue, a group
consisting of two men and a woman, who no sooner beheld him than they
separated, the men drawing back into Second Avenue and the woman coming
hastily towards him. Not understanding the move, he stood waiting her
approach, when instead of advancing to where he was, she paused at the
gate of Mr. Blake’s house and lifted her hand as if to open it, when
with a wild and terrified gesture she started back, covering her
face with her hands, and before he knew it, had actually fled in the
direction from which she had come. A little startled, Thompson advanced
and looked through the gate before him to see if possible what had
alarmed her, when to his great surprise, he beheld the pale face of the
master of the house, Mr. Blake himself, looking through the bars from
the other side of the gate. He in his turn started back and before he
could recover himself, Mr. Blake had disappeared. He says he tried the
gate after that, but found it locked.”

“Thompson tells you this story, does he?”

“Yes.”

“Well,” said I, “it’s a pretty wild kind of a tale, and all I have
got to say is, that neither you nor Thompson had better go blabbing
it around too much. Mum is the word where such men as Mr. Blake are
concerned.” And I departed to hunt up Thompson.

But he had nothing to add to his statement, except that the girl
appeared to be tall and thin, and was closely wrapped about in a shawl.
My next move was to make such inquiries as I could with safety into the
private concerns of Mr. Blake and his family, and discovered--well, such
facts as these:

That Mr. Blake was a man who if he paid but little attention to domestic
affairs was yet rarely seen out of his own house, except upon occasions
of great political importance, when he was always to be found on
the platform at meetings of his constituents. Though to the ordinary
observer a man eminently calculated, from his good looks, fine position,
and solid wealth to enjoy society, he not only manifested a distaste
for it, but even went so far as to refuse to participate in the social
dinners of his most intimate friends; the only table to which he would
sit down being that of some public caterer, where he was sure of finding
none but his political associates assembled.

To all appearance he wished to avoid the ladies, a theory borne out by
the fact that never, even in church, on the street, or at any place of
amusement, was he observed with one at his side. This fact in a
man, young--he was not far from thirty-five at that time--rich, and
marriageable, would, however, have been more noteworthy than it was
if he had not been known to belong to a family eminent for their
eccentricities. Not a man of all his race but had possessed some marked
peculiarity. His father, bibliomaniac though he was, would never treat a
man or a woman with decency, who mentioned Shakspeare to him, nor would
he acknowledge to his dying day any excellence in that divine poet
beyond a happy way of putting words together. Mr. Blake’s uncle hated
all members of the legal profession, and as for his grandfather--but you
have heard what a mania of dislike he had against that simple article of
diet, fish; how his friends were obliged to omit it from their bills of
fare whenever they expected him to dinner. If then Mr. Blake chose
to have any pet antipathy--as for women for instance--he surely
had precedent enough in his own family to back him. However, it was
whispered in my ear by one gentleman, a former political colleague of
his who had been with him in Washington, that he was known at one time
to show considerable attention to Miss Evelyn Blake, that cousin of
his who has since made such a brilliant thing of it by marrying, and
straightway losing by death, a wealthy old scapegrace of a French noble,
the Count De Mirac. But that was not a matter to be talked about,
Madame the Countess being free at present and in New York, though to all
appearance upon anything but pleasant terms with her quondam admirer.

Remembering the picture I had seen in Mr. Blake’s private apartment, I
asked if this lady was a brunette, and being told she was, and of the
most pronounced type, felt for the moment I had stumbled upon something
in the shape of a clue; but upon resorting to Mr. Gryce with my
information, he shook his head with a short laugh and told me I would
have to dive deeper than that if I wanted to fish up the truth lying at
the bottom of this well.



CHAPTER V. A NEW YORK BELLE


Meanwhile all our efforts to obtain information in regard to the fate or
whereabouts of the missing girl, had so far proved utterly futile. Even
the advertisements inserted by Mrs. Daniels had produced no effect; and
frustrated in my scheme I began to despair, when the accounts of that
same Mrs. Daniels’ strange and unaccountable behavior during these days
of suspense, which came to me through Fanny, (the pretty housemaid at
Mr. Blake’s, whose acquaintance I had lately taken to cultivating,)
aroused once more my dormant energies and led me to ask myself if the
affair was quite as hopeless as it seemed.

“If she was a ghost,” was her final expression on the subject, “she
could’nt go peramberlating this house more than she does. It seems as if
she could’nt keep still a minute. Upstairs and down, upstairs and down,
till we’re most wild. And so white as she is and so trembling! Why her
hands shake so all the time she never dares lift a dish off the table.
And then the way she hangs about Mr. Blake’s door when he’s at home!
She never goes in, that’s the oddest part of it, but walks up and down
before it, wringing her hands and talking to herself just like a mad
woman. Why, I have seen her almost put her hand on the knob twice in
an afternoon perhaps, then draw back as if she was afraid it would burn
her; and if by any chance the door opened and Mr. Blake came out, you
ought to have seen how she run. What it all means I don’t know, but I
have my imaginings, and if she is’nt crazy, why--” etc., etc.

In face of facts like these I felt it would be pure insanity to despair.
Let there be but a mystery, though it involved a man of the position of
Mr. Blake and I was safe. My only apprehension had been that the whole
affair would dissolve itself into an ordinary elopement or some such
common-place matter.

When, therefore, a few minutes later, Fanny announced that Mr. Blake
had ordered a carriage to take him to the Charity Ball that evening,
I determined to follow him and learn if possible what change had
taken place in himself or his circumstances, to lead him into such an
innovation upon his usual habits. Though the hour was late I had but
little difficulty in carrying out my plan, arriving at the Academy
something less than an hour after the opening dance.

The crowd was great and I circulated the floor three times before I came
upon him. When I did, I own I was slightly disappointed; for instead of
finding him as I anticipated, the centre of an admiring circle of ladies
and gentlemen, I espied him withdrawn into a corner with a bland old
politician of the Fifteenth Ward, discussing, as I presently overheard,
the merits and demerits of a certain Smith who at that time was making
some disturbance in the party.

“If that is all he has come for,” thought I, “I had better have stayed
at home and made love to the pretty Fanny.” And somewhat chagrined, I
took up my stand near by, and began scrutinizing the ladies.

Suddenly I felt my heart stand still, the noise of voices ceasing
the same instant behind me. A lady was passing on the arm of a
foreign-looking gentleman, whom it did not require a second glance to
identify with the subject of the portrait in Mr. Blake’s house. Older by
some few years than when her picture was painted, her beauty had assumed
a certain defiant expression that sufficiently betrayed the fact that
the years had not been so wholly happy as she had probably anticipated
when she jilted handsome Holman Blake for the old French Count. At all
events so I interpreted the look of latent scorn that burned in her dark
eyes, as she slowly turned her richly bejeweled head towards the corner
where that gentleman stood, and meeting his eyes no doubt, bowed with a
sudden loss of self-possession that not all the haughty carriage of
her noble form, held doubly erect for the next few moments, could quite
conceal or make forgotten.

“She still loves him,” I inwardly commented and turned to see if the
surprise had awakened any expression on his uncommunicative countenance.

Evidently not, for the tough old politician of the Fifteenth Ward was
laughing, at one of his own jokes probably, and looking up in the
face of Mr. Blake, whose back was turned to me, in a way that entirely
precluded all thought of any tragic expression in that quarter. Somewhat
disgusted, I withdrew and followed the lady.

I could not get very near. By this time the presence of a live countess
in the assembly had become known, and I found her surrounded by a swarm
of half-fledged youths. But I cared little for this; all I wanted to
know was whether Mr. Blake would approach her or not during the evening.
Tediously the moments passed; but a detective on duty, or on fancied
duty, succumbs to no weariness. I had a woman before me worth studying
and the time could not be thrown away. I learned to know her beauty;
the poise of her head, the flush of her cheek, the curl of her lip, the
glance--yes, the glance of her eye, though that was more difficult to
understand, for she had a way of drooping her lids at times that, while
exceedingly effective upon the poor wretch toward whom she might be
directing that half-veiled shaft of light, was anything but conducive to
my purposes.

At length with a restless shrug of her haughty shoulders she turned away
from her crowd of adorers, her breast heaving under its robing of garnet
velvet, and her whole face flaring with a light that might mean resolve
and might mean simply love. I had no need to turn my head to see who was
advancing towards her; her stately attitude as countess, her thrilling
glance as woman, betrayed only too readily.

He was the more composed of the two. Bowing over her hand with a few
words I could not hear, he drew back a step and began uttering the usual
common-place sentiments of the occasion.

She did not respond. With a splendor of indifference not often seen even
in the manner of our grandest ladies, she waited, opening and shutting
her richly feathered fan, as one who would say, “I know all this has to
be gone through with, therefore I will be patient.” But as the moments
passed, and his tone remained unchanged, I could detect a slight gleam
of impatience flash in the depths of her dark eyes, and a change
come into the conventional smile that had hitherto lighted, without
illuminating her countenance. Drawing still further back from the crowd
that was not to be awed from pressing upon her, she looked around as if
seeking a refuge. Her glance fell upon a certain window, with a gleam
of satisfaction. Seeing they would straightway withdraw there, I took
advantage of the moment and made haste to conceal myself behind a
curtain as near that vicinity as possible. In another instant I heard
them approaching.

“You seem to be rather overwhelmed with attention to-night,” were the
first words I caught, uttered in Mr. Blake’s calmest and most courteous
tones.

“Do you think so?” was the slightly sarcastic reply. “I was just
deciding to the contrary when you came up.”

There was a pause. Taking out my knife, I ripped open a seam in the
curtain hanging before me, and looked through. He was eyeing her
intently, a firm look upon his face that made its reserve more marked
than common. I saw him gaze at her handsome head piled with its midnight
tresses amid which the jewels, doubtless of her dead lord, burned with
a fierce and ominous glare, at her smooth olive brow, her partly veiled
eyes where the fire passionately blazed, at her scarlet lips trembling
with an emotion her rapidly flushing cheeks would not allow her to
conceal. I saw his glances fall and embrace her whole elegant form with
its casing of ruby velvet and ornamentation of lace and diamonds, and
an expectant thrill passed through me almost as if I already beheld the
mask of his reserve falling, and the true man flash out in response to
the wooing beauty of this full-blown rose, evidently in waiting for him.
But it died away and a deeper feeling seized me as I saw his glances
return unkindled to her countenance, and heard him say in still more
measured accents than before:

“Is it possible then that the Countess De Mirac can desire the adulation
of us poor American plebeians? I had not thought it, madame.”

Slowly her dark eyes turned towards him; she stood a statue.

“But I forget,” he went on, a tinge of bitterness for a moment showing
itself in his smile: “perhaps in returning to her own country, Evelyn
Blake has so far forgotten the last two years as to find pleasure again
in the toys and foibles of her youth. Such things have been, I hear.”
 And he bowed almost to the ground in his half sarcastic homage.

“Evelyn Blake! It is long since I have heard that name,” she murmured.

He could not restrain the quick flush from mounting to his brow. “Pardon
me,” said he, “if it brings you sadness or unwelcome memories. I promise
you I will not so transgress again.”

A wan smile crossed her lips grown suddenly pallid.

“You mistake,” said she; “if my name brings up a past laden with bitter
memories and shadowed by regret, it also recalls much that is pleasant
and never to be forgotten. I do not object to hearing my girlhood’s name
uttered--by my nearest relative.”

The answer was dignity itself. “Your name is Countess De Mirac, your
relatives must be proud to utter it.”

A gleam not unlike the lightning’s quick flash shot from the eyes she
drooped before him.

“Is it Holman Blake I am listening to,” said she; “I do not recognize my
old friend in the cool and sarcastic man of the world now before me.”

“We often fail to recognize the work of our hands, madame, after it has
fallen from our grasp.”

“What,” she cried, “do you mean--would you say that--”

“I would say nothing,” interrupted he calmly, stooping for the fan she
had dropped. “At an interview which is at once a meeting and a parting,
I would give utterance to nothing which would seem like recrimination.
I--”

“Wait,” suddenly exclaimed she, reaching out her hand for her fan with a
gesture lofty as it was resolute. “You have spoken a word which demands
explanation; what have I ever done to you that you should speak the word
recrimination to me?”

“What? You shook my faith in womankind; you showed me that a woman who
had once told a man she loved him, could so far forget that love as to
marry one she could never respect, for the sake of titles and jewels.
You showed me--”

“Hold,” said she again, this time without gesture or any movement, save
that of her lips grown pallid as marble, “and what did you show me?”

He started, colored profoundly, and for a moment stood before her
unmasked of his stern self-possession. “I beg your pardon,” said he, “I
take back that word, recrimination.”

It was now her turn to lift her head and survey him. With glance less
cool than his, but fully as deliberate, she looked at his proud head
bending before her; studying his face, line by line, from the stern brow
to the closely compressed lips on which melancholy seemed to have
set its everlasting seal, and a change passed over her countenance.
“Holman,” said she, with a sudden rush of tenderness, “if in the times
gone by, we both behaved with too much worldly prudence for it now to be
any great pleasure for either of us to look back, is that any reason
why we should mar our whole future by dwelling too long upon what we are
surely still young enough to bury if not forget? I acknowledge that
I would have behaved in a more ideal fashion, if, after I had been
forsaken by you, I had turned my face from society, and let the
canker-worm of despair slowly destroy whatever life and bloom I had
left. But I was young, and society had its charms, so did the prospect
of wealth and position, however hollow they may have proved; you who
are the master of both this day, because twelve months ago you forsook
Evelyn Blake, should be the last to reproach me with them. I do not
reproach you; I only say let the past be forgotten--”

“Impossible,” exclaimed he, his whole face darkening with an expression
I could not fathom. “What was done at that time cannot be undone. For
you and me there is no future. Yes,” he said turning towards her as she
made a slight fluttering move of dissent, “no future; we can bury the
past, but we can not resurrect it. I doubt if you would wish to if we
could; as we cannot, of course you will not desire even to converse upon
the subject again. Evelyn I wanted to see you once, but I do not wish to
see you again; will you pardon my plain speaking, and release me?”

“I will pardon your plain speaking, but--” Her look said she would not
release him.

He seemed to understand it so, and smiled, but very bitterly. In another
moment he had bowed and gone, and she had returned to her crowd of
adoring sycophants.



CHAPTER VI. A BIT OF CALICO


It was about this time that I took up my residence in a sort of
lodging-house that occupied the opposite corner to that of Mr. Blake.
My room, as I took pains to have it, overlooked the avenue, and from
its windows I could easily watch the goings and comings of the gentleman
whose movements were daily becoming of more and more interest to me.
For set it down to caprice--and men are often as capricious as women--or
account for it as you will, his restlessness at this period was truly
remarkable. Not a day that he did not spend his time in walking the
streets, and that not in his usual aimless gentlemanly fashion, but
eagerly and with an intent gaze that roamed here and there, like a bird
seeking its prey. It would often be as late as five o’clock before he
came in, and if, as now frequently happened, he did not have company to
dinner, he was even known to start out again after seven o’clock and go
over the same ground as in the morning, looking with strained gaze, that
vainly endeavored to appear unconcerned, into the faces of the women
that he passed. I not unfrequently followed him at these times as much
for my own amusement as from any hope I had of coming upon anything that
should aid me in the work before me. But when he suddenly changed his
route of travel from a promenade in the fashionable thoroughfares of
Broadway and Fourteenth Street to a walk through Chatham Square and the
dark, narrow streets of the East side, I began to scent whom the prey
might be that he was seeking, and putting every other consideration
aside, regularly set myself to dog his steps, as only I, with my
innumerable disguises, knew how to do. For three separate days I kept at
his heels wherever he went, each day growing more and more astonished
if not to say hopeful, as I found myself treading the narrowest and most
disreputable streets of the city; halting at the shops of pawnbrokers;
peering into the back-rooms of liquor shops; mixing with the crowds that
infest the corner groceries at nightfall, and even slinking with hand on
the trigger of the pistol I carried in my pocket, up dark alleys where
every door that swung noiselessly to and fro as we passed, shut upon
haunts of such villainy as only is known to us of the police, or to
those good souls that for the sake of One whose example they follow, lay
aside their fears and sensitiveness to carry light into the dim pits of
this wretched world. At first I thought Mr. Blake might have some such
reason for the peculiar course he took. But his indifference to all
crowds where only men were collected, his silence where a word would
have been well received, convinced me it was a woman he was seeking and
that with an intentness which blinded him to the commonest needs of the
hour. I even saw him once in his hurry and abstraction, step across the
body of a child who had fallen face downward on the stones, and that
with an expression showing he was utterly unconscious of anything but an
obstacle in his path. The strangest part of it all was that he seemed to
have no fear. To be sure he took pains to leave his watch at home; but
with such a figure and carriage as he possessed, the absence of jewelry
could never deceive the eye for a moment as to the fact of his being
a man of wealth, and those he went among would do anything for money.
Perhaps, like me, he carried a pistol. At all events he shunned no spot
where either poverty lay hid or deviltry reigned, his proud stern head
bending to enter the lowest doors without a tremble of the haughty lips
that remained compressed as by an iron force; except when some poor
forlorn creature with flaunting head-gear, and tremulous hands,
attracted by his bearing would hastily brush against him, when he would
turn and look, perhaps speak, though what he said I always failed to
catch; after which he would hurry on as if possessed by seven devils.
The evenings of those three days were notable also. Two of them he
spent in the manner I have described; the third he went to the Windsor
House--where the Countess De Mirac had taken rooms--going up to the
ladies’ entrance and actually ringing the bell, only to start back and
walk up and down on the opposite side of the way, with his hands behind
his back, and his head bent, evidently deliberating as to whether he
should or should not carry out his original intention of entering. The
arrival of a carriage with the stately subject of his deliberations,
who from her elaborate costume had seemingly been to some kettledrum or
private reception, speedily put an end to his doubts. As the door opened
to admit her, I saw him cast one look at her heavily draped person, with
its snowy opera-cloak drawn tightly over the sweeping folds of her maize
colored silk, and shrink back with what sounded like a sigh of anger or
distrust, and without waiting for the closing of the door upon her, turn
toward home with a step that hesitated no longer.

The fourth day to my infinite chagrin, I was sick and could not go with
him. All I could do was to wrap myself in blankets and sit in my window
from which I had the satisfaction of viewing him start as I supposed
upon his usual course. The rest of the day was employed in a long,
dull waiting for his return, only relieved by casual glimpses of Mrs.
Daniels’ troubled face as she appeared at one window or another of
the old-fashioned mansion before me. She seemed, too, to be unusually
restless, opening the windows and looking out with forlorn cranings of
her neck as if she too were watching for her master. Indeed I have
no doubt from what I afterwards learned, that she was in a state of
constant suspense during these days. Her frequent appearance at the
station house, where she in vain sought for some news of the girl in
whose fate she was so absorbed, confirmed this. Only the day before I
gave myself up to my unreserved espionage of Mr. Blake, she had had an
interview with Mr. Gryce in which she had let fall her apprehensions
that the girl was dead, and asked whether if that were the case, the
police would be likely to come into a knowledge of the fact. Upon being
assured that if she had not been privately made way with, there was
every chance in their favor, she had grown a little calmer, but before
going away had so far forgotten herself as to intimate that if some
result was not reached before another fortnight had elapsed, she should
take the matter into her own hands and--She did not say what she would
do, but her looks were of a very menacing character. It was no wonder,
then, that her countenance bore marks of the keenest anxiety as she
trod the halls of that dim old mansion, with its dusky corners rich
with bronzes and the glimmering shine of ancient brocades, breathing
suggestions of loss and wrong; or bent her wrinkled forehead to gaze
from the windows for the coming of one whose footsteps were ever
delayed. She happened to be looking out, when after a longer stroll than
usual the master of the house returned. As he made his appearance at the
corner, I saw her hurriedly withdraw her head and hide herself behind
the curtain, from which position she watched him as with tired steps and
somewhat dejected mien, he passed up the steps and entered the house.
Not till the door closed upon him, did she venture to issue forth and
with a hurried movement shut the blinds and disappear. This anxiety on
her part redoubled mine, and thankful enough was I when on the next day
I found myself well enough to renew my operations. To ferret out this
mystery, if mystery it was,--I still found myself forced to admit the
possibility of there being none--had now become the one ambition of my
life; and all because it was not only an unusually blind one, but of a
nature that involved danger to my position as detective, I entered upon
it with a zest rare even to me who love my work and all it involves with
an undivided passion.

To equip myself, then, in a fresh disguise and to join Mr. Blake shortly
after he had left his own corner, was anything but a hardship to me that
bright winter morning, though I knew from past experience, a long and
wearisome walk was before me with nothing in all probability at the
end but reiterated disappointment. But for once the fates had willed
it otherwise. Whether Mr. Blake, discouraged at the failure of his own
attempts, whatever they were, felt less heart to prosecute them than
usual I cannot say, but we had scarcely entered upon the lower end of
the Bowery, before he suddenly turned with a look of disgust, and
gazing hurriedly about him, hailed a Madison Avenue car that was rapidly
approaching. I was at that moment on the other side of the way, but I
hurried forward too, and signaled the same car. But just as I was on the
point of entering it I perceived Mr. Blake step hastily back and with
his eyes upon a girl that was hurrying past him with a basket on her
arm, regain the sidewalk with a swiftness that argued his desire to stop
her. Of course I let the car pass me, though I did not dare approach him
too closely after my late conspicuous attempt to enter it with him. But
from my stand on the opposite curb-stone I saw him draw aside the girl,
who from her garments might have been the daughter or wife of any one
of the shiftless, drinking wretches lounging about on the four corners
within my view, and after talking earnestly with her for a few moments,
saunter at her side down Broome Street, still talking. Reckless at this
sight of the consequences which might follow his detection of the part
I was playing, I hasted after them, when I was suddenly disconcerted by
observing him hurriedly separate from the girl and turn towards me with
intention as it were to regain the corner he had left. Weighing in an
instant the probable good to be obtained by following either party,
I determined to leave Mr. Blake for one day to himself, and turn my
attention to the girl he had addressed, especially as she was tall and
thin and bore herself with something like grace.

Barely bestowing a glance upon him, then, as he passed, in a vain
attempt to read the sombre expression of his inscrutable face grown
five years older in the last five days, I shuffled after the girl now
flitting before me down Broome Street. As I did so, I noticed her dress
to its minutest details, somewhat surprised to find how ragged and
uncouth it was. That Mr. Blake should stop a girl wherever seen, clad
in a black alpaca frock, a striped shawl and a Bowery hat trimmed with
feathers, I could easily understand; but that this creature with her
faded calico dress, dingy cape thrown carelessly over her head, and
ragged basket, should arrest his attention, was a riddle to me. I
hastened forward with intent to catch a glimpse of her countenance if
possible; but she seemed to have acquired wings to her feet since her
interview with Mr. Blake. Darting into a crowd of hooting urchins that
were rushing from Centre Street after a broken wagon and runaway horse,
she sped from my sight with such rapidity, I soon saw that my only hope
of overtaking her lay in running. I accordingly quickened my steps when
those same hooting youngsters getting in the way of my feet, I tripped
up and--well, I own I retired from that field baffled. Not entirely so,
however. Just as I was going down, I caught sight of the girl tearing
away from a box of garbage on the curb-stone; and when order having
been restored, by which lofty statement I mean to say when your humble
servant had regained his equilibrium, I awoke to the fact that she had
effectually disappeared, I hurried to that box and succeeded in finding
hanging to it a bit of rag easily recognized as a piece of the old
calico frock of nameless color which I had been following a moment
before. Regarding it as the sole spoils of a very unsatisfactory day’s
work, I put it carefully away in my pocket book, where it lay till--But
with all my zeal for compression, I must not anticipate.

When I came home that afternoon I found myself unexpectedly involved in
a matter that for the remainder of the day at least, prevented me from
further attending to the affair I had in hand. The next morning Mr.
Blake did not start out as usual, and at noon I received intimation
from Fanny that he was preparing to take a journey. Where, she could
not inform me, nor when, though she thought it probable he would take an
early train. Mrs. Daniels was feeling dreadfully, she informed me; and
the house was like a grave. Greatly excited at this unexpected move on
Mr. Blake’s part, I went home and packed my valise with something of the
spirit of her who once said, under somewhat different circumstances I
allow, “Whither thou goest I will go.”

The truth was, I had travelled so far and learned so little, that
my professional pride was piqued. That expression of Mr. Gryce still
rankled, and nothing could soothe my injured spirit now but success.
Accordingly when Mr. Blake stepped up to the ticket office of the Hudson
River Railroad next morning, to buy a ticket for Putney, a small town
in the northern part of Vermont, he found beside him a spruce
young drummer, or what certainly appeared such, who by some strange
coincidence, wanted a ticket for the same place. The fact did not seem
in the least to surprise him, nor did he cast me a look beyond the
ordinary glance of one stranger at another. Indeed Mr. Blake had no
appearance of being a suspicious man, nor do I think at this time,
he had the remotest idea that he was either watched or followed; an
ignorance of the truth which I took care to preserve by taking my seat
in a different car from him and not showing myself again during the
whole ride from New York to Putney.



CHAPTER VII. THE HOUSE AT THE GRANBY CROSS ROADS


Why Mr. Blake should take a journey at all at this time, and why of
all places in the world he should choose such an insignificant town
as Putney for his destination, was of course the mystery upon which I
brooded during the entire distance. But when somewhere near five in the
afternoon I stepped from the cars on to the platform at Putney Station
only to hear Mr. Blake making inquiries in regard to a certain stage
running between that town and a still smaller village further east, I
own I was not only surprised but well-nigh nonplussed. Especially as
he seemed greatly disappointed to hear that it only ran once a day, and
then for an earlier train in the morning.

“You will have to wait till to-morrow I fear,” said the ticket agent,
“unless the landlord of the hotel down yonder, can harness you up a
team. There is a funeral out west to-day and--”

I did not wait to hear more but hurried down to the hotel he had pointed
out, and hunting up the landlord inquired if for love or money he could
get me any sort of a conveyance for Melville that afternoon. He assured
me it would be impossible, the livery stable as well as his own being
entirely empty.

“Such a thing don’t happen here once in five years,” said he to me. “But
the old codger who is dead, though a queer dick was a noted personage in
these parts, and not a man, woman or child, who could find a horse, mule
or donkey, but what availed himself of the privilege. Even the doctor’s
spavined mare was pressed into service, though she halts on one leg and
stops to get her breath half a dozen times in going up one short hill.
You will have to wait for the stage, sir.”

“But I am in a hurry,” said I as I saw Mr. Blake enter. “I have business
in Melville tonight, and I would pay anything in reason to get there.”

But the landlord only shook his head; and drawing back with the air of
an abused man, I took up my stand in the doorway where I could hear the
same colloquy entered into with Mr. Blake, with the same unsatisfactory
termination. He did not take it quite as calmly as I did, though he
was of too reserved a nature to display much emotion over anything.
The prospect of a long tedious evening spent in a country hotel seemed
almost unendurable to him, but he finally succumbed to the force of
circumstances, as indeed he seemed obliged to do, and partaking of such
refreshment as the rather poorly managed hotel afforded, retired without
ceremony to his room, from which he did not emerge again till next
morning. In all this he had somehow managed not to give his name; and by
means of some inquiries I succeeded in making that evening, I found his
person was unknown in the town.

By a little management I secured the next room to his, by which
arrangement I succeeded in passing a sleepless night, Mr. Blake spending
most of the wee sma’ hours in pacing the floor of his room, with an
unremitting regularity that had anything but a soothing effect upon my
nerves. Early the next morning we took the stage, he sitting on the back
seat, and I in front with the driver. There were other passengers, but
I noticed he never spoke to any of them, nor through all the long drive
did he once look up from the corner where he had ensconced himself. It
was twelve o’clock when we reached the end of the route, a small town
of somewhat less than the usual pretensions of mountain villages; so
insignificant indeed, that I found it more and more difficult to imagine
what the wealthy ex-Congressman could find in such a spot as this, to
make amends for a journey of such length and discomfort; when to my
increasing wonder I heard him give orders for a horse to be saddled and
brought round to the inn door directly after dinner. This was a move I
had not expected and it threw me a little aback, for although I had thus
far managed to hold myself so aloof from Mr. Blake, even while keeping
him under my eye, that no suspicion of my interest in his movements had
as yet been awakened, how could I thus for the third time follow his
order with one precisely similar, without attracting an attention that
would be fatal to my plans. Yet to let him ride off alone now, would be
to drop the trail at the very moment the scent became of importance.

The landlord, a bustling, wiry little man all nervousness and questions,
unwittingly helped me at this crisis.

“Are you going on to Perry, sir?” inquired he of that gentleman, “I have
been expecting a man along these three days bound for Perry.”

“I am that man,” I broke in, stepping forward with some appearance of
asperity, “and I hope you won’t keep me waiting. A horse as soon as
dinner is over, do you hear? I am two days late now, and won’t stand any
nonsense.”

And to escape the questions sure to follow, I strode into the
dining-room with a half-fierce, half-sullen countenance, that
effectually precluded all advances. During the meal I saw Mr. Blake’s
eye roam more than once towards my face; but I did not return his gaze,
or notice him in any way; hurrying through my dinner, and mounting the
first horse brought around, as if time were my only consideration. But
once on the road I took the first opportunity to draw rein and wait,
suddenly remembering that I had not heard Mr. Blake give any intimation
of the direction he intended taking. A few minutes revealed to me his
elegant form well mounted and showing to perfection in his closely
buttoned coat, slowly approaching up the road. Taking advantage of
a rise in the ground, I lingered till he was almost upon me, when I
cantered quickly on, fearing to arouse his apprehensions if I allowed
him to pass me on a road so solitary as that which now stretched out
before us: a move provocative of much embarassment to me, as I dared not
turn my head for the same reason, anxious as I was to keep him in sight.

The roads dividing before me, at length gave me my first opportunity
to pause and look back. He was some fifty paces behind. Waiting till he
came up, I bowed with the surly courtesy I thought in keeping with the
character I had assumed, and asked if he knew which road led towards
Perry, saying I had come off in such haste I had forgotten to inquire my
way. He returned my bow, pointed towards the left hand road and saying,
“I know this does not,” calmly took it.

Now here was a dilemma. If in face of this curt response I proceeded to
follow him, my hand was revealed at once; yet the circumstances
would admit of no other course. I determined to compromise matters by
pretending to take the right hand road till he was out of sight, when I
would return and follow him swiftly upon the left. Accordingly I reined
my horse to the right, and for some fifteen minutes galloped slowly
away towards the north; but another fifteen saw me facing the west, and
riding with a force and fury of which I had not thought the old mare
they had given me capable, till I put her to the test. It was not long
before I saw my fine gentleman trotting in front of me up a long but
gentle slope that rose in the distance; and slackening my own rein, I
withdrew into the forest at the side of the road, till he had passed its
summit and disappeared, when I again galloped forward.

And thus we went on for an hour, over the most uneven country I ever
traversed, he always one hill ahead; when suddenly, by what instinct I
cannot determine, I felt myself approaching the end, and hastening to
the top of the ascent up which I was then laboring, looked down into the
shallow valley spread out before me.

What a sight met my eyes if I had been intent on anything less practical
than the movements of the solitary horseman below! Hills on hills piled
about a verdant basin in whose depths nestled a scanty collection of
houses, in number so small they could be told upon the fingers of the
right hand, but which notwithstanding lent an indescribable aspect of
comfort to this remote region of hill and forest.

But the vision of Mr. Blake pausing half way down the slope before me,
examining, yes examining a pistol which he held in his hand, soon put
an end to all ideas of romance. Somewhat alarmed I reined back; but his
action had evidently no connection with me, for he did not once glance
behind him, but kept his eye on the road which I now observed took a
short turn towards a house of so weird and ominous an appearance that I
scarcely marvelled at his precaution.

Situated on a level track of land at the crossing of three roads, its
spacious front, rude and unpainted as it was, presented every appearance
of an inn, but from its moss-grown chimneys no smoke arose, nor could
I detect any sign of life in its shutterless windows and closed doors,
across which shivered the dark shadow of the one gaunt and aged pine,
that stood like a guard beside its tumbled-down porch.

Mr. Blake seemed to have been struck by the same fact concerning its
loneliness, for hurriedly replacing his pistol in his breast pocket, he
rode slowly forward. I instantly conceived the plan of striking across
the belt of underbrush that separated me from this old dwelling, and by
taking my stand opposite its front, intercept a view of Mr. Blake as
he approached. Hastily dismounting, therefore, I led my horse into the
bushes and tied her to a tree, proceeding to carry out my plan on foot.
I was so far successful as to arrive at the further edge of the wood,
which was thick enough to conceal my presence without being too dense to
obstruct my vision, just as Mr. Blake passed on his way to this solitary
dwelling. He was looking very anxious, but determined. Turning my eyes
from him, I took another glance at the house, which by this movement I
had brought directly before me. It was even more deserted-looking than
I had thought; its unpainted front with its double row of blank windows
meeting your gaze without a response, while the huge old pine with half
its limbs dismantled of foliage, rattled its old bones against its sides
and moaned in its aged fashion like the solitary retainer of a dead
race.

I own I felt the cold shivers creep down my back as that creaking sound
struck my ears, though as the day was chill with an east wind I dare say
it was more the effect of my sudden cessation from exercise, than of
any superstitious awe I felt. Mr. Blake seemed to labor under no such
impressions. Riding up to the front door he knocked without dismounting,
on its dismal panels with his riding whip. No response was heard.
Knitting his brows impatiently, he tried the latch: the door was locked.
Hastily running his eye over the face of the building, he drew rein and
proceeded to ride around the house, which he could easily do owing
to the absence of every obstruction in the way of fence or shrubbery.
Finding no means of entrance he returned again to the front door which
he shook with an impatient hand that however produced no impression
upon the trusty lock, and recognizing, doubtless, the futility of his
endeavors, he drew back, and merely pausing to give one other look at
its deserted front, turned his horse’s head, and to my great amazement,
proceeded with sombre mien and clouded brow to retake the road to
Melville.

This old inn or decayed homestead was then the object of his lengthened
and tedious journey; this ancient house rotting away among the bleak
hills of Vermont, the bourne towards which his steps had been tending
for these past two days. I could not understand it. Rapidly emerging
from the spot where I had secreted myself, I in my turn made a circuit
of the house, if happily I should discover some loophole of entrance
which had escaped his attention. But every door and window was securely
barred, and I was about to follow his example and leave the spot, when
I saw two or three children advancing towards me down the cross roads,
gaily swinging their school books. I noticed they hesitated and huddled
together as they approached and saw me, but not heeding this, I accosted
them with a pleasant word or so, then pointing over my shoulder to the
house behind, asked who lived there. Instantly their already pale faces
grew paler.

“Why,” cried one, a boy, “don’t you know? That is where the two wicked
men lived who stole the money out of the Rutland bank. They were put in
prison, but they got away and--”

Here, the other, a little girl, plucked him by the sleeve with such
affright, that he himself took alarm and just giving me one quick stare
out of his wide eyes, grasped his companion by the hand and took to his
heels. As for myself I stood rooted to the ground in my astonishment.
This blank, sleepy old house the home of the notorious Schoenmakers
after whom half of the detectives of the country were searching? I could
scarcely credit my own ears. True I now remembered they had come from
these parts, still--

Turning round I eyed the house once more. How altered it looked to me!
What a murderous aspect it wore, and how dismally secret were the tight
shut windows and closely fastened doors, on one of which a rude cross
scrawled in red chalk met the eye with a mysterious significance. Even
the old pine had acquired the villainous air of the uncanny repositor of
secrets too dreadful to reveal, as it groaned and murmured to itself in
the keen east wind. Dark deeds and foul wrong seemed written all over
the fearful place, from the long strings of black moss that clung to
the worm-eaten eaves, to the worn stone with its great blotch of
something,--could it have been blood?--that served as a threshold to
the door. Suddenly with the quickness of lightning the thought flashed
across me, what could Mr. Blake, the aristocratic representative of New
York’s oldest family, have wanted in this nest of infamy? What errand
of hope, fear, despair, avarice or revenge, could have brought this
superior gentleman with his refined tastes and proudly reticent manners,
so many miles from home, to the forsaken den of a brace of hardy
villains whose name for two years now, had stood as the type of all that
was bold, bad and lawless, and for whom during the last six weeks the
prison had yawned, and the gallows hungered. Contemplation brought
no reply, and shocked at my own thoughts, I put the question by for
steadier brains than mine; and instead of trying further to solve it,
cast about how I was to gain entrance into this deserted building; for
to enter it I was more than ever determined, now that I had heard to
whom it had once belonged.

Examining with a glance the several roads that branched off in every
direction from where I stood, I found them all equally deserted. Even
the school children had disappeared in some one of the four or five
houses scattered in the remote distance.

If I was willing to enter upon any daring exploit, there was no one to
observe or interrupt. I resolved to make the attempt with which my mind
was full. This was to climb the old tree, and from one of the two or
three branches that brushed against the house, gain entrance at an
open garret window that stared at me from amid the pine’s dark needles.
Taking off my coat with a sigh over the immaculate condition of my new
cassimere trousers, I bent my energies to the task. A difficult one you
will say for a city lad, but thanks to fortune I was not brought up in
New York, and know how to climb trees with the best. With little more
than a scratch or so, I reached the window of which I have spoken,
and after a moment spent in regaining my breath, gave one spring and
accomplished my purpose. I alighted upon a heap of broken glass in a
large bare room. An ominous chill at once struck to my heart. Though
I am anything but a sensitive man as far as physical impressions are
concerned, there was something in the hollow echo that arose from the
four blank walls about me as my feet alighted on that rough, uncarpeted
floor, that struck a vague chill through my blood, and I actually
hesitated for the moment whether to pursue the investigations I had
promised myself, or beat a hasty retreat. A glance at the huge distorted
limbs swaying across the square of the open window decided me. It
was easy to enter by means of that unsteady support, but it would be
extremely unsafe to venture forth in that way. If I prized life and limb
I must seek some other method of egress. I at once put my apprehensions
in my pocket and entered upon my self imposed task.

A single glance was sufficient to exhaust the resources of the empty
garret in which I found myself. Two or three old chairs piled in one
corner, a rusty stove or so, a heap of tattered and decaying clothing,
were all that met my gaze. Taking my way, then, at once to the ladder,
whose narrow ends projecting above a hole in the garret floor, seemed
to proffer the means of reaching the rooms below, I proceeded to descend
into what to my excited imagination looked like a gulf of darkness. It
proved, however, to be nothing more nor less than an unlighted hall of
small dimensions, with a stair-case at one end and a door at the other,
which, upon opening I found myself in a large, square room whose immense
four-post bedstead entirely denuded of its usual accompaniments of bed
and bolster at once struck my eye and for a moment held it enchained.
There were other articles in the room; a disused bureau, a rocking
chair, even a table, but nothing had such a ghostly look as that antique
bedstead with its curtains of calico tied back over its naked framework,
like rags draped from the bare bones of a skeleton. Passing hurriedly
by, I tried a closet door or so, finding little, however, to reward my
search; and eager to be done with what was every moment becoming more
and more drearisome, I hastened across the floor to the front of the
house where I found another hall and a row of rooms that, while not
entirely stripped of furniture, were yet sufficiently barren to
offer little encouragement to my curiosity. One only, a small but not
uncomfortable apartment, showed any signs of having been occupied within
a reasonable length of time; and as I paused before its hastily spread
bed, thrown together as only a man would do it, and wondering why the
room was so dark, looked up and saw that the window was entirely covered
by an old shawl and a couple of heavy coats that had been hastily nailed
across it, I own I felt my hand go to my breast pocket almost as if I
expected to see the wild faces of the dreaded Schoenmakers start up all
aglare from one of the dim corners before me. Rushing to the window, I
tore down with one sweep of my arm both coat and shawl, and with a start
discovered that the window still possessed its draperies in the shape of
a pair of discolored and tattered curtains tied with ribbons that must
once have been brilliant and cheery of color.

Nor was this the only sign in the room of a bygone presence that had
possessed a taste for something beyond the mere necessities of life.
On the grim coarsely papered wall hung more than one picture; cut from
pictorial newspapers to be sure, but each and every one, if I may be
called a judge of such matters, possessing some quality of expression to
commend it to a certain order of taste. They were all strong pictures.
Vivid faces of men and women in daring positions; a hunter holding back
a jaguar from his throat; a soldier protecting his comrade from the
stroke; and most striking of all, a woman lissome as she was powerful,
starting aghast and horror stricken from--what? I could not tell; a
rough hand had stripped the remainder of the picture from the wall.

A bit of candle and a half sheet of a newspaper lay on the floor. I
picked up the paper. It was a Rutland Herald and bore the date of two
days before. As I read I realized what I had done. If these daring
robbers were not at this very moment in the house, they had been there,
and that within two or three days. The broken panes of glass in the
garret above were now explained. I was not the first one who had climbed
that creaking pine tree this fall.

Something like a sensible dread of a very possible danger now seized
hold of me. If I had stumbled upon these strangely subtile, yet
devilishly bold creatures in their secret lair, the pistol I carried was
not going to save me. Shut in like a fox in a hole, I had little to hope
for, if they once made their appearance at the stairhead or came upon me
from any of the dim halls of the crazy old dwelling, which I now began
to find altogether too large for my comfort. Stealing cautiously forth
from the room in which I had found so much to disconcert me, I crept
towards the front staircase and listened. All was deathly quiet. The
old pine tree moaned and twisted without, and from time to time the wind
came sweeping down the chimney with an unearthly shrieking sound that
was weirdly in keeping with the place. But within and below all was
still as the tomb, and though in no ways reassured, I determined to
descend and have the suspense over at once. I did so, pistol in hand
and ears stretched to their utmost to catch the slightest rustle, but no
sound came to disturb me, nor did I meet on this lower floor the sign of
any other presence in the house but my own. Passing hastily through what
appeared to be a sort of rude parlor, I stepped into the kitchen and
tried one of the windows. Finding I could easily lift it from the
inside, I drew my breath with ease for the first time since I had
alighted among the broken glass above, and turning back, deliberately
opened the door of the kitchen stove, and looked in. As I half expected,
I found a pile of partly charred rags, showing where the wretches had
burned their prison clothing, and proceeding further, picked up from
the ashes a ring which whether or not they were conscious of having
attempted to destroy in this way I cannot say, but which I thankfully
put in my pocket against the day it might be required as proof.

Discerning nothing more in that quarter inviting interest, I asked
myself if I had nerve to descend into the cellar. Finally concluding
that that was more than could be expected from any man in my position, I
gave one look of farewell to the damp and desolate walls about me, then
with a breath of relief jumped from the kitchen window again into the
light and air of day. As I did so I could swear I heard a door within
that old house swing on its hinges and softly close. With a thrill I
recognized the fact that it came from the cellar.

                        *      *      *      *

My thoughts on the road back to Melville were many and conflicting.
Chief above them all, however, rose the comfortable conclusion that in
the pursuit of one mysterious affair, I had stumbled, as is often the
case, upon the clue to another of yet greater importance, and by so
doing got a start that might yet redound greatly to my advantage. For
the reward offered for the recapture of the Schoenmakers was large, and
the possibility of my being the one to put the authorities upon their
track, certainly appeared after this day’s developements, open at least
to a very reasonable hope. At all events I determined not to let the
grass grow under my feet till I had informed the Superintendent of what
I had seen and heard that day in the old haunt of these two escaped
convicts.

Arrived at the public house in Melville, and learning that Mr. Blake had
safely returned there an hour before, I drew the landlord to one side
and asked what he could tell me about that old house of the two noted
robbers Schoenmaker, I had passed on my way back among the hills.

“Wa’al now,” replied he, “this is curious. Here I’ve just been answering
the gentleman up stairs a heap of questions concerning that self same
old place, and now you come along with another batch of them; just as
if that rickety old den was the only spot of interest we had in these
parts.”

“Perhaps that may be the truth,” I laughed. “Just now when the papers
are full of these rogues, anything concerning them must be of superior
interest of course.” And I pressed him again to give me a history of the
house and the two thieves who had inhabited it.

“Wa’al,” drawled he “‘taint much we know about them, yet after all it
may be a trifle too much for their necks some day. Time was when nobody
thought especial ill of them beyond a suspicion or so of their being
somewhat mean about money. That was when they kept an inn there, but
when the robbery of the Rutland bank was so clearly traced to them,
more than one man about here started up and said as how they had
always suspected them Shoenmakers of being villains, and even hinted at
something worse than robbery. But nothing beyond that one rascality has
yet been proved against them, and for that they were sent to jail for
twenty years as you know. Two months ago they escaped, and that is the
last known of them. A precious set, too, they are; the father being only
so much the greater rogue than the son as he is years older.”

“And the inn? When was that closed?”

“Just after their arrest.”

“Has’nt it been opened since?”

“Only once when a brace of detectives came up from Troy to investigate,
as they called it.”

“Who has the key?”

“Ah, that’s more than I can tell you.”

I dared not ask how my questions differed from those of Mr. Blake, nor
indeed touch upon that point in any way. I was chiefly anxious now
to return to New York without delay; so paying my bill I thanked the
landlord, and without waiting for the stage, remounted my horse and
proceeded at once to Putney where I was fortunate enough to catch the
evening train. By five o’clock next morning I was in New York where I
proceeded to carry out my programme by hastening at once to headquarters
and reporting my suspicions regarding the whereabouts of the
Schoenmakers. The information was received with interest and I had
the satisfaction of seeing two men despatched north that very day with
orders to procure the arrest of the two notable villains wherever found.



CHAPTER VIII. A WORD OVERHEARD


That evening I had a talk with Fanny over the area gate. She came out
when she saw me approach, with her eyes staring and her whole form in a
flutter.

“O,” she cried, “such things as I have heard this day!”

“Well,” said I, “what? let me hear too.” She put her hand on her heart.
“I never was so frightened,” whispered she, “I thought I should have
fainted right away. To hear that elegant lady use such a word as
crime,--”

“What elegant lady?” interrupted I. “Don’t begin in the middle of your
story, that’s a good girl; I want to hear it all.”

“Well,” said she, calming down a little, “Mrs. Daniels had a visitor
to-day, a lady. She was dressed--”

“O, now,” interrupted I for the second time, “you can leave that out.
Tell me what her name was and let the fol-de-rols go.”

“Her name?” exclaimed the girl with some sharpness, “how should I know
her name; she did’nt come to see me.”

“How did she look then? You saw her I suppose?”

“And was’nt that what I was telling you, when you stopped me. She looked
like a queen, that she did; as grand a lady as ever I see, in her velvet
dress sweeping over the floor, and her diamonds as big as--”

“Was she a dark woman?” I asked.

“Her hair was black and so were her eyes, if that is what you mean.”

“And was she very tall and proud looking?”

The girl nodded. “You know her?” whispered she.

“No,” said I, “not exactly; but I think I can tell who she is. And so
she called to-day on Mrs. Daniels, did she.”

“Yes, but I guess she knew master would be home before she got away.”

“Come,” said I, “tell me all about it; I’m getting impatient.”

“And ain’t I telling you?” said she. “It was about three o’clock this
afternoon, the time I go up stairs to dress, so I just hangs about in
the hall a bit, near the parlor door, and I hear her gossiping with Mrs.
Daniels almost as if she was an old friend, and Mrs. Daniels answering
her mighty stiffly and as if she was’nt glad to see her at all. But the
lady didn’t seem to mind, but went on talking as sweet as honey, and
when they came out, you would have thought she loved the old woman like
a sister to see her look into her face and say something about knowing
how busy she was, but that it would give her so much pleasure if she
would come some day to see her and talk over old times. But Mrs. Daniels
was’nt pleased a bit and showed plain enough she did’nt like the lady,
fine as she was in her ways. She was going to answer her too, but just
then the front door opened and Mr. Blake with his satchel in his hand,
came into the house. And how he did start, to be sure, when he saw them,
though he tried to say something perlite which she did’nt seem to take
to at all, for after muttering something about not expecting to see him,
she put her hand on the knob and was going right out. But he stopped her
and they went into the parlor together while Mrs. Daniels stood staring
after them like one mad, her hand held out with his bag and umbrella in
it, stiff as a statter in the Central Park. She did’nt stand so long,
though, but came running down the hall, as if she was bewitched. I was
dreadful flustered, for though I was hid behind the wall that juts out
there by the back stairs, I was afraid she would see me and shame me
before Mr. Blake. But she passed right by and never looked up. ‘There is
something dreadful mysterious in this,’ thought I, and I just made up
my mind to stay where I was till Mr. Blake and the lady should come out
again from the parlor. I did’nt have to wait very long. In a few minutes
the door opened and they stepped out, he ahead and she coming after. I
thought this was queer, he is always so dreadful perlite in his ways,
but I thought it was a deal queerer when I saw him go up the front
stairs, she hurrying after, looking I cannot tell you how, but awful
troubled and anxious, I should say.

“They went into that room of his he calls his studio and though I knew
it might cost me my place if I was found out, I could’nt help following
and listening at the keyhole.”

“And what did you hear?” I asked, for she paused to take breath.

“Well, the first thing I heard was a cry of pleasure from her, and the
words, ‘You keep that always before you? You cannot dislike me, then, as
much as you pretend.’ I don’t know what she meant nor what he did, but
he stepped across the room and I heard her cry out this time as if she
was hurt as well as awful surprised; and he talked and talked, and I
could’nt catch a word, he spoke so low; and by and by she sobbed just a
little, and I got scared and would have run away but she cried out with
a kind of shriek, ‘O, don’t say any more; to think that crime should
come into our family, the proudest in the land. How could you, Holman,
how could you.’ Yes,” the girl went on, flushing in her excitement till
she was as red as the cherry ribbons in her cap, “those were the very
words she used: ‘To think that crime should come into our family! the
proudest one in the land!’ And she called him by his first name, and
asked him how he could do it.”

“And what did Mr. Blake say?” returned I, a little taken back myself at
this result of my efforts with Fanny.

“O, I did’nt wait to hear. I did’nt wait for anything. If folks was
going to talk about such things as that, I thought I had better be
anywhere than listening at the keyhole. I went right up stairs I can
tell you.”

“And whom have you told of what you heard in the half dozen hours that
have gone by?”

“Nobody; how could you think so mean of me when I promised, and--”

It is not necessary to go any further into this portion of the
interview.

The Countess De Mirac possessed to its fullest extent the present fine
lady’s taste for bric-a-brac. So much I had learned in my inquiries
concerning her. Remembering this, I took the bold resolution of
profiting by this weakness of hers to gain admission to her presence,
she being the only one sharing Mr. Blake’s mysterious secret. Borrowing
a valuable antique from a friend of mine at that time in the business,
I made my appearance the very next day at her apartments, and sending
in an urgent request to see Madame, by the trim negress who answered my
summons, waited in some doubt for her reply.

It came all too soon; Madame was ill and could see no one. I was not,
however, to be baffled by one rebuff. Handing the basket I held to the
girl, I urged her to take it in and show her mistress what it contained,
saying it was a rare article which might never again come her way.

The girl complied, though with a doubtful shake of the head which was
anything but encouraging. Her incredulity, however, must have been
speedily rebuked, for she almost immediately returned without the
basket, saying Madame would see me.

My first thoughts upon entering the grand lady’s presence, was that the
girl had been mistaken, for I found the Countess walking the floor in an
abstracted way, drying a letter she had evidently but just completed, by
shaking it to and fro with an unsteady hand; the placque I had brought,
lying neglected on the table.

But at sight of my respectful form standing with bent head in the
doorway, she hurriedly thrust the letter into a book and took up the
placque. As she did so I marked her well and almost started at the
change I observed in her since that evening at the Academy. It was not
only that she was dressed in some sort of loose dishabille that was
in eminent contrast to the sweeping silks and satins in which I had
hitherto beheld her adorned; or that she was laboring under some
physical disability that robbed her dark cheek of the bloom that was its
chiefest charm. The change I observed went deeper than that; it was more
as if a light had been extinguished in her countenance. It was the same
woman I had beheld standing like a glowing column of will and strength
before the melancholy form of Mr. Blake, but with the will and strength
gone, and with them all the glow.

“She no longer hopes,” thought I, and already felt repaid for my
trouble.

“This is a very pretty article you have brought me,” said she with
something of the unrestrained love of art which she undoubtedly
possessed, showing itself through all her languor. “Where did it come
from, and what recommendations have you, to prove it is an honest sale
you offer me?”

“None,” returned I, ignoring with a reassuring smile the first question,
“except that I should not be afraid if all the police in New York knew I
was here with this fine placque for sale.”

She gave a shrug of her proud shoulder that bespoke the French Countess
and softly ran her finger round the edge of the placque.

“I don’t need anything more of this kind,” said she languidly;
“besides,” and she set it down with a fretful air, “I am in no mood to
buy this afternoon.” Then shortly, “What do you ask for it?”

I named a fabulous price.

She started and cast me a keen glance. “You had better take it to some
one else; I have no money to throw away.”

With a hesitating hand I lifted the placque towards the basket. “I would
very much like to sell it to you,” said I. “Perhaps--”

Just then a lady’s fluttering voice rose from the room beyond inquiring
for the Countess, and hurriedly taking the placque from my hand with
an impulsive “O there’s Amy,” she passed into the adjoining apartment,
leaving the door open behind her.

I saw a quick interchange of greetings between her and a fashionably
dressed lady, then they withdrew to one side with the ornament I had
brought, evidently consulting in regard to its merits. Now was my time.
The book in which she had placed the letter she had been writing lay on
the table right before me, not two inches from my hand. I had only
to throw back the cover and my curiosity would be satisfied. Taking
advantage of a moment when their backs were both turned, I pressed open
the book with a careful hand, and with one eye on them and one on the
sheet before me, managed to read these words:--


    MY DEAREST CECILIA.

    I have tried in vain to match the sample you sent me at Stewart’s,
    Arnold’s and McCreery’s. If you still insist upon making up the
    dress in the way you propose, I will see what Madame Dudevant can
    do for us, though I cannot but advise you to alter your plans and
    make the darker shade of velvet do. I went to the Cary reception
    last night and met Lulu Chittenden. She has actually grown old,
    but was as lively as ever. She created a great stir in Paris when
    she was there; but a husband who comes home two o’clock in the
    morning with bleared eyes and empty pockets, is not conducive to
    the preservation of a woman’s beauty. How she manages to retain
    her spirits I cannot imagine. You ask me news of cousin Holman. I
    meet him occasionally and he looks well, but has grown into the
    most sombre man you ever saw. In regard to certain hopes of which
    you have sometimes made mention, let me assure you they are no
    longer practicable. He has done what--

Here the conversation ceased in the other room, the Countess made a
movement of advance and I closed the book with an inward groan over my
ill-luck.

“It is very pretty,” said she with a weary air; “but as I remarked
before, I am not in the buying mood. If you will take half you mention,
I may consider the subject, but--”

“Pardon me, Madame,” I interrupted, being in no wise anxious to leave
the placque behind me, “I have been considering the matter and I hold to
my original price. Mr. Blake of Second Avenue may give it to me if you
do not.”

“Mr. Blake!” She eyed me suspiciously. “Do you sell to him?”

“I sell to anyone I can,” replied I; “and as he has an artist’s eye for
such things--”

Her brows knitted and she turned away. “I do not want it;” said she,
“sell it to whom you please.”

I took up the placque and left the room.



CHAPTER IX. A FEW GOLDEN HAIRS


When a few days from that I made my appearance before Mr. Gryce, it was
to find him looking somewhat sober. “Those Schoenmakers,” said he, “are
making a deal of trouble. It seems they escaped the fellows up north and
are now somewhere in this city, but where--”

An expressive gesture finished the sentence.

“Is that so?” exclaimed I. “Then we are sure to nab them. Given time and
a pair of low, restless German thieves, I will wager anything, our hands
will be upon them before the month is over. I only hope, when we do come
across them, it will not be to find their betters too much mixed up with
their devilish practices.” And I related to him what Fanny had told me a
few evenings before.

“The coil is tightening,” said he. “What the end will be I don’t know.
Crime, said she? I wish I knew in what blind hole of the earth that girl
we are after lies hidden.”

As if in answer to this wish the door opened and one of our men came
in with a letter in his hand. “Ha!” exclaimed Mr. Gryce, after he had
perused it, “look at that.”

I took the letter from his hand and read:

    The dead body of a girl such as you describe was found in the East
    river off Fiftieth Street this morning. From appearance has been
    dead some time. Have telegraphed to Police Headquarters for
    orders. Should you wish to see the body before it is removed to
    the Morgue or otherwise disturbed, please hasten to Pier 48 E. R.
                                                           GRAHAM.

“Come,” said I, “let’s go and see for ourselves. If it should be the
one--”

“The dinner party proposed by Mr. Blake for to-night, may have its
interruptions,” he remarked.

I do not wish to make my story any longer than is necessary, but I must
say that when in an hour or so later, I stood with Mr. Gryce before the
unconscious form of that poor drowned girl I felt an unusual degree
of awe stealing over me: there was so much mystery connected with this
affair, and the parties implicated were of such standing and repute.

I almost dreaded to see the covering removed from her face lest I should
behold, what? I could not have told if I had tried.

“A trim made body enough,” cried the official in charge as Mr. Gryce
lifted an end of the cloth that enveloped her and threw it back. “Pity
the features are not better preserved.”

“No need for us to see the features,” exclaimed I, pointing to the locks
of golden red hair that hung in tangled masses about her. “The hair is
enough; she is not the one.” And I turned aside, asking myself if it was
relief I felt.

To my surprise Mr. Gryce did not follow.

“Tall, thin, white face, black eyes.” I heard him whisper to himself.
“It is a pity the features are not better preserved.”

“But,” said I, taking him by the arm, “Fanny spoke particularly of
her hair being black, while this girl’s--Good heavens!” I suddenly
ejaculated as I looked again at the prostrate form before me. “Yellow
hair or black, this is the girl I saw him speaking to that day in
Broome Street. I remember her clothes if nothing more.” And opening my
pocketbook, I took out the morsel of cloth I had plucked that day from
the ash barrel, lifted up the discolored rags that hung about the body
and compared the two. The pattern, texture and color were the same.

“Well,” said Mr. Gryce, pointing to certain contusions, like marks from
the blow of some heavy instrument on the head and bared arms of the girl
before us; “he will have to answer me one question anyhow, and that
is, who this poor creature is who lies here the victim of treachery or
despair.” And turning to the official he asked if there were any other
signs of violence on the body.

The answer came deliberately, “Yes, she has evidently been battered to
death.”

Mr. Gryce’s lips closed with grim decision. “A most brutal murder,” said
he and lifting up the cloth with a hand that visibly trembled, he softly
covered her face.

“Well,” said I as we slowly paced back up the pier, “there is one thing
certain, she is not the one who disappeared from Mr. Blake’s house.”

“I am not so sure of that.”

“How!” said I. “You believed Fanny lied when she gave that description
of the missing girl upon which we have gone till now?”

Mr. Gryce smiled, and turning back, beckoned to the official behind us.
“Let me have that description,” said he, “which I distributed among the
Harbor Police some days ago for the identification of a certain corpse I
was on the lookout for.”

The man opened his coat and drew out a printed paper which at Mr.
Gryce’s word he put into my hand. It ran as follows:

    Look out for the body of a young girl, tall, well shaped but thin,
    of fair complexion and golden hair of a peculiar bright and
    beautiful color, and when found, acquaint me at once.
                                                            G.

“I don’t understand,” began I.

But Mr. Gryce tapping me on the arm said in his most deliberate tones,
“Next time you examine a room in which anything of a mysterious nature
has occurred, look under the bureau and if you find a comb there with
several long golden hairs tangled in it, be very sure before you draw
any definite conclusions, that your Fannys know what they are talking
about when they declare the girl who used that comb had black hair on
her head.”



CHAPTER X. THE SECRET OF MR. BLAKE’S STUDIO


“Mr. Blake is at dinner, sir, with company, but I will call him if you
say so.”

“No,” returned Mr. Gryce; “show us into some room where we can be
comfortable and we will wait till he has finished.”

The servant bowed, and stepping forward down the hall, opened the door
of a small and cosy room heavily hung with crimson curtains. “I will
let him know that you are here,” said he, and vanished towards the
dining-room.

“I doubt if Mr. Blake will enjoy the latter half of his bill of fare as
much as the first,” said I, drawing up one of the luxurious arm-chairs
to the side of my principal. “I wonder if he will break away from his
guests and come in here?”

“No; if I am not mistaken we shall find Mr. Blake a man of nerve. Not a
muscle of his face will show that he is disturbed.”

“Well,” said I, “I dread it.”

Mr. Gryce looked about on the gorgeous walls and the rich old fashioned
furniture that surrounded him, and smiled one of his grimmest smiles.

“Well, you may,” said he.

The next instant a servant stood in the doorway, bearing to our great
astonishment, a tray well set with decanter and glasses.

“Mr. Blake’s compliments, gentlemen,” said he, setting it down on the
table before us. “He hopes you will make yourselves at home and he will
see you as soon as possible.”

The humph! of Mr. Gryce when the servant had gone would have done your
soul good, also the look he cast at the pretty Dresden Shepherdess on
the mantel-piece, as I reached out my hand towards the decanter. Somehow
it made me draw back.

“I think we had better leave his wine alone,” said he.

And for half an hour we sat there, the wine untouched between us,
listening alternately to the sound of speech-making and laughter that
came from the dining-room, and the solemn ticking of the clock as it
counted out the seconds on the mantel-piece. Then the guests came in
from the table, filing before us past the open door on their way to
the parlors. They were all gentlemen of course--Mr. Blake never invited
ladies to his house--and gentlemen of well known repute. The dinner had
been given in honor of a certain celebrated statesman, and the character
of his guests was in keeping with that of the one thus complimented.

As they went by us gaily indulging in the jokes and light banter with
which such men season a social dinner, I saw Mr. Gryce’s face grow sober
by many a shade; and when in the midst of it all, we heard the voice
of Mr. Blake rise in that courteous and measured tone for which it
is distinguished, I saw him reach forward and grasp his cane with an
uneasiness I had never seen displayed by him before. But when some time
later, the guests having departed, the dignified host advanced with some
apology to where we were, I never beheld a firmer look on Mr. Gryce’s
face than that with which he rose and confronted him. Mr. Blake’s own
had not more character in it.

“You have called at a rather inauspicious time, Mr. Gryce,” said the
latter, glancing at the card which he held in his hand. “What may your
business be? Something to do with politics, I suppose.”

I surveyed the man in amazement. Was this great politician stooping
to act a part, or had he forgotten our physiognomies as completely as
appeared?

“Our business is not politics,” replied Mr. Gryce; “but fully as
important. May I request the doors be closed?”

I thought Mr. Blake looked surprised, but he immediately stepped to the
door and shut it. Then coming back, he looked at Mr. Gryce more closely
and a change took place in his manner.

“I think I have seen you before,” said he.

Mr. Gryce bowed with just the suspicion of a smile. “I have had the
honor of consulting you before in this very house,” observed he.

A look of full recognition passed over the dignified countenance of the
man before us.

“I remember,” said he, shrugging his shoulders in the old way. “You are
interested in some servant girl or other who ran away from this house a
week or so ago. Have you found her?” This with no apparent concern.

“We think we have,” rejoined Mr. Gryce with some solemnity. “The river
gives up its prey now and then, Mr. Blake.”

Still only that look of natural surprise.

“Indeed! You do not mean to say she has drowned herself? I am sorry for
that, a girl who had once lived in my house. What trouble could she have
had to drive her to such an act?”

Mr. Gryce advanced a step nearer the gentleman.

“That is what we have come here to learn,” said he with a deliberation
that yet was not lacking in the respect due to a man so universally
esteemed as Mr. Blake. “You who have seen her so lately ought to be able
to throw some light upon the subject at least.”

“Mr.--” he again glanced at the card, “Mr. Gryce,--excuse me--I believe
I told you when you were here before that I had no remembrance of this
girl at all. That if such a person was in my house I did not know it,
and that all questions put to me on that subject would be so much labor
thrown away.”

Mr. Gryce bowed. “I remember,” said he. “I was not alluding to any
connection you may have had with the girl in this house, but to the
interview you were seen to have with her on the corner of Broome Street
some days ago. You had such an interview, did you not?”

A flush, deep as it was sudden, swept over Mr. Blake’s usually unmoved
cheek. “You are transgressing sir,” said he and stopped. Though a man of
intense personal pride, he had but little of that quality called temper,
or perhaps if he had, thought it unwise to display it on this occasion.
“I saw and spoke to a girl on the corner of that street some days ago,”
 he went on more mildly, “but that she was the one who lived here,
I neither knew at the time nor feel willing to believe now without
positive proof.” Then in a deep ringing tone the stateliness of which it
would be impossible to describe, he inquired, “Have the city authorities
presumed to put a spy on my movements, that the fact of my speaking to
a poor forsaken creature on the corner of the street should be not only
noted but remembered?”

“Mr. Blake,” observed Mr. Gryce, and I declare I was proud of my
superior at that moment, “no man who is a true citizen and a
Christian should object to have his steps followed, when by his own
thoughtlessness, perhaps, he has incurred a suspicion which demands it.”

“And do you mean to say that I have been followed,” inquired he,
clenching his hand and looking steadily, but with a blanching cheek,
first at Mr. Gryce then at me.

“It was indispensable,” quoth that functionary gently.

The outraged gentleman riveted his gaze upon me. “In town and out of
town?” demanded he.

I let Mr. Gryce reply. “It is known that you have lately sought to visit
the Schoenmakers,” said he.

Mr. Blake drew a deep breath, cast his eyes about the handsome apartment
in which we were, let them rest for a moment upon a portrait that graced
one side of the wall, and which was I have since learned a picture of
his father, and slowly drew forward a chair. “Let me hear what your
suspicions are,” said he.

I noticed Mr. Gryce colored at this; he had evidently been met in a
different way from what he expected. “Excuse me,” said he, “I do not say
I have any suspicions; my errand is simply to notify you of the death of
the girl you were seen to speak with, and to ask whether or not you
can give us any information that can aid us in the matter before the
coroner.”

“You know I have not. If I have been as closely followed as you say, you
must know why I spoke to that girl and others, why I went to the house
of the Schoenmakers and--Do you know?” he suddenly inquired.

Mr. Gryce was not the man to answer such a question as that. He eyed the
rich signet ring that adorned the hand of the gentleman before him and
suavely smiled. “I am ready to listen to any explanations,” said he.

Mr. Blake’s haughty countenance became almost stern. “You consider you
have a right to demand them; let me hear why.”

“Well,” said Mr. Gryce with a change of tone, “you shall. Unprofessional
as it is, I will tell you why I, a member of the police force, dare
enter the house of such a man as you are, and put him the questions I
have concerning his domestic affairs. Mr. Blake, imagine yourself in
a detective’s office. A woman comes in, the housekeeper of a respected
citizen, and informs us that a girl employed by her as seamstress has
disappeared in a very unaccountable way from her master’s house
the night before; in fact been abducted as she thinks from certain
evidences, through the window. Her manner is agitated, her appeal for
assistance urgent, though she acknowledges no relationship to the girl
or expresses any especial cause for her interest beyond that of common
humanity. ‘She must be found,’ she declares, and hints that any sum
necessary will be forthcoming, though from what source after her own
pittance is expended she does not state. When asked if her master has
no interest in the matter, she changes color and puts us off. He never
noticed his servants, left all such concerns to her, etc.; but shows
fear when a proposition is made to consult him. Next imagine yourself
with the detectives in that gentleman’s house. You enter the girl’s
room; what is the first thing you observe? Why that it is not only one
of the best in the house, but that it is conspicuous for its comforts if
not for its elegancies. More than that, that there are books of poetry
and history lying around, showing that the woman who inhabited it was
above her station; a fact which the housekeeper is presently brought to
acknowledge. You notice also that the wild surmise of her abduction by
means of the window, has some ground in appearance, though the fact
that she went with entire unwillingness is not made so apparent. The
housekeeper, however, insists in a way that must have had some special
knowledge of the girl’s character or circumstances to back it, that she
never went without compulsion; a statement which the torn curtains
and the track of blood over the roof of the extension, would seem to
emphasize. A few other facts are made known. First, a pen-knife is
picked up from the grass plot in the yard beneath, showing with what
instrument the wound was inflicted, whose drippings made those marks of
blood alluded to. It was a pearl-handled knife belonging to the writing
desk found open on her table, and its frail and dainty character proved
indisputably, that it was employed by the girl herself, and that against
manifest enemies; no man being likely to snatch up any such puny weapon
for the purpose either of offence or defence. That these enemies were
two and were both men, was insisted upon by Mrs. Daniels who overheard
their voices the night before.

“Mr. Blake, such facts as these arouse curiosity, especially when
the master of the house being introduced upon the scene, he fails to
manifest common human interest, while his housekeeper betrays in every
involuntary gesture and expression she makes use of, her horror if not
her fear of his presence, and her relief at his departure. Yes,” he
exclaimed, unheeding the sudden look here cast him by Mr. Blake, “and
curiosity begets inquiry, and inquiry elucidated further facts such as
these, that the mysterious master of the house was in his garden at the
hour of the girl’s departure, was even looking through the bars of his
gate when she, having evidently escaped from her captors, came back with
every apparent desire to reenter her home, but seeing him, betrayed an
unreasonable amount of fear and fled back even into the very arms of
the men she had endeavored to avoid. Did you speak sir?” asked Mr. Gryce
suddenly stopping, with a sly look at his left boot tip.

Mr. Blake shook his head. “No,” said he shortly, “go on.” But that last
remark of Mr. Gryce had evidently made its impression.

“Inquiry revealed, also, two or three other interesting facts. First,
that this gentleman qualified though he was to shine in ladies’ society,
never obtruded himself there, but employed his leisure time instead, in
walking the lower streets of the city, where he was seen more than
once conversing with certain poor girls at street corners and in blind
alleys. The last one he talked with, believed from her characteristics
to be the same one that was abducted from his house--”

“Hold there,” said Mr. Blake with some authority in his tone, “there you
are mistaken; that is impossible.”

“Ah, and why?”

“The girl you allude to had bright golden hair, something which the
woman who lived in my house did not possess.”

“Indeed. I thought you had never noticed the woman who sewed for you,
sir,--did not know how she looked?”

“I should have noticed her if she had had such hair as the girl you
speak of.”

Mr. Gryce smiled and opened his pocketbook.

“There is a sample of her hair, sir,” said he, taking out a thin strand
of brilliant hair and showing it to the gentleman before him. “Bright
you see, and golden as that of the unfortunate creature you talked with
the other night.”

Mr. Blake stooped forward and lifted it with a hand that visibly
trembled. “Where did you get this?” asked he at last, clenching it to
his breast with sudden passion.

“From out of the comb which the girl had been using the night before.”

The imperious man flung it hastily from him.

“We waste our time,” said he, looking Mr. Gryce intently in the face.
“All that you have said does not account for your presence here nor the
tone you have used while addressing me. What are you keeping back? I am
not a man to be trifled with.”

Mr. Gryce rose to his feet. “You are right,” said he, and he gave a
short glance in my direction. “All that I have said would not perhaps
justify me in this intrusion, if--” he looked again towards me. “Do you
wish me to continue?” he asked.

Mr. Blake’s intent look deepened. “I see no reason why you should not
utter the whole,” said he. “A good story loses nothing by being told
to the end. You wish to say something about my journey to Schoenmaker’s
house, I suppose.”

Mr. Gryce gravely shook his head.

“What, you can let such a mystery as that go without a word?”

“I am not here to discuss mysteries that have no connection with the
sewing-girl in whose cause I am interested.”

“Then,” said Mr. Blake, turning for the first time upon my superior with
all the dignified composure for which he was eminent, “it is no
longer necessary for us to prolong this interview. I have allowed, nay
encouraged you to state in the plainest terms what it was you had or
imagined you had against me, knowing that my actions of late, seen by
those who did not possess the key to them, must have seemed a little
peculiar. But when you say you have no interest in any mystery
disconnected with the girl who has lived the last few months in
my house, I can with assurance say that it is time we quitted this
unprofitable conversation, as nothing which I have lately done, said or
thought here or elsewhere has in any way had even the remotest bearing
upon that individual; she having been a stranger to me while in my
house, and quite forgotten by me, after her unaccountable departure
hence.”

Mr. Gryce’s hand which had been stretched out towards the hitherto
untouched decanter before him, suddenly dropped. “You deny then,” said
he, “all connection between yourself and the woman, lady or sewing-girl,
who occupied that room above our heads for eleven months previous to the
Sunday morning I first had the honor to make your acquaintance.”

“I am not in the habit of repeating my assertions,” said Mr. Blake with
some severity, “even when they relate to a less disagreeable matter than
the one under discussion.”

Mr. Gryce bowed, and slowly reached out for his hat; I had never seen
him so disturbed. “I am sorry,” he began and stopped, fingering his
hat-brim nervously. Suddenly he laid his hat back, and drew up his form
into as near a semblance of dignity as its portliness would allow.

“Mr. Blake,” said he, “I have too much respect for the man I believed
you to be when I entered this house to-night, to go with the thing
unsaid which is lying at present like a dead weight upon my lips. I dare
not leave you to the consequence of my silence; for duty will compel
me to speak some day and in some presence where you may not have
the opportunity which you can have here, to explain yourself with
satisfaction. Mr. Blake I cannot believe you when you say the girl who
lived in this house was a stranger to you.”

Mr. Blake drew his proud form up in a disdain that was only held in
check by the very evident honesty of the man before him. “You
are courageous at least,” said he. “I regret you are not equally
discriminating.” And raising Mr. Gryce’s hat he placed it in his hand.

“Pardon me,” said that gentleman, “I would like to justify myself before
I go. Not with words,” he proceeded as the other folded his arms with a
sarcastic bow. “I am done with words; action accomplishes the rest. Mr.
Blake I believe you consider me an honest officer and a reliable man.
Will you accompany me to your private room for a moment? There is
something there which may convince you I was neither playing the fool
nor the bravado when I uttered the phrase I did an instant ago.”

I expected to hear the haughty master of the house refuse a request so
peculiar. But he only bowed, though in a surprised way that showed
his curiosity if no more was aroused. “My room and company are at your
disposal,” said he, “but you will find nothing there to justify you in
your assertions.”

“Let me at least make the effort,” entreated my superior.

Mr. Blake smiling bitterly immediately led the way to the door. “The
man may come,” he remarked carelessly as Mr. Gryce waved his hand in my
direction. “Your justification if not mine may need witnesses.”

Rejoiced at the permission, for my curiosity was by this time raised to
fever pitch, I at once followed. Not without anxiety. The assured poise
of Mr. Blake’s head seemed to argue that the confidence betrayed by my
superior might receive a shock; and I felt it would be a serious blow
to his pride to fail now. But once within the room above, my doubts
speedily fled. There was that in Mr. Gryce’s face which anyone
acquainted with him could not easily mistake. Whatever might be
the mysterious something which the room contained, it was evidently
sufficient in his eyes to justify his whole conduct.

“Now sir,” said Mr. Blake, turning upon my superior with his sternest
expression, “the room and its contents are before you; what have you to
say for yourself.”

Mr. Gryce equally stern, if not equally composed, cast one of his
inscrutable glances round the apartment and without a word stepped
before the picture that was as I have said, the only ornamentation of
the otherwise bare and unattractive room.

I thought Mr. Blake looked surprised, but his face was not one that
lightly expressed emotion.

“A portrait of my cousin the Countess De Mirac,” said he with a certain
dryness of tone hard to interpret.

Mr. Gryce bowed and for a moment stood looking with a strange lack of
interest at the proudly brilliant face of the painting before him, then
to our great amazement stepped forward and with a quick gesture turned
the picture rapidly to the wall, when--Gracious heavens! what a vision
started out before us from the reverse side of that painted canvas! No
luxurious brunette countenance now, steeped in pride and languor, but a
face--Let me see if I can describe it. But no, it was one of those faces
that are indescribable. You draw your breath as you view it; you feel as
if you had had an electric shock; but as for knowing ten minutes later
whether the eyes that so enthralled you were blue or black, or the locks
that clustered halo-like about a forehead almost awful in its expression
of weird, unfathomable power, were brown or red, you could not nor would
you pretend to say. It was the character of the countenance itself that
impressed you. You did not even know if this woman who might have been
anything wonderful or grand you ever read of, were beautiful or not. You
did not care; it was as if you had been gazing on a tranquil evening
sky and a lightning flash had suddenly startled you. Is the lightning
beautiful? Who asks! But I know from what presently transpired, that
the face was ivory pale in complexion, the eyes deeply dark, and the
hair,--strange and uncanny combination,--of a bright and peculiar golden
hue.

“You dare!” came forth in strange broken tones from Mr. Blake’s lips.

I instantly turned towards him. He was gazing with a look that was half
indignant, half menacing at the silent detective who with eyes drooped
and finger directed towards the picture, seemed to be waiting for him to
finish.

“I do not understand an audacity that allows you to--to--” Was this
the haughty gentleman we had known, this hesitating troubled man with
bloodless lips and trembling hands?

“I declared my desire to justify myself,” said my principal with a
respectful bow. “This is my justification. Do you note the color of the
woman’s hair whose portrait hangs with its face turned to the wall in
your room? Is it like or unlike that of the strand you held in your hand
a few moments ago; a strand taken as I swear, hair by hair from the comb
of the poor creature who occupied the room above. But that is not all,”
 he continued as Mr. Blake fell a trifle aback; “just observe the dress
in which this woman is painted; blue silk you see, dark and rich; a wide
collar cunningly executed, you can almost trace the pattern; a brooch;
then the roses in the hand, do you see? Now come with me upstairs.”

Too much startled to speak, Mr. Blake, haughty aristocrat as he was,
turned like a little child and followed the detective who with an
assured step and unembarassed mien led the way into the deserted room
above.

“You accuse me of insulting you, when I express disbelief of your
assertion that there was no connection between you and the girl Emily,”
 said Mr. Gryce as he lit the gas and unlocked that famous bureau drawer.
“Will you do so any longer in face of these?” And drawing off the towel
that lay uppermost, he revealed the neatly folded dress, wide collar,
brooch and faded roses that lay beneath. “Mrs. Daniels assures us these
articles belonged to the sewing-woman Emily; were brought here by her.
Dare you say they are not the ones reproduced in the portrait below?”

Mr. Blake uttering a cry sank on his knees before the drawer. “My God!
My God!” was his only reply, “what are these?” Suddenly he rose, his
whole form quivering, his eyes burning. “Where is Mrs. Daniels?” he
cried, hastily advancing and pulling the bell. “I must see her at once.
Send the house-keeper here,” he ordered as Fanny smiling demurely made
her appearance at the door.

“Mrs. Daniels is out,” returned the girl, “went out as soon as ever you
got up from dinner, sir.”

“Gone out at this hour?”

“Yes sir; she goes out very often nowadays, sir.”

Her master frowned. “Send her to me as soon as she returns,” he
commanded, and dismissed the girl.

“I don’t know what to make of this,” he now said in a strange tone,
approaching again the touching contents of that open bureau drawer with
a look in which longing and doubt seemed in some way to be strangely
commingled. “I cannot explain the presence of these articles in this
room; but if you will come below I will see what I can do to make other
matters intelligible to you. Disagreeable as it is for me to take anyone
into my confidence, affairs have gone too far for me to hope any longer
to preserve secrecy as to my private concerns.”



CHAPTER XI. LUTTRA


“Gentlemen,” said he as he ushered us once more into his studio, “you
have presumed, and not without reason I should say, to infer that the
original of this portrait and the woman who has so long occupied the
position of sewing-woman in my house, are one and the same. You will no
longer retain that opinion when I inform you that this picture, strange
as it may appear to you, is the likeness of my wife.”

“Wife!” We both were astonished as I take it, but it was my voice which
spoke. “We were ignorant you ever had a wife.”

“No doubt,” continued our host smiling bitterly, “that at least has
evaded the knowledge even of the detectives.” Then with a return to
his naturally courteous manner, “She was never acknowledged by me as my
wife, nor have we ever lived together, but if priestly benediction can
make a man and woman one, that woman as you see her there is my lawful
wife.”

Rising, he softly turned the lovely, potent face back to the wall,
leaving us once more confronted by the dark and glowing countenance of
his cousin.

“I am not called upon,” said he, “to go any further with you than this.
I have told you what no man till this hour has ever heard from my lips,
and it should serve to exonerate me from any unjust suspicions you may
have entertained. But to one of my temperament, secret scandal and the
gossip it engenders is only less painful than open notoriety. If I leave
the subject here, a thousand conjectures will at once seize upon you,
and my name if not hers will become, before I know it, the football of
gossip if not of worse and deeper suspicion than has yet assailed me.
Gentleman I take you to be honest men; husbands, perhaps, and fathers;
proud, too, in your way and jealous of your own reputation and that of
those with whom you are connected. If I succeed in convincing you that
my movements of late have been totally disconnected with the girl whose
cause you profess solely to be interested in, may I count upon your
silence as regards those actions and the real motive that led to them?”

“You may count upon my discretion as regards all matters that do not
come under the scope of police duty,” returned Mr. Gryce. “I haven’t
much time for gossip.”

“And your man here?”

“O, he’s safe where it profits him to be.”

“Very well, then, I shall count upon you.”

And with the knitted brows and clinched hands of a proudly reticent
man who, perhaps for the first time in his life finds himself forced to
reveal his inner nature to the world, he began his story in these words:

“Difficult as it is for me to introduce into a relation like this the
name of my father, I shall be obliged to do so in order to make my
conduct at a momentous crisis of my life intelligible to you. My father,
then, was a man of strong will and a few but determined prejudices.
Resolved that I should sustain the reputation of the family for wealth
and respectability, he gave me to understand from my earliest years,
that as long as I preserved my manhood from reproach, I had only to make
my wishes known, to have them immediately gratified; while if I crossed
his will either by indulging in dissipation or engaging in pursuits
unworthy of my name, I no longer need expect the favor of his
countenance or the assistance of his purse.

“When, therefore, at a certain period of my life, I found that the
charms of my cousin Evelyn were making rather too strong an impression
upon my fancy for a secured peace of mind, I first inquired how such a
union would affect my father, and learning that it would be in direct
opposition to his views, cast about in my mind what I should do to
overcome my passion. Travel suggested itself, and I took a trip to
Europe. But the sight of new faces only awakened in me comparisons
anything but detrimental to the beauty of her who was at that time my
standard of feminine loveliness. Nature and the sports connected with a
wild life were my next resort. I went overland to California, roamed the
orange groves of Florida, and probed the wildernesses of Canada and
our Northern states. It was during these last excursions that an event
occurred which has exercised the most material influence upon my fate,
though at the time it seemed to me no more than the matter of a day.

“I had just returned from Canada and was resting in tolerable enjoyment
of a very beautiful autumn at Lake George, when a letter reached me
from a friend then loitering in the vicinity, urging me to join him in
a certain small town in Vermont where trout streams abounded and what is
not so often the case under the circumstances, fishers were few.

“Being in a somewhat reckless mood I at once wrote a consent, and before
another day was over, started for the remote village whence his letter
was postmarked. I found it by no means easy of access. Situated in the
midst of hills some twenty miles or so distant from any railroad, I
discovered that in order to reach it, a long ride in a stage-coach was
necessary, followed by a somewhat shorter journey on horseback. Not
being acquainted with the route, I timed my connections wrong, so that
when evening came I found myself riding over a strange road in the
darkest night I had ever known. As if this was not enough, my horse
suddenly began to limp and presently became so lame I found it
impossible to urge her beyond a slow walk. It was therefore with no
ordinary satisfaction that I presently beheld a lighted building in the
distance, which as I approached resolved itself into an inn. Stopping
in front of the house, which was closed against the chill night air,
I called out lustily for someone to take my horse, whereupon the door
opened and a man appeared on the threshold with a lantern in his hand. I
at once made my wishes known, receiving in turn a somewhat gruff,

“‘Well it is a nasty night and it will be nastier before it’s over;’ an
opinion instantly endorsed by a sudden swoop of wind that rushed by at
that moment, slamming the door behind him and awakening over my head a
lugubrious groaning as from the twisting boughs of some old tree, that
was almost threatening in its character.

“‘You had better go in,’ said he, ‘the rain will come next.’

“I at once leaped from my horse and pushing open the door with main
strength, entered the house. Another man met me on the threshold who
merely pointing over his shoulder to a lighted room in his rear, passed
out without a word, to help the somewhat younger man, who had first
appeared, in putting up my horse. I at once accepted his silent
invitation and stepped into the room before me. Instantly I found myself
confronted by the rather startling vision of a young girl of a unique
and haunting style of beauty, who rising at my approach now stood with
her eyes on my face and her hands resting on the deal table before which
she had been sitting, in an attitude expressive of mingled surprise
and alarm. To see a woman in that place was not so strange; but such
a woman! Even in the first casual glance I gave her, I at once
acknowledged to myself her extraordinary power. Not the slightness of
her form, the palor of her countenance, or the fairness of the locks of
golden red hair that fell in two long braids over her bosom, could for
a moment counteract the effect of her dark glance or the vivid almost
unearthly force of her expression. It was as if you saw a flame
upstarting before you, waving tremulously here and there, but burning
and resistless in its white heat. I took off my hat with deference.

“A shudder passed over her, but she made no effort to return my
acknowledgement. As we cast our eyes dilating with horror, down some
horrible pit upon whose verge we suddenly find ourselves, she allowed
her gaze for a moment to dwell upon my face, then with a sudden lifting
of her hand, pointed towards the door as if to bid me depart--when it
swung open with that shrill rushing of wind that involuntarily awakes a
shudder within you, and the two men entered and came stamping up to my
side. Instantly her hand sunk, not feebly as with fear, but calmly as if
at the bidding of her will, and without waiting for them to speak, she
turned away and quietly left the room. As the door closed upon her I
noticed that she wore a calico frock and that her face did not own one
perfect feature.

“‘Go after Luttra and tell her to make up the bed in the northwest
room,’ said the elder of the two in deep gutteral tones unmistakably
German in their accent, to the other who stood shaking the wet off his
coat into the leaping flames of a small wood fire that burned on the
hearth before us.

“‘O, she’ll do without my bothering,’ was the sullen return. ‘I’m wet
through.’

“The elder man, a large powerfully framed fellow of some fifty years or
so, frowned. It was an evil frown, and the younger one seemed to feel
it. He immediately tossed his coat onto a chair and left the room.

“‘Boys are so obstropolous now-a-days,’ remarked his companion to me
with what he evidently intended for a conciliatory nod. ‘In my time they
were broke in, did what they were told and asked no questions.’

“I smiled to myself at his calling the broad shouldered six-footer who
had just left us a boy, but merely remarking, ‘He is your son is he
not!’ seated myself before the blaze which shot up a tongue of white
flame at my approach, that irresistibly recalled to my fancy the
appearance of the girl who had gone out a moment before.

“‘O, yes, he is my son, and that girl you saw here was my daughter; I
keep this inn and they help me, but it is a slow way to live, I can tell
you. Travel on these roads is slim.’

“‘I should think likely,’ I returned, remembering the half dozen or so
hills up which I had clambered since I took to my horse. ‘How far are we
from Pentonville?’

“‘O, two or three miles,’ he replied, but in a hurried kind of a way.
‘Not far in the daytime but a regular journey in a night like this?’

“‘Yes,’ said I, as the house shook under a fresh gust; ‘it is fortunate
I have a place in which to put up.’

“He glanced down at my baggage which consisted of a small hand bag,
an over-coat and a fishing pole, with something like a gleam of
disappointment.

“‘Going fishing?’ he asked.

“‘Yes,’ I returned.

“‘Good trout up those streams and plenty of them,’ he went on. ‘Going
alone?’

“I did not half like his importunity, but considering I had nothing
better to do, replied as affably as possible. ‘No, I expect to meet a
friend in Pentonville who will accompany me.”

“His hand went to his beard in a thoughtful attitude and he cast me
what, with my increased experience of the world, I should now consider a
sinister glance. ‘Then you are expected?’ said he.

“Not considering this worth reply, I stretched out my feet to the blaze
and began to warm them, for I felt chilled through.

“‘Been on the road long?’ he now asked, glancing at the blue flannel
suit I wore.

“‘All summer,’ I returned,

“I again thought he looked disappointed.

“‘From Troy or New York?’ he went on with a vague endeavor to appear
good naturally off hand.

“‘New York.’

“‘A big place that,’ he continued. ‘I was there once, lots of money
stored away in them big buildings down in Wall Street, eh?’

“I assented, and he drew a chair up to my side, a proceeding that was
interrupted, however, by the reentrance of his son, who without any
apology crowded into the other side of the fire-place in a way to
sandwich me between them. Not fancying this arrangement which I,
however, imputed to ignorance, I drew back and asked if my room was
ready. It seemed it was not, and unpleasantly as it promised, I felt
forced to reseat myself and join in, if not support, the conversation
that followed.

“A half hour passed away, during which the wind increased till it almost
amounted to a gale. Spurts of rain dashed against the windows with a
sharp crackling sound that suggested hail, while ever and anon a distant
roll as of rousing thunder, rumbled away among the hills in a long and
reverberating peal, that made me feel glad to be housed even under the
roof of these rude and uncongenial creatures. Suddenly the conversation
turned upon the time and time-pieces, when in a low even tone I heard
murmured behind me,

“‘The gentleman’s room is ready;’ and turning, I saw standing in
the doorway the slight figure of the young girl whose appearance had
previously so impressed me.

“I immediately arose. ‘Then I will proceed to it at once,’ said I,
taking up my traps and advancing towards her.

“‘Do not be alarmed if you hear creaks and cracklings all over the
house,’ observed the landlord as I departed. ‘The windows are loose and
the doors ill-fitting. In such a storm as this they make noise enough
to keep an army awake. The house is safe enough though and if you don’t
mind noise--’

“‘O I don’t mind noise,’ rejoined I, feeling at that moment tired enough
to fall into a doze on the staircase. ‘I shall sleep, never fear,’ and
without further ado followed the girl upstairs into a large clumsily
furnished room whose enormous bed draped with heavy curtains at once
attracted my attention.

“‘O I cannot sleep under those things,’ remarked I, with a gesture
towards the dismal draperies which to me were another name for
suffocation.

“With a single arm-sweep she threw them back. ‘Is there anything more I
can do for you?’ asked she, glancing hastily about the room.

“I thanked her and said ‘no,’ at which she at once departed with a look
of still determination upon her countenance that I found it hard to
explain.

“Left alone in that large, bare and dimly lighted room, with the wind
shrieking in the chimney and the powerful limbs of some huge tree
beating against the walls without, with a heavy thud inexpressibly
mournful, I found to my surprise and something like dismay, that the
sleepiness which had hitherto oppressed me, had in some unaccountable
way entirely fled. In vain I contemplated the bed, comfortable enough
now in its appearance that the stifling curtains were withdrawn; no
temptation to invade it came to arouse me from the chair into which I
had thrown myself. It was as if I felt myself under the spell of some
invisible influence that like the eye of a basilisk, held me enchained.
I remember turning my head towards a certain quarter of the wall as if
I half expected to encounter there the bewildering glance of a serpent.
Yet far from being apprehensive of any danger, I only wondered over the
weakness of mind that made such fancies possible.

“An extra loud swirl of the foliage without, accompanied by a quick
vibration of the house, aroused me at last. If I was to lose the sense
of this furious storm careering over my head, I must court sleep at
once. Rising, I drew off my coat, unloosened my vest and was about to
throw it off, when I bethought me of a certain wallet it contained.
Going to the door in some unconscious impulse of precaution I suppose, I
locked myself in, and then drawing out my wallet, took from it a roll of
bills which I put into a small side pocket, returning the wallet to its
old place.

“Why I did this I can scarcely say. As I have before intimated, I
was under no special apprehension. I was at that time anything but a
suspicious man, and the manner and appearance of the men below struck me
as unpleasantly disagreeable but nothing more. But I not only did what I
have related, but allowed the lamp to remain lighted, lying down finally
in my clothes; an almost unprecedented act on my part, warranted however
as I said to myself, by the fury of the gale which at that time seemed
as if it would tumble the roof over our heads.

“How long I lay listening to the creakings and groanings of the rickety
old house, I cannot say, nor how long I remained in the doze which
finally seized me as I became accustomed to the sounds around and over
me. Enough that before the storm had passed its height, I awoke as if at
the touch of a hand, and leaping with a bound out of the bed, beheld
to my incredible amazement, the alert, nervous form of Luttra standing
before me. She had my coat in her hand, and it was her touch that had
evidently awakened me.

“‘I want you to put this on,’ said she in a low thrilling tone totally
new in my experience, ‘and come with me. The house is unsafe for you to
remain in. Hear how it cracks and trembles. Another blast like that and
we shall be roofless.’

“She was moving toward the door, which to my amazement stood ajar, but
my hesitation stopped her.

“‘Won’t you come?’ she whispered, turning her face towards me with a
look of such potent determination, I followed in spite of myself ‘I dare
not let you stay here, your blood will be upon my head.’

“‘You exaggerate,’ I replied, shrinking back with a longing look at the
comfortable bed I had just left. ‘These old houses are always strong.
It will take many such a gust as that you hear, to overturn it, I assure
you.’

“‘I exaggerate!’ she returned with a look of scorn impossible to
describe. ‘Hark!’ she said, ‘hear that.’

“I did hear, and I must acknowledge that it seemed is if we were about
to be swept from our foundations.

“‘Yes,’ said I, ‘but it is a fearful night to be out in.’

“‘I shall go with you,’ said she.

“‘In that case--’ I began with an ill-advised attempt at gallantry which
she cut short with a gesture.

“‘Here is your hat,’ remarked she, ‘and here is your bag. The
fishing-pole must remain, you cannot carry it.’

“‘But,--’ I expostulated.

“‘Hush!’ said she with her ear turned towards the depths of the
staircase at the top of which we stood. ‘My father and brother will
think as you do that it is folly to leave the shelter of a roof for the
uncertainties of the road on such a night as this, but you must not heed
them. I tell you shelter this night is danger, and that the only safety
to be found is on the stormy highway.’

“And without waiting for my reply, she passed rapidly down stairs,
pushed open a door at the bottom, and stepped at once into the room we
had left an hour or so before.

“What was there in that room that for the first time struck an ominous
chill as of distinct peril through my veins? Nothing at first sight,
everything at the second. The fire which had not been allowed to die
out, still burned brightly on the ruddy hearthstone, but it was not that
which awakened my apprehension. Nor was it the loud ticking clock on the
mantel-piece with its hand pointing silently to the hour of eleven. Nor
yet the heavy quiet of the scantily-furnished room with its one lamp
burning on the deal table against the side of the wall. It was the sight
of those two powerful men drawn up in grim silence, the one against the
door leading to the front hall, the other against that opening into the
kitchen.

“A glance at Luttra standing silent and undismayed at my side, however,
instantly reassured me. With that will exercised in my favor, I could
not but win through whatever it was that menaced me. Slinging my bag
over my shoulder, I made a move towards the door and the silent figure
of my host. But with a quick outreaching of her hand, she drew me back.

“‘Stand still!’ said she. ‘Karl,’ she went on, turning her face towards
the more sullen but less intent countenance of her brother, ‘open the
door and let this gentleman pass. He finds the house unsafe in such a
gale and desires to leave it. At once!’ she continued as her brother
settled himself more determinedly against the lock: ‘I don’t often ask
favors.’

“‘The man is a fool that wants to go out in a night like this,’ quoth
the fellow with a dogged move; ‘and so are you to encourage it. I think
too much of your health to allow it.’

“She did not seem to hear. ‘Will you open the door?’ she went on, not
advancing a step from the fire, before which she had placed herself and
me.’

“‘No, I won’t,’ was the brutal reply. ‘Its been locked for the night and
its not me nor one like me, that will open it.’

“With a sudden whitening of her already pale face, she turned towards
her father. He was not even looking at her.

“‘Some one must open the house,’ said she, glancing back at her brother.
‘This gentleman purposes to leave and his whim must be humored. Will you
unlock that door or shall I?’

“An angry snarl interrupted her. Her father had bounded from the door
where he stood and was striding hastily towards her. In my apprehension
I put up my arm for a shield, for he looked ready to murder her, but
I let it drop again as l caught her glance which was like white flame
undisturbed by the least breeze of personal terror.

“‘You will stop there,’ said she, pointing to a spot a few feet from
where she stood. ‘Another step and I let that for which I have heard
you declare you would peril your very soul, fall into the heart of the
flames.’ And drawing from her breast a roll of bills, she stretched them
out above the fire before which she was standing.

“‘You -----’ broke from the gray-bearded lips of the old man, but he
stopped where he was, eyeing those bills as if fascinated.

“‘I am not a girl of many words, as you know,’ continued she in a lofty
tone inexpressibly commanding. ‘You may strangle me, you may kill me,
it matters little; but this gentleman leaves the house this night, or I
destroy the money with a gesture.’

“‘You -----’ again broke from those quivering lips, but the old man did
not move.

“Not so the younger. With a rush he left his post and in another instant
would have had his powerful arms about her slender form, only that I
met him half way with a blow that laid him on the floor at her feet.
She said nothing, but one of the bills immediately left her hand and
fluttered into the fire where it instantly shrivelled into nothing.

“With the yell of a mad beast wounded in his most vulnerable spot, the
old man before us stamped with his heel upon the floor.

“‘Stop!’ cried he; and going rapidly to the front door he opened it.
‘There!’ shrieked he, ‘if you will be fools, go! and may the lightning
blast you. But first give me the money.’

“‘Come from the door,’ said she, reaching out her left hand for the
lantern hanging at the side of the fireplace, ‘and let Karl light this
and keep himself out of the way.’

“It was all done. In less time than I can tell it, the old man had
stepped from the door, the younger one had lit the lantern and we were
in readiness to depart.

“‘Now do you proceed,’ said she to me, ‘I will follow.’

“‘No,’ said I, ‘we will go together.’

“‘But the money?’ growled the heavy voice of my host over my shoulder.

“‘I will give it to you on my return,’ said the girl.”



CHAPTER XII. A WOMAN’S LOVE


“Shall I ever forget the blast of driving rain that struck our faces and
enveloped us in a cloud of wet, as the door swung on its hinges and let
us forth into the night; or the electric thrill that shot through me as
that slender girl grasped my hand and drew me away through the blinding
darkness. It was not that I was so much affected by her beauty as
influenced by her power and energy. The fury of the gale seemed to bend
to her will, the wind lend wings to her feet. I began to realize what
intellect was. Arrived at the roadside, she paused and looked back. The
two burly forms of the men we had left behind us were standing in the
door of the inn; in another moment they had plunged forth and towards
us. With a low cry the young girl leaped towards a tree where to
my unbounded astonishment I beheld my horse standing ready saddled.
Dragging the mare from her fastenings, she hung the lantern, burning as
it was, on the pommel of the saddle, struck the panting creature a smart
blow upon the flank, and drew back with a leap to my side.

“The startled horse snorted, gave a plunge of dismay and started away
from us down the road.

“‘We will wait,’ said Luttra.

“The words were no sooner out of her mouth than her father and brother
rushed by.

“‘They will follow the light,’ whispered she; and seizing me again by
the hand, she hurried me away in the direction opposite to that
which the horse had taken. ‘If you will trust me, I will bring you to
shelter,’ she murmured, bending her slight form to the gusty wind but
relaxing not a whit of her speed.

“‘You are too kind,’ I murmured in return. ‘Why should you expose
yourself to such an extent for a stranger?’

“Her hand tightened on mine, but she did not reply, and we hastened
on as speedily as the wind and rain would allow. After a short but
determined breasting of the storm, during which my breath had nearly
failed me, she suddenly stopped.

“‘Do you know,’ she exclaimed in a low impressive tone, ‘that we are on
the verge of a steep and dreadful precipice? It runs along here for a
quarter of a mile and it is not an uncommon thing for a horse and rider
to be dashed over it in a night like this.’

“There was something in her manner that awakened a chill in my veins
almost as if she had pointed out some dreadful doom which I had
unwittingly escaped.

“‘This is, then, a dangerous road,’ I murmured.

“‘Very,’ was her hurried and almost incoherent reply.

“How far we travelled through the mud and tangled grasses of that
horrible road I do not know. It seemed a long distance; it was probably
not more than three quarters of a mile. At last she paused with a short
‘Here we are;’ and looking up, I saw that we were in front of a small
unlighted cottage.

“No refuge ever appeared more welcome to a pair of sinking wanderers I
am sure. Wet to the skin, bedrabbled with mud, exhausted with breasting
the gale, we stood for a moment under the porch to regain our breath,
then with her characteristic energy she lifted the knocker and struck a
smart blow on the door.

“‘We will find shelter here,’ said she.

“She was not mistaken. In a few moments we were standing once more
before a comfortable fire hastily built by the worthy couple whose
slumbers we had thus interrupted. As I began to realize the sweetness of
conscious safety, all that this young, heroic creature had done for me
swept warmly across my mind. Looking up from the fire that was beginning
to infuse its heat through my grateful system, I surveyed her as she
slowly undid her long braids and shook them dry over the blaze, and
almost started to see how young she was. Not more than sixteen I should
say, and yet what an invincible will shone from her dark eyes and
dignified her slender form; a will gentle as it was strong, elevated
as it was unbending. I bowed my head as I watched her, in grateful
thankfulness which I presently put into words.

“At once she drew herself erect. ‘I did but my duty,’ said she quietly.
‘I am glad I was prospered in it.’ Then slowly. ‘If you are grateful,
sir, will you promise to say nothing of--of what took place at the inn?’

“Instantly I remembered a suspicion which had crossed my mind while
there, and my hand went involuntarily to my vest pocket. The roll of
bills was gone.

“She did not falter. ‘I would be relieved if you would,’ continued she.

“I drew out my empty hand, looked at it, but said nothing.

“‘Have you lost anything?’ asked she. ‘Search in your overcoat pockets.’

“I plunged my hand into the one nearest her and drew it out with
satisfaction; the roll of bills was there. ‘I give you my promise,’ said
I.

“‘You will find a bill missing,’ she murmured; ‘for what amount I do not
know; the sacrifice of something was inevitable.’

“‘I can only wonder over the ingenuity you displayed, as well as express
my appreciation for your bravery,’ returned I with enthusiasm. ‘You are
a noble girl.’

“She put out her hand as if compliments hurt her. ‘It is the first time
they have ever attempted anything like that,’ cried she in a quick low
tone full of shame and suffering. ‘They have shown a disposition to--to
take money sometimes, but they never threatened life before. And they
did threaten yours. They saw you take out your money, through a hole
pierced in the wall of the room you occupied, and the sight made them
mad. They were going to kill you and then tumble you and your horse over
the precipice below there. But I overheard them talking and when they
went out to saddle the horse, I hurried up to your room to wake you. I
had to take possession of the bills; you were not safe while you held
them. I took them quietly because I hoped to save you without betraying
them. But I failed in that. You must remember they are my father and my
brother.’

“‘I will not betray them,’ said I.

“She smiled. It was a wintry gleam but it ineffably softened her face. I
became conscious of a movement of pity towards her.

“‘You have a hard lot,’ remarked I. ‘Your life must be a sad one.’

“She flashed upon me one glance of her dark eye. ‘I was born for
hardship,’ said she, ‘but--’ and a sudden wild shudder seized her, ‘but
not for crime.’

“The word fell like a drop of blood wrung from her heart.

“‘Good heavens!’ cried I, ‘and must you--’

“‘No,’ rang from her lips in a clarion-like peal; ‘some things cut the
very bonds of nature. I am not called upon to cleave to what will drag
me into infamy.’ Then calmly, as if speaking of the most ordinary matter
in the world, ‘I shall never go back to that house we have left behind
us, sir.’

“‘But,’ cried I, glancing at her scanty garments, ‘where will you go?
What will you do? You are young--’

“‘And very strong,’ she interrupted. ‘Do not fear for me.’ And her smile
was like a burst of sudden sunshine.

“I said no more that night.

“But when in the morning I stumbled upon her sitting in the kitchen
reading a book not only above her position but beyond her years,
a sudden impulse seized me and I asked her if she would like to be
educated. The instantaneous illumining of her whole face was sufficient
reply without her low emphatic words,

“‘I would be content to study on my knees to know what some women do,
whom I have seen.’

“It is not necessary for me to relate with what pleasure I caught at
the idea that here was a chance to repay in some slight measure the
inestimable favor she had done me; nor by what arguments I finally won
her to accept an education at my hands as some sort of recompense for
the life she had saved. The advantage which it would give her in her
struggle with the world she seemed duly to appreciate, but that so
great a favor could be shown her without causing me much trouble and an
unwarrantable expense, she could not at once be brought to comprehend,
and till she could, she held out with that gentle but inflexible will of
hers. The battle, however, was won at last and I left her in that little
cottage, with the understanding that as soon as the matter could be
arranged, she was to enter a certain boarding-school in Troy with the
mistress of which I was acquainted. Meanwhile she was to go out to
service at Melville and earn enough money to provide herself with
clothes.

“I was a careless fellow in those days but I kept my promise to that
girl. I not only entered her into that school for a course of three
years, but acting through its mistress who had taken a great fancy to
her, supplied her with the necessities her position required. It was so
easy; merely the signing of a check from time to time, and it was
done. I say this because I really think if it had involved any personal
sacrifice on my part, even of an hour of my time, or the labor of a
thought, I should not have done it. For with my return to the city my
interest in my cousin revived, absorbing me to such an extent that any
matter disconnected with her soon lost all charm for me.

“Two years passed; I was the slave of Evelyn Blake, but there was no
engagement between us. My father’s determined opposition was enough to
prevent that. But there was an understanding which I fondly hoped would
one day open for me the way of happiness. But I did not know my father.
Sick as he was--he was at that time laboring under the disease which in
a couple of months later bore him to the tomb--he kept an eye upon my
movements and seemed to probe my inmost heart. At last he came to a
definite decision and spoke.

“His words opened a world of dismay before me. I was his only child, as
he remarked, and it had been and was the desire of his heart to leave
me as rich and independent a man as himself. But I seemed disposed
to commit one of those acts against which he had the most determined
prejudice; marriage between cousins being in his eyes an unsanctified
and dangerous proceeding, liable to consequences the most unhappy. If I
persisted, he must will his property elsewhere. The Blake estate should
never descend with the seal of his approbation to a race of probable
imbeciles.

“Nor was this enough. He not only robbed me of the woman I loved,
but with a clear insight into the future, I presume, insisted upon
my marrying some one else of respectability and worth before he died.
‘Anyone whose appearance will do you credit and whose virtue is beyond
reproach,’ said he. ‘I don’t ask her to be rich or even the offspring of
one of our old families. Let her be good and pure and of no connection
to us, and I will bless her and you with my dying breath.’

“The idea had seized upon him with great force, and I soon saw he was
not to be shaken out of it. To all my objections he returned but the one
word,

“‘I don’t restrict your choice and I give you a month in which to
make it. If at the end of that time you cannot bring your bride to my
bedside, I must look around for an heir who will not thwart my dying
wishes.’”

“A month! I surveyed the fashionable belles that nightly thronged the
parlors of my friends and felt my heart sink within me. Take one of them
for my wife, loving another woman? Impossible. Women like these demanded
something in return for the honor they conferred upon a man by marrying
him. Wealth? they had it. Position? that was theirs also. Consideration?
ah, what consideration had I to give? I turned from them with distaste.

“My cousin Evelyn gave me no help. She was a proud woman and loved my
money and my expectations as much as she did me.

“‘If you must marry another woman to retain your wealth, marry, said
she, ‘but do not marry one of my associates. I will have no rival in my
own empire; your wife must be a plainer and a less aspiring woman than
Evelyn Blake. Yet do not discredit your name,--which is mine,’ she would
always add.

“Meanwhile the days flew by. If my own conscience had allowed me to
forget the fact, my father’s eagerly inquiring, but sternly unrelenting
gaze as I came each evening to his bedside, would have kept it
sufficiently in my mind. I began to feel like one in the power of
some huge crushing machine whose slowly descending weight he in vain
endeavors to escape.

“How or when the thought of Luttra first crossed my mind I cannot
say. At first I recoiled at the suggestion and put it away from me in
disdain; but it ever recurred and with it so many arguments in her favor
that before long I found myself regarding it as a refuge. To be sure she
was a waif and a stray, but that seemed to be the kind of wife demanded
of me. She was allied to rogues if not villains, I knew; but then had
she not cut all connection with them, dropped away from them, planted
her feet on new ground which they would never invade? I commenced to
cherish the idea. With this friendless, grateful, unassuming protegee of
mine for a wife, I would be as little bound as might be. She would
ask nothing, and I need give nothing, beyond a home and the common
attentions required of a gentleman and a friend. Then she was not
disagreeable, nor was her beauty of a type to suggest the charms of
her I had lost. None of the graces of the haughty patrician lady whose
lightest gesture was a command, would appear in this humble girl, to
mock and constrain me. No, I should have a fair wife and an obedient
one, but no vulgarized shadow of Evelyn, thank God, or of any of her
fashionably dressed friends.

“Advanced thus far towards the end, I went to see Luttra. I had not
beheld her since the morning we parted at the door of that little
cottage in Vermont, and her presence caused me a shock. This, the humble
waif with the appealing grateful eyes I had expected to encounter? this
tall and slender creature with an aureola of golden hair about a face
that it was an education to behold! I felt a half movement of anger as I
surveyed her. I had been cheated; I had planted a grape seed and a palm
tree had sprung up in its place. I was so taken aback, my salute lost
something of the benevolent condescension I had intended to infuse into
it. She seemed to feel my embarassment and a half smile fluttered to
her lips. That smile decided me. It was sweet but above all else it was
appealing.

“How I won that woman to marry me in ten days time I care not to
state. Not by holding up my wealth and position before her. Something
restrained me from that. I was resolved, and perhaps it was the only
point of light in my conduct at that time, not to buy this young girl. I
never spoke of my expectations, I never alluded to my present advantages
yet I won her.

“We were married, there, in Troy in the quietest and most unpretending
manner. Why the fact has never transpired I cannot say. I certainly took
no especial pains to conceal it at the time, though I acknowledge
that after our separation I did resort to such measures as I thought
necessary, to suppress what had become gall and wormwood to my pride.

“My first move after the ceremony was to bring her immediately to New
York and to this house. With perhaps a pardonable bitterness of spirit,
I had refrained from any notification of my intentions, and it was as
strangers might enter an unprepared dwelling, that we stepped across the
threshold of this house and passed immediately to my father’s room.

“‘I can give you no wedding and no honeymoon,’ I had told her. ‘My
father is dying and demands my care. From the altar to a death-bed may
be sad for you, but it is an inevitable condition of your marriage with
me.’ And she had accepted her fate with a deep unspeakable smile it has
taken me long months of loneliness and suffering to understand.

“‘Father, I bring you my bride,’ were my first words to him as the door
closed behind us shutting us in with the dread, invisible Presence that
for so long a time had been relentlessly advancing upon our home.

“I shall never forget how he roused himself in his bed, nor with what
eager eyes he read her young face and surveyed her slight form swaying
towards him in her sudden emotion like a flame in a breeze. Nor while I
live shall I lose sight of the spasm of uncontrollable joy with which
he lifted his aged arms towards her, nor the look with which she sprang
from my side and nestled, yes nestled, on the breast that never to my
remembrance had opened itself to me even in the years of my earliest
childhood. For my father was a stern man who believed in holding love at
arm’s length and measured affection by the depth of awe it inspired.

“‘My daughter!’ broke from his lips, and he never inquired who she was
or what; no, not even when after a moment of silence she raised her head
and with a sudden low cry of passionate longing looked in his face and
murmured,

“‘I never had a father.’

“Sirs, it is impossible for me to continue without revealing depths
of pride and bitterness in my own nature, from which I now shrink with
unspeakable pain. So far from being touched by this scene, I felt myself
grow hard under it. If he had been disappointed in my choice, queried
at it or even been simply pleased at my obedience, I might have accepted
the wife I had won, and been tolerably grateful. But to love her, admire
her, glory in her when Evelyn Blake had never succeeded in winning a
glance from his eyes that was not a public disapprobation! I could
not endure it; my whole being rebelled, and a movement like hate took
possession of me.

“Bidding my wife to leave me with my father alone, I scarcely waited
for the door to close upon the poor young thing before all that had been
seething in my breast for a month, burst from me in the one cry,

“‘I have brought you a daughter as you commanded me. Now give me the
blessing you promised and let me go; for I cannot live with a woman I do
not love.’

“Instantly, and before his lips could move, the door opened and the
woman I thus repudiated in the first dawning hour of her young bliss,
stood before us. My God! what a face! When I think of it now in the
night season--when from dreams that gloomy as they are, are often
elysian to the thoughts which beset me in my waking hours, I suddenly
arouse to see starting upon me from the surrounding shadows that young
fair brow with its halo of golden tresses, blotted, ay blotted by the
agony that turned her that instant into stone, I wonder I did not take
out the pistol that lay in the table near which I stood, and shoot her
lifeless on the spot as some sort of a compensation for the misery I had
caused her. I say I wonder now: then I only thought of braving it out.

“Straight as a dart, but with that look on her face, she came towards
us. ‘Did I hear aright?’ were the words that came from her lips. ‘Have
you married me, a woman beneath your station as I now perceive, because
you were commanded to do so? Have you not loved me? given me that which
alone makes marriage a sacrament or even a possibility? and must you
leave this house made sacred by the recumbent form of your dying father
if I remain within it?’

“I saw my father’s stiff and pallid lips move silently as though
he would answer for me if he could, and summoning up what courage I
possessed, I told her that I deeply regretted she had overheard my
inconsiderate words. That I had never meant to wound her, whatever
bitterness lay in my heart towards one who had thwarted me in my dearest
and most cherished hopes. That I humbly begged her pardon and would so
far acknowledge her claim upon me as to promise that I would not leave
my home at this time, if it distressed her; my desire being not to
injure her, only to protect myself.

“O the scorn that mounted to her brow at these weak words. Not scorn of
me, thank God, worthy as I was of it that hour, but scorn of my slight
opinion of her.

“‘Then I heard aright,’ she murmured, and waited with a look that would
not be gainsaid.

“I could only bow my head, cursing the day I was born.

“‘Holman! Holman!’ came in agonized entreaty from the bed, ‘you will not
rob me of my daughter now?’

“Startled, I looked up. Luttra was half way to the door.

“‘What are you going to do?’ cried I, bounding towards her.

“She stopped me with a look. ‘The son must never forsake the father,’
said she. ‘If either of us must leave the house this day, let it be I.’
Then in a softer tone, ‘When you asked me to be your wife, I who had
worshipped you from the moment you entered my father’s house on the
memorable night I left it, was so overcome at your condescension that
I forgot you did not preface it by the usual passionate, ‘I love you,’
which more than the marriage ring binds two hearts together. In the
glamour and glow of my joy, I did not see that the smile that was in my
heart, was missing from your face. I was to be your wife and that was
enough, or so I thought then, for I loved you. Ah, and I do now, my
husband, love you so that I leave you. Were it for your happiness I
would do more than that, I would give you back your freedom, but from
what I hear, it seems that you need a wife in name and I will be but
fulfilling your desire in holding that place for you. I will never
disgrace the position high as it is above my poor deserts. When the day
comes--if the day comes--that you need or feel you need the sustainment
of my presence or the devotion of my heart, no power on earth save that
of death itself, shall keep me from your side. Till that day arrives I
remain what you have made me, a bride who lays no claim to the name
you this morning bestowed upon her.’ And with a gesture that was like a
benediction, she turned, and noiselessly, breathlessly as a dream that
vanishes, left the room.

“Sirs, I believe I uttered a cry and stumbled towards her. Some one in
that room uttered a cry, but it may be that it only rose in my heart and
that the one I heard came from my father’s lips. For when at the door
I turned, startled at the deathly silence, I saw he had fainted on his
pillow. I could not leave him so. Calling to Mrs. Daniels, who was never
far from my father in those days, I bade her stop the lady--I believe
I called her my wife--who was going down the stairs, and then rushed to
his side. It took minutes to revive him. When he came to himself it was
to ask for the creature who had flashed like a beacon of light upon his
darkening path. I rose as if to fetch her but before I could advance I
heard a voice say, ‘She is not here,’ and looking up I saw Mrs. Daniels
glide into the room.

“‘Mrs. Blake has gone, sir, I could not keep her.’”



CHAPTER XIII. A MAN’S HEART


“That was the last time my eyes ever rested upon my wife. Whither she
went or what refuge she gained, I never knew. My father who had received
in this scene a great shock, began to fail so rapidly, he demanded my
constant care; and though from time to time as I ministered to him and
noted with what a yearning persistency he would eye the door and then
turn and meet my gaze with a look I could not understand, I caught
myself asking whether I had done a deed destined to hang forever about
me like a pall; it was not till after his death that the despairing
image of the bright young creature to whom I had given my name, returned
with any startling distinctness to my mind, or that I allowed myself to
ask whether the heavy gloom which I now felt settling upon me was owing
to the sense of shame that overpowered me at the remembrance of the
past, or to the possible loss I had sustained in the departure of my
young unloved bride.

“The announcement at this time of the engagement between Evelyn Blake
and the Count De Mirac may have had something to do with this. Though I
had never in the most passionate hours of my love for her, lost sight of
that side of her nature which demanded as her right the luxury of great
wealth; and though in my tacit abandonment of her and secret marriage
with another I had certainly lost the right to complain of her actions
whatever they might be, this manifest surrendering of herself to the
power of wealth and show at the price of all that women are believed to
hold dear, was an undoubted blow to my pride and the confidence I
had till now unconsciously reposed in her inherent womanliness and
affection. That she had but made on a more conspicuous scale, the same
sacrifice as myself to the god of Wealth and Position, was in my eyes
at that time, no palliation of her conduct. I was a man none too good
or exalted at the best; she, a woman, should have been superior to the
temptations that overpowered me. That she was not, seemed to drag all
womanhood a little nearer the dust; fashionable womanhood I ought to
say, for somehow even at that early day her conduct did not seem to
affect the vivid image of Luttra standing upon my threshold, shorn of
her joy but burning with a devotion I did not comprehend, and saying,

“‘I loved you. Ah, and I do yet, my husband, love you so that I leave
you. When the day comes--if the day comes--you need or feel you need
the sustainment of my presence or the devotion of my heart, no power on
earth save that of death itself, shall keep me from your side.’

“Yes, with the fading away of other faces and other forms, that face and
that form now began to usurp the chief place in my thoughts. Not to my
relief and pleasure. That could scarcely be, remembering all that had
occurred; rather to my increasing distress and passionate resentment.
I longed to forget I was held by a tie, that known to the world would
cause me the bitterest shame. For by this time the true character of
her father and brother had been revealed and I found myself bound to the
daughter of a convicted criminal.

“But I could not forget her. The look with which she had left me was
branded into my consciousness. Night and day it floated before me, till
to escape it I resolved to fasten it upon canvas, if by that means I
might succeed in eliminating it from my dreams.

“The painting you have seen this night is the result. Born with an
artist’s touch and insight that under other circumstances might,
perhaps, have raised me into the cold dry atmosphere of fame, the
execution of this piece of work, presented but few difficulties to my
somewhat accustomed hand. Day by day her beauty grew beneath my brush,
startling me often with its spiritual force and significance till my
mind grew feverish over its work, and I could scarcely refrain from
rising at night to give a touch here or there to the floating golden
hair or the piercing, tender eyes turned, ah, ever turned upon the
inmost citadel of my heart with that look that slew my father before his
time and made me, yes me, old in spirit even in the ardent years of my
first manhood.

“At last it was finished and she stood before me life-like and real in
the very garments and with almost the very aspect of that never to be
forgotten moment. Even the roses which in the secret uneasiness of my
conscience I had put in her hand on our departure from Troy, as a sort
of visible token that I regarded her as my bride, and which through all
her interview with my father she had never dropped, blossomed before
me on the canvas. Nothing that could give reality to the likeness,
was lacking; the vision of my dreams stood embodied in my sight, and I
looked for peace. Alas, that picture now became my dream.

“Inserting it behind that of Evelyn which for two years had held its
place above my armchair, I turned its face to the wall when I rose in
the morning. But at night it beamed ever upon me, becoming as the months
passed, the one thing to hold to and muse over when the world grew a
little noisy in my ears and the never ceasing conflict of the ages beat
a trifle too loudly on heart and brain.

“Meanwhile no word of her, only of her villainous father and brother; no
token that she had escaped evil or was removed from want. If I had loved
her I could not have succored her, for I did not know where to find her.
Her countenance illumined my wall, but her fair young self lay for all I
knew sheltered within the darkness and silence of the tomb.

“At length my morbid broodings worked out their natural result. A dull
melancholy settled upon me which nothing could break. Even the news that
my cousin who had lost her husband a month after marriage, had returned
to America with expectation to remain, scarcely caused a ripple in my
apathy. Was I sinking into a hypochrondriac? or was my passion for the
beautiful brunette dead? I determined to solve the doubt.

“Seeking her where I knew she would be found, I gazed again upon her
beauty. It was absolutely nothing to me. A fair young face with high
thoughts in every glance floated like sunshine between us and I left the
haughty Countess, with the knowledge burned deep into my brain, that the
love I had considered slain was alive and demanding, but that the object
of it past recall, was my lost young wife.

“Once assured of this, my apathy vanished like mist before a kindled
torch. Henceforth the future held a hope, and life a purpose. I would
seek my wife throughout the world and bring her back if I found her
in prison between the men whose existence was a curse to my pride. But
where should I turn my steps? What golden thread had she left in my hand
by which to trace her through the labyrinth of this world? I could think
of but one, and that was the love which would restrain her from going
away from me too far. The Luttra of old would not leave the city where
her husband lived. If she was not changed, I ought to be able to find
her somewhere within this great Babylon of ours. Wisdom told me to
set the police upon her track, but pride bade me try every other means
first. So with the feverish energy of one leading a forlorn hope, I
began to pace the streets if haply I might see her face shine upon me
from the crowd of passers by; a foolish fancy, unproductive of result! I
not only failed to see her, but anyone like her.

“In the midst of the despair occasioned by this failure a thought flashed
across me or rather a remembrance. One night not long since, being
uncommonly restless, I had risen from my bed, dressed me and gone out
into the yard back of my house for a little air. It was an unusual thing
for me to do but I seemed to be suffocating where I was, and nothing
else would satisfy me. As you already surmise, it was the night on which
disappeared the sewing girl of which you have so often spoken, but I
knew nothing of that, my thoughts were far from my own home and its
concerns. You may judge what a state of mind I was in when I tell you
that I even thought at one moment while I paused before the gate leading
into ---- Street that I saw the face of her with whom my thoughts were
ever busy, peering upon me through the bars.

“You tell me that I did see a girl there, and that it was the one who
had lived as sewing woman in my house; it may be so, but at the time I
considered it a vision of my wife, and the remembrance of it, coming as
it did after my repeated failures to encounter her in the street, worked
a change in my plans. For regard it as weakness or not, the recollection
that the vision I had seen wore the garments of a working-woman rather
than a lady, acted upon me like a warning not to search for her any
longer among the resorts of the well-dressed, but in the regions of
poverty and toil. I therefore took to wanderings such as I have no heart
to describe. Nor do I need to, if, as you have informed me, I have been
followed.

“The result was almost madness. Though deep in my heart I felt a
steadfast trust in the purity of her intentions, the fear of what she
might have been driven to by the awful poverty and despair I every day
saw seething about me, was like hot steel in brain and heart. Then her
father and her brother! To what might they not have forced her, innocent
and loving soul though she was! Drinking the dregs of a cup such as I
had never considered it possible for me to taste, I got so far as to
believe that her eyes would yet flash upon me from beneath some of the
tattered shawls I saw sullying the forms of the young girls upon which I
hourly stumbled. Yes, and even made a move to see my cousin, if haply I
could so win upon her compassion as to gain her consent to shelter the
poor creature of my dreams in case the necessity came. But my heart
failed me at the sight of her cold face above the splendor she had
bought with her charms, and I was saved a humiliation I might never have
risen above.

“At last, one day I saw a girl--no, it was not she, but her hair was
similar to hers in hue, and the impulse to follow her was irresistible.
I did more than that, I spoke to her. I asked her if she could tell me
anything of one whose locks were golden red like hers--But I need not
tell you what I said nor what she replied with a gentle delicacy that
was almost a shock to me as showing from what heights to what depths a
woman can fall. Enough that nothing passed between us beyond what I have
intimated, and that in all she said she gave me no news of Luttra.

“Next day I started for the rambling old house in Vermont, if haply
in the spot where I first saw her, I might come upon some clue to her
present whereabouts. But the old inn was deserted, and whatever hope I
may have had in that direction, perished with the rest.

“Concerning the contents of that bureau-drawer above, I can say nothing.
If, as I scarcely dare to hope, they should prove to have been indeed
brought here by the girl who has since disappeared so strangely, who
knows but what in those folded garments a clue is given which will lead
me at last to the knowledge for which I would now barter all I possess.
My wife--But I can mention her name no more till the question that now
assails us is set at rest. Mrs. Daniels must--”

But at that moment the door opened and Mrs. Daniels came in.



CHAPTER XIV. MRS. DANIELS


She still wore her bonnet and shawl and her face was like marble.

“You want me?” said she with a hurried look towards Mr. Blake that had
as much fear as surprise in it.

“Yes,” murmured that gentleman moving towards her with an effort we
could very well appreciate. “Mrs. Daniels, who was the girl you harbored
in that room above us for so long? Speak; what was her name and where
did she come from?”

The housekeeper trembling in every limb, cast us one hurried appeal.

“Speak!” reechoed Mr. Gryce; “the time for secrecy has passed.”

“O,” cried she, sinking into a chair from sheer inability to stand, “it
was your wife, Mr. Blake, the young creature you--”

“Ah!”

All the agony, the hopelessness, the love, the passion of those last few
months flashed up in that word. She stopped as if she had been shot, but
seeing the hand which he had hurriedly raised, fall slowly before him,
went on with a burst,

“O sir, she made me swear on my knees I would never betray her, no
matter what happened. When not two weeks after your father died she came
to the house and asking for me, told me all her story and all her love;
how she could not reconcile it with her idea of a wife’s duty to live
under any other roof than that of her husband, and lifting off the black
wig which she wore, showed me how altered she had made herself by that
simple change--in her case more marked by the fact that her eyes were
in keeping with black hair, while with her own bright locks they always
gave you a shock as of something strange and haunting--I gave up my will
as if forced by a magnetic power, and not only opened the house to her
but my heart as well; swearing to all she demanded and keeping my oath
too, as I would preserve my soul from sin and my life from the knife of
the destroyer.”

“But, when she went,” broke from the pallid lips of the man before her,
“when she was taken away from the house, what then?”

“Ah,” returned the agitated woman, “what then! Do you not think I
suffered? To be held by my oath, an oath I was satisfied she would wish
kept even at this crisis, yet knowing all the while she was drifting
away into some evil that you, if you knew who she was, would give your
life to avert from your honor if not from her innocent head! To see you
cold, indifferent, absorbed in other things, while she, who would have
perished any day for your happiness, was losing her life perhaps in the
clutches of those horrible villains! Do not ask me to tell you what I
have suffered since she went; I can never tell you,--innocent, tender,
noble-hearted creature that she was.”

“Was?” His hand clutched his heart as if it had been seized by a deathly
spasm. “Why do you say was?”

“Because I have just come from the Morgue where she lies dead.”

“No, no,” came in a low shriek from his lips, “that is not she; that is
another woman, like her perhaps, but not she.”

“Would to God you were right; but the long golden braids! Such hair as
hers I never saw on anyone before.”

“Mr. Blake is right,” I broke in, for I could not endure this scene any
longer. “The woman taken out of the East river to-day has been both seen
and spoken to by him and that not long since. He should know if it is
his wife.”

“And isn’t it?”

“No, a thousand times no; the girl was a perfect stranger.”

The assurance seemed to lift a leaden weight from her heart. “O thank
God,” she murmured dropping with an irresistible impulse on her knees.
Then with a sudden return of her old tremble, “But I was only to reveal
her secret in case of her death! What have I done, O what have I done!
Her only hope lay in my faithfulness.”

Mr. Blake leaning heavily on the table before him, looked in her face.

“Mrs. Daniels,” said he, “I love my wife; her hope now lies in me.”

She leaped to her feet with a joyous bound. “You love her? O thank God!”
 she again reiterated but this time in a low murmur to her self. “Thank
God!” and weeping with unrestrained joy, she drew back into a corner.

Of course after that, all that remained for us to do was to lay our
heads together and consult as to the best method of renewing our search
after the unhappy girl, now rendered of double interest to us by the
facts with which we had just been made acquainted. That she had been
forced away from the roof that sheltered her by the power of her father
and brother was of course no longer open to doubt. To discover them,
therefore, meant to recover her. Do you wonder, then, that from the
moment we left Mr. Blake’s house, the capture of that brace of thieves
became the leading purpose of our two lives?



CHAPTER XV. A CONFAB


Next morning Mr. Gryce and I met in serious consultation. How, and in
what direction should we extend the inquiries necessary to a discovery
of these Schoenmakers?

“I advise a thorough overhauling of the German quarter,” said my
superior. “Schmidt, and Rosenthal will help us and the result ought to
be satisfactory.”

But I shook my head at this. “I don’t believe,” said I, “that they will
hide among their own people. You must remember they are not alone, but
have with them a young woman of a somewhat distinguished appearance,
whose presence in a crowded district, like that, would be sure to awaken
gossip; something which above all else they must want to avoid.”

“That is true; the Germans are a dreadful race for gossip.”

“If they dared to ill-dress her or ill-treat her, it would be different.
But she is a valuable piece of property to them you see, a choice lot
of goods which it is for their interest to preserve in first-class
condition till the day comes for its disposal. For I presume you have no
doubt that it is for the purpose of extorting money from Mr. Blake that
they have carried off his young wife.”

“For that reason or one similar. He is a man of resources, they may have
hoped he would help them to escape the country.”

“If they don’t hide in the German quarter they certainly won’t in the
Italian, French or Irish. What they want is too keep close and rouse
no questions. I think they will be found to have gone up the river
somewhere, or over to Jersey. Hoboken would’nt be a bad place to send
Schmidt to.”

“You forget what it is they’ve got on their minds; besides no
conspicuous party such as they could live in a rural district without
attracting more attention than in the most crowded tenement house in the
city.”

“Where do you think, then, they would be liable to go?”

“Well my most matured thought on the subject,” returned Mr. Gryce, after
a moment’s deliberation, “is this,--you say, and I agree, that they
have hampered themselves with this woman at this time for the purpose of
using her hereafter in a scheme of black-mail upon Mr. Blake. He, then,
must be the object about which their thoughts revolve and toward which
whatever operations or plans they may be engaged upon must tend. What
follows? When a company of men have made up their minds to rob a bank,
what is the first thing they do? They hire, if possible, a house next to
the especial building they intend to enter, and for months work upon
the secret passage through which they hope to reach the safe and
its contents; or they make friends with the watchman that guards its
treasures, and the janitor who opens and shuts the doors. In short they
hang about their prey before they pounce upon it. And so will these
Schoenmakers do in the somewhat different robbery which they plan sooner
or later to effect. Whatever may keep them close at this moment, Mr.
Blake and Mr. Blake’s house is the point toward which their eyes are
turned, and if we had time--”

“But we have’nt,” I broke in impetuously. “It is horrible to think of
that grand woman languishing away in the power of such rascals.”

“If we had time,” Mr. Gryce persisted, “all it would be necessary to do
would be to wait, they would come into our hands as easily and naturally
as a hawk into the snare of the fowler. But as you say we have not, and
therefore, I would recommend a little beating of the bush directly about
Mr. Blake’s house; for if all my experience is not at fault, those men
are already within eye-shot of the prey they intend to run down.”

“But,” said I, “I have been living myself in that very neighborhood and
know by this time the ways of every house in the vicinity. There is not
a spot up and down the Avenue for ten blocks where they could hide away
for two days much less two weeks. And as for the side streets,--why
I could tell you the names of those who live in each house for a
considerable distance. Yet if you say so I will go to work--”

“Do, and meanwhile Schmidt and Rosenthal shall rummage the German
quarter and even go through Williamsburgh and Hoboken. The end justifies
any amount of labor that can be spent upon this matter.”

“And you,” I asked.

“Will do my part when you have done yours.”



CHAPTER XVI. THE MARK OF THE RED CROSS


And what success did I meet? The best in the world. And by what means
did I attain it? By that of the simplest, prettiest clue I ever came
upon. But let me explain.

When after a wearisome day spent in an ineffectual search through the
neighborhood, I went home to my room, which as you remember was a front
one in a lodging-house on the opposite corner from Mr. Blake, I was so
absorbed in mind and perhaps I may say shaken in nerve, by the strain
under which I had been laboring for some time now, that I stumbled up an
extra flight of stairs, and without any suspicion of the fact, tried
the door of the room directly over mine. It is a wonder to me now that I
could have made the mistake, for the halls were totally dissimilar,
the one above being much more cut up than the one below, besides being
flanked by a greater number of doors. But the intoxication of the mind
is not far removed from that of the body, and as I say it was not till
I had tried the door and found it locked, that I became aware of the
mistake I had made.

With the foolish sense of shame that always overcomes us at the
committal of any such trivial error, I stumbled hastily back, when my
foot trod upon something that broke under my weight. I never let even
small things pass without some notice. Stooping, then, for what I had
thus inadvertently crushed, I carried it to where a single gas jet
turned down very low, made a partial light in the long hall, and
examining it, found it to be a piece of red chalk.

What was there in that simple fact to make me start and hastily recall
one or two half-forgotten incidents which, once brought to mind, awoke
a train of thought that led to the discovery and capture of those two
desperate thieves? I will tell you.

I don’t remember now whether in my account of the visit I paid to
the Schoenmakers’ house in Vermont, I informed you of the red cross I
noticed scrawled on the panel of one of the doors. It seemed a trivial
thing at the time and made little or no impression upon me, the chances
being that I should never have thought of it again, if I had not come
upon the article just mentioned at a moment when my mind was full of
those very Schoenmakers. But remembered now, together with another
half-forgotten fact,--that some days previous I had been told by the
woman who kept the house I was in, that the parties over my head (two
men and a woman I believe she said) were giving her some trouble, but
that they paid well and therefore she did not like to turn them out,--it
aroused a vague suspicion in my mind, and led to my walking back to the
door I had endeavored to open in my abstraction, and carefully looking
at it.

It was plain and white, rather ruder of make than those below, but
offering no inducements for prolonged scrutiny. But not so with the
one that stood at right angles to it on the left. Full in the centre
of that, I beheld distinctly scrawled, probably with the very piece of
chalk I then held, a red cross precisely similar in outline to the one
I had seen a few days before on the panel of the Schoenmakers’ door at
Granby.

The discovery sent a thrill over me that almost raised my hair on end.
Was, then, this famous trio to be found in the very house in which I had
been myself living for a week or more? over my head in fact? I could
not withdraw my gaze from the mysterious looking object. I bent near, I
listened, I heard what sounded like the suppressed snore of a powerful
man, and almost had to lay hold of myself to prevent my hand from
pushing open that closed door and my feet from entering. As it was I did
finger the knob a little, but an extra loud snore from within reminded
me by its suggestion of strength that I was but a small man and that in
this case and at this hour, discretion was the better part of valor.

I therefore withdrew, but for the whole night lay awake listening to
catch any sounds that might come from above, and going so far as to plan
what I would do if it should be proved that I was indeed upon the trail
of the men I was so anxious to encounter.

With the breaking of day I was upon my feet. A rude step had gone up
the stairs a few minutes before and I was all alert to follow. But
I presently considered that my wisest course would be to sound the
landlady and learn if possible with what sort of characters I had to
deal. Routing her out of the kitchen, where at that early hour she was
already engaged in domestic duties, I drew her into a retired corner and
put my questions. She was not backward in replying. She had conceived an
innocent liking for me in the short time I had been with her--a display
of weakness for which I was myself, perhaps, as much to blame as
she--and was only too ready to pour out her griefs into my sympathizing
ear. For those men were a grief to her, acceptable as was the money
they were careful to provide her with. They were not only always in the
house, that is one of them, smoking his old pipe and blackening up the
walls, but they looked so shabby, and kept the girl so close, and if
they did go out, came in at such unheard of hours. It was enough to
drive her crazy; yet the money, the money--

“Yes,” said I, “I know; and the money ought to make you overlook all
the small disagreeablenesses you mention. What is a landlady without
patience.” And I urged her not to turn them out.

“But the girl,” she went on, “so nice, so quiet, so sick-looking! I
cannot stand it to see her cooped up in that small room, always watched
over by one or both of those burly wretches. The old man says she is
his daughter and she does not deny it, but I would as soon think of that
little rosy child you see cooing in the window over the way, belonging
to the beggar going in at the gate, as of her with her lady-like ways
having any connection with him and his rough-acting son. You ought to
see her--”

“That is just what I want to do,” interrupted I. “Not because you have
tempted my fancy by a recital of her charms,” I hastened to add, “but
because she is, if I don’t mistake, a woman for whose discovery and
rescue, a large sum of money has been offered.”

And without further disguise I acquainted the startled woman before me
with the fact that I was not, as she had always considered, the clerk
out of employment whose daily business it was to sally forth in quest of
a situation, but a member of the city police.

She was duly impressed and easily persuaded to second all my operations
as far as her poor wits would allow, giving me free range of her upper
story, and above all, promising that secrecy without which all my finely
laid plans for capturing the rogues without raising a scandal, would
fall headlong to the ground.

Behold me, then, by noon of that same day domiciled in an apartment next
to the one whose door bore that scarlet sign which had aroused within
me such feverish hopes the night before. Clad in the seedy garments of
a broken down French artist whose acquaintance I had once made, with
something of his air and general appearance and with a few of his
wretched daubs hung about on the whitewashed wall, I commenced with
every prospect of success as I thought, that quiet espionage of the hall
and its inhabitants which I considered necessary to a proper attainment
of the end I had in view.

A racking cough was one of the peculiarities of my friend, and
determined to assume the character in toto, I allowed myself to startle
the silence now and then with a series of gasps and chokings that
whether agreeable or not, certainly were of a character to show that I
had no desire to conceal my presence from those I had come among. Indeed
it was my desire to acquaint them as fully and as soon as possible with
the fact of their having a neighbor: a weak-eyed half-alive innocent
to be sure, but yet a neighbor who would keep his door open night and
day--for the warmth of the hall of course--and who with the fretful
habit of an old man who had once been a gentleman and a beau, went
rambling about through the hall speaking to those he met and expecting
a civil word in return. When he was not rambling or coughing he made
architectural monsters out of cardboard, wherewith to tempt the pennies
out of the pockets of unwary children, an employment that kept him
chained to a small table in the centre of his room directly opposite the
open door.

As I expected I had scarcely given way to three separate fits of
coughing, when the door next me opened with a jerk and a rough voice
called out,

“Who’s that making all that to do about here? If you don’t stop that
infernal noise in a hurry--”

A soft voice interrupted him and he drew back. “I will go see,” said
those gentle tones, and Luttra Blake, for I knew it was she before the
skirt of her robe had advanced beyond the door, stepped out into the
hall.

I was yet bent over my work when she paused before me. The fact is I did
not dare look up, the moment was one of such importance to me.

“You have a dreadful cough,” said she with that low ring of sympathy in
her voice that goes unconsciously to the heart. “Is there no help for
it?”

I pushed back my work, drew my hand over my eyes, (I did not need to
make it tremble) and glanced up. “No,” said I with a shake of my head,
“but it is not always so bad. I beg your pardon, miss, if it disturbs
you.”

She threw back the shawl which she had held drawn tightly over her head,
and advanced with an easy gliding step close to my side. “You do not
disturb me, but my father is--is, well a trifle cross sometimes, and if
he should speak up a little harsh now and then, you must not mind. I am
sorry you are so ill.”

What is there in some women’s look, some women’s touch that more than
all beauty goes to the heart and subdues it. As she stood there before
me in her dark worsted dress and coarse shawl, with her locks simply
braided and her whole person undignified by art and ungraced by
ornament, she seemed just by the power of her expression and the
witchery of her manner, the loveliest woman I had ever beheld.

“You are veree kind, veree good,” I murmured, half ashamed of my
disguise, though it was assumed for the purpose of rescuing her. “Your
sympathy goes to my heart.” Then as a deep growl of impatience rose from
the room at my side, I motioned her to go and not irritate the man who
seemed to have such control over her.

“In a minute,” answered she, “first tell me what you are making.”

So I told her and in the course of telling, let drop such other facts
about my fancied life as I wished to have known to her and through her
to her father. She looked sweetly interested and more than once turned
upon me that dark eye, of which I had heard so much, full of tears that
were as much for me, scamp that I was, as for her own secret trouble.
But the growls becoming more and more impatient she speedily turned to
go, repeating, however, as she did so,

“Now remember what I say, you are not to be troubled if they do speak
cross to you. They make noise enough themselves sometimes, as you will
doubtless be assured of to-night.”

And the lips which seemed to have grown stiff and cold with her misery,
actually softened into something like a smile.

The nod which I gave her in return had the solemnity of a vow in it.

My mind thus assured as to the correctness of my suspicions, and the way
thus paved to the carrying out of my plans, I allowed some few days
to elapse without further action on my part. My motive was to acquaint
myself as fully as possible with the habits and ways of these two
desperate men, before making the attempt to capture them upon which so
many interests hung. For while I felt it would be highly creditable to
my sagacity, as well as valuable to my reputation as a detective, to
restore these escaped convicts in any way possible into the hands of
justice, my chief ambition after all was to so manage the affair as
to save the wife of Mr. Blake, not only from the consequences of their
despair, but from the publicity and scandal attendant upon the open
arrest of two heavily armed men. Strategy, therefore, rather than force
was to be employed, and strategy to be successful must be founded upon
the most thorough knowledge of the matter with which one has to deal.
Three days, then, did I give to the acquiring of that knowledge, the
result of which was the possession of the following facts.

1. That the landlady was right when she told me the girl was never left
alone, one of the men, if not the father then the son, always remaining
with her.

2. That while thus guarded, she was not so restricted but that she had
the liberty of walking in the hall, though never for any length of time.

3. That the cross on the door seemed to possess some secret meaning
connected with their presence in the house, it having been erased one
evening when the whole three went out on some matter or other, only to
be chalked on again when in an hour or so later, father and daughter
returned alone.

4. That it was the father and not the son who made such purchases as
were needed, while it was the son and not the father who carried on
whatever operations they had on hand; nightfall being the favorite
hour for the one and midnight for the other; though it not infrequently
happened that the latter sauntered out for a short time also in the
afternoon, probably for the drink he could not go long without.

5. That they were men of great strength but little alertness; the stray
glimpses I had had of them, revealing a breadth of back that was truly
formidable, if it had not been joined to a heaviness of motion that
proclaimed a certain stolidity of mind that was eminently in our favor.

How best to use these facts in the building up of a matured plan of
action, was, then, the problem. By noon of a certain day I believed
it to have been solved, and reluctant as I was to leave the spot of my
espionage even for the hour or two necessary to a visit to headquarters,
I found myself compelled to do so. Packing up in a small basket I had
for the purpose, the little articles I had been engaged during the last
few days in making, I gave way to a final fit of coughing so hollow and
sepulchral in its tone, that it awoke a curse from the next room deep as
the growl of a wild beast, and still continuing, finally brought Luttra
to the door with that look of compassion on her face that always called
up a flush to my cheek whether I wished it or no.

“Ah, Monsieur, I am afraid your cough is very bad to-day. O I see; you
have been getting ready to go out--”

“Come back here,” broke in a heavy voice from the room she had left.
“What do you mean by running off to palaver with that old rascal every
time he opens his ----- battery of a cough?”

A smile that went through me like the cut of a knife, flashed for a
moment on her face.

“My father is in one of his impatient moods,” said she, “you had better
go. I hope you will be successful,” she murmured, glancing wistfully at
my basket.

“What is that?” again came thundering on our ears. “Successful? What are
you two up to?” And we heard the rough clatter of advancing steps.

“Go,” said she; “you are weak and old; and when you come back, try and
not cough.” And she gave me a gentle push towards the door.

“When I come back,” I began, but was forced to pause, the elder
Schoenmaker having by this time reached the open doorway where he stood
frowning in upon us in a way that made my heart stand still for her.

“What are you two talking about?” said he; “and what have you got in
your basket there?” he continued with a stride forward that shook the
floor.

“Only some little toys that he has been making, and is now going out to
sell,” was her low answer given with a quick deprecatory gesture such as
I doubt if she ever used for herself.

“Nothing more?” asked he in German with a red glare in the eye he turned
towards her.

“Nothing more,” replied she in the same tongue. “You may believe me.”

He gave a deep growl and turned away. “If there was,” said he, “you know
what would happen.” And unheeding the wild keen shudder that seized her
at the word, making her insensible for the moment to all and everything
about her, he laid one heavy hand upon her slight shoulder and led her
from the room.

I waited no longer than was necessary to carry my feeble and faltering
steps appropriately down the stairs, to reach the floor below and gain
the landlady’s presence.

“Do you go up,” said I, “and sit on those stairs till I come back. If
you hear the least cry of pain or sound of struggle from that young
girl’s room, do you call at once for help. I will have a policeman
standing on the corner below.”

The good woman nodded and proceeded at once to take up her work-basket.
“Lucky there’s a window up there, so I can see,” I heard her mutter.
“I’ve no time to throw away even on deeds of charity.”

Notwithstanding which precaution, I was in constant anxiety during my
absence; an absence necessarily prolonged as I had to stop and explain
matters to the Superintendent, as well as hunt up Mr. Gryce and get his
consent to assist me in the matter of the impending arrest.

I found the latter in his own home and more than enthusiastic upon the
subject.

“Well,” said he after I had informed him of the discoveries I had made,
“the fates seem to prosper you in this. I have not received an inkling
of light upon the matter since I parted from you at Mr. Blake’s house.
By the way I saw that gentleman this morning and I tell you we will find
him a grateful man if this affair can be resolved satisfactorily.”

“That is good,” said I,” gratitude is what we want.” Then shortly,
“Perhaps it is no more than our duty to let him know that his wife is
safe and under my eye; though I would by no means advocate his knowing
just how near him she is, till the moment comes when he is wanted, or we
shall have a lover’s impetuosity to deal with as well as all the rest.”
 Then with a hurried remembrance of a possible contingency, went on to
say, “But, by the way, in case we should need the cooperation of Mrs.
Blake in what we have before us, you had better get a line written
in French from Mrs. Daniels, expressive of her belief in Mr. Blake’s
present affection for his wife. The latter will not otherwise trust us,
or understand that we are to be obeyed in whatever we may demand. Let
it be unsigned and without names in case of accident; and if the
housekeeper don’t understand French, tell her to get some one to help
her that does, only be sure that the handwriting employed is her own.”

Mr. Gryce seemed to perceive the wisdom of this precaution and promised
to procure me such a note by a certain hour, after which I related to
him the various other details of the capture such as I had planned it,
meeting to my secret gratification an unqualified approval that went far
towards alleviating that wound to my pride which I had received from him
in the beginning of this affair.

“Let all things proceed as you have determined, and we shall accomplish
something that it will be a life-long satisfaction to remember,” said
he; “but you must be prepared for some twist of the screw which you
do not anticipate. I never knew anything to go off just as one
prognosticates it must, except once,” he added thoughtfully, “and
then it was with a surprise attached to it that well nigh upset me
notwithstanding all my preparations.”

“You won a great success that day,” remarked I. “I hope the fates will
be as propitious to me to-morrow. Failure now would break my heart.”

“But you won’t fail,” exclaimed he. “I myself am resolved to see you
through this matter with credit.”

And in this assurance I returned to my lodgings where I found the
landlady sitting where I had left her, darning her twenty-third sock.

“I have to mend for a dozen men and three boys,” said she, “and the boys
are the worst by a heap sight. Look at that, will you,” holding up
a darn with a bit of stocking attached. “That hole was made playing
shinny.”

I uttered my condolences and asked if any sound or disturbance had
reached her ears from above.

“O no, all is right up there; I’ve scarcely heard a whisper since you’ve
been gone.”

I gave her a pat on the chin scarcely consistent with my aged and
tottering mien and proceeded to shamble painfully to my room.



CHAPTER XVII. THE CAPTURE


Promptly next morning at the designated hour, came the little note
promised me by Mr. Gryce. It was put in my hand with many sly winks by
the landlady herself, who developed at this crisis quite an adaptation
for, if not absolute love of intrigue and mystery. Glancing over it--it
was unsealed--and finding it entirely unintelligible, I took it for
granted it was all right and put it by till chance, or if that failed,
strategy, should give me an opportunity to communicate with Mrs. Blake.
An hour passed; the doors of their rooms remained unclosed. A half hour
more dragged its slow minutes away, and no sound had come from their
precincts save now and then a mumbled word of parley between the father
and son, a short command to the daughter, or a not-to-be-restrained oath
of annoyance from one or both of the heavy-limbed brutes as something
was said or done to disturb them in their indolent repose. At last
my impatience was to be no longer restrained. Rising, I took a bold
resolution. If the mountain would not come to Mahomet, Mahomet would go
to the mountain. Taking my letter in the hand, I deliberately proceeded
to the door marked with the ominous red cross and knocked.

A surprised snarl from within, followed by a sudden shuffling of feet
as the two men leaped upright from what I presume had been a recumbent
position, warned me to be ready to face defiance if not the fury of
despair; and curbing with a determined effort the slight sinking of
heart natural to a man of my make on the threshold of a very doubtful
adventure, I awaited with as much apparent unconcern as possible, the
quick advance of that light foot which seemed to be ready to perform
all the biddings of these hardened wretches, much as it shrunk from
following in the ways of their infamy.

“Ah miss,” said I, as the door opened revealing in the gap her white
face clouded with some new and sudden apprehension, “I beg your pardon
but I am an old man, and I got a letter to-day and my eyes are so weak
with the work I’ve been doing that I cannot read it. It is from some one
I love, and would you be so kind as to read off the words for me and so
relieve an old man from his anxiety.”

The murmur of suspicion behind her, warned her to throw wide open the
door. “Certainly,” said she, “if I can,” taking the paper in her hand.

“Just let me get a squint at that first,” said a sullen voice behind
her; and the youngest of the two Schoenmakers stepped forward and tore
the paper out of her grasp.

“You are too suspicious,” murmured she, looking after him with the first
assumption of that air of power and determination which I had heard
so eloquently described by the man who loved her. “There is nothing in
those lines which concerns us; let me have them back.”

“You hold your tongue,” was the brutal reply as the rough man opened the
folded paper and read or tried to read what was written within. “Blast
it! it’s French,” was his slow exclamation after a moment spent in
this way. “See,” and he thrust it towards his father who stood frowning
heavily a few feet off.

“Of course, it’s French,” cried the girl. “Would you write a note in
English to father there? The man’s friends are French like himself, and
must write in their own language.”

“Here take it and read it out,” commanded her father; “and mind you
tell us what it means. I’ll have nothing going on here that I don’t
understand.”

“Read me the French words first, miss,” said I. “It is my letter and I
want to know what my friend has to say to me.”

Nodding at me with a gentle look, she cast her eyes on the paper and
began to read:

    “Calmez vous, mon amie, il vous aime et il vous cherche. Dans
    quatre heures vous serez heureuse. Allons du courage, et surtout
    soyez maitre de vous meme.”

“Thanks!” I exclaimed in a calm matter-of-fact way as I perceived the
sudden tremor that seized her as she recognized the handwriting and
realized that the words were for her. “My friend says he will pay my
week’s rent and bids me be at home to receive him,” said I, turning upon
the two ferocious faces peering over her shoulder, with a look of meek
unsuspiciousness in my eye, that in a theatre would have brought down
the house.

“Is that what those words say, you?” asked the father, pointing over her
shoulder to the paper she held.

“I will translate for you word by word what it says,” replied she,
nerving herself for the crisis till her face was like marble, though
I could see she could not prevent the gleam of secret rapture that had
visited her, from flashing fitfully across it. “Calmez vous, mon amie.
Do not be afraid, my friend. Il vous aime et il vous cherche. He loves
you and is hunting for you. Dans quatre heures vous serez heureuse. In
four hours you will be happy. Allons du courage, et surtout soyez
maitre de vous meme. Then take courage and above all preserve your
self-possession. It is the French way of expressing one’s self,”
 observed she. “I am glad your friend is disposed to help you,” she
continued, giving me back the letter with a smile. “I am afraid you
needed it.”

In a sort of maze I folded up the letter, bowed my very humble thanks to
her and shuffled slowly back. The fact is I had no words; I was utterly
dumbfounded. Half way through that letter, with whose contents you
must remember I was unacquainted, I would have given my whole chance of
expected reward to have stopped her. Read out such words as those before
these men! Was she crazy? But how naturally at the conclusion did she
with a word make its language seem consistent with the meaning I had
given it. With a fresh sense of my obligation to her, I hurried to my
room, there to count out the minutes of another long hour in anxious
expectation of her making that endeavor to communicate with me, which
her new hopes and fears must force her to feel almost necessary to her
existence. At length, my confidence in her was rewarded. Coming out into
the hall, she hurried past my door, her finger on her lip. I immediately
rose and stood on the threshold with another paper in my hand, which I
had prepared against this opportunity. As she glided back, I put it in
her hand, and warning her with a look not to speak, resumed my usual
occupation. The words I had written were as follows:

    At or as near the time as possible of your brother’s going out,
    you are to come to this room wrapped in an extra skirt and with
    your shawl over your head. Leave the skirt and shawl behind you,
    and withdraw at once to the room at the head of the stairs. You
    are not to speak, and you are not to vary from the plan thus laid
    down. Your brother and father are to be arrested, whether or no;
    but if you will do as this commands, they will be arrested without
    bloodshed and without shame to one you know.

Her face while she read these lines, was a study, but I dared not soften
toward it. Dropping the paper from her hand, she gave me one inquiring
look. But I pointed determinedly to the words lying upward on the floor,
and would listen to no appeal. My resolve had its effect. Bowing her
head with a sorrowful gesture, she laid her hand on her heart, looked up
and glided from the room. I took up that paper and tore it into bits.

And now for the first time since I had been in the house, I closed the
door of my room. I had a part to perform that rendered the dropping of
my disguise indispensable. The old French artist had finished his work,
and henceforth must merge into Q. the detective. Shortly before two
o’clock my assistants began to arrive. First, Mr. Gryce appeared on the
scene and was stowed away in a large room on the other side of mine.
Next, two of the most agile, as well as muscular men in the force who,
thanks to having taken off their shoes in the lower hall, gained the
same refuge without awakening the suspicions of those we were anxious to
surprise. Lastly, the landlady who went into the closet to which I had
bidden Mrs. Blake retire after leaving in my room the articles I had
mentioned.

All was now ready and waiting for the departure of the youngest
Schoenmaker. Would he disappoint us and remain at home that day? Had any
suspicions been awakened in the stolid breasts of these men, that would
serve to make them more watchful than usual against running unnecessary
risks? No; at or near the time for the clock to strike two, their door
opened and the tread of a lumbering foot was heard in the hall. On it
came, passing my room with a rude stamping that gradually grew less
distinct as the hardy rough went down the corridor, brushing the wall
behind which Mr. Gryce and his men lay concealed with his thick cane,
and even stopping to light his pipe in front of the small apartment
where cowered our good landlady with her eternal basket of mending in
her lap.

At length all was quiet, and throwing open my door, I withdrew into
a small closet connected with my room, to wait with indescribable
impatience, the appearance of Mrs. Blake. She came in a very few
minutes, remained for an instant, and departed, leaving behind her as
I had requested, the skirt and shawl in which she had left her father’s
presence. I at once endued myself in these articles of apparel--taking
care to draw the shawl well over my head--and with a pocket handkerchief
to my face, (a proceeding made natural enough by the sneeze which at
that very moment I took care should assail me) walked boldly back to the
room from which she had just come.

The door was of course ajar, and as I swung it open with as near a
simulation of her manner as possible, the vision of her powerful
father lolling on a bench directly before me, offered anything but an
encouraging spectacle to my eyes. But doubling myself almost together
with as ladylike an atch-ee as my masculine nostrils would allow, I
succeeded in closing the door and reaching a low stool by the window
without calling from him anything worse than a fretful “I hope you are
not going to bark too.”

I did not reply to this of course, but sat with my face turned towards
the street in an attitude which I hoped would awaken his attention
sufficiently to cause him to get up and come over to my side. For as he
sat face to the door it would be impossible to take him by surprise, and
that, now that I saw what a huge and muscular creature he was, seemed
to me to be the only safe method before us. But, whether from the
sullenness of his disposition or the very evident laziness of the
moment, he manifested no disposition to move, and hearing or thinking I
did, the stealthy advance of Mr. Gryce and his companions down the hall,
I allowed myself to give way to a suppressed exclamation, and leaning
forward, pressed my forehead against the pane of glass before me as
if something of absorbing interest had just taken place in the street
beneath.

His fears at once took alarm. Bounding up with a curse, he strode
towards me, muttering,

“What’s up now? What’s that you are looking at?” reaching my side just
as Mr. Gryce and his two men softly opened the door and with a quick
leap threw their arms about him, closing upon him with a force he could
not resist, desperate as he was and mighty in the huge strength of an
unusually developed muscular organization.

“You, you girl there, are to blame for this!” came mingled with curses
from his lips, as with one huge pant he submitted to his captors. “Only
let me get my hand well upon you once--Damn it!” he suddenly exclaimed,
dragging the whole three men forward in his effort to get his mouth down
to my ear, “go and rub that sign out on the door or I’ll--you know what
I’ll do well enough. Do you hear?”

Rising, still with face averted, I proceeded to do what he asked. But in
another moment seeing that he had been effectually bound and gagged,
I took out the piece of red chalk I had kept in my pocket, and
deliberately chalked it on again, after which operation I came back and
took my seat as before on the low stool by the window.

The object now was to secure the second rascal in the same way we had
the first; and for this purpose Mr. Gryce ordered the now helpless giant
to be dragged into the adjoining small room formerly occupied by Mrs.
Blake, where he and his men likewise took up their station leaving me
to confront as best I might, the surprise and consternation of the one
whose return we now awaited.

I did not shrink. With that brave woman’s garments drawn about me,
something of her dauntless spirit seemed to invade my soul, and though I
expected--But let that come in its place, I am not here to interest you
in myself or my selfish thoughts.

A half hour passed; he had never lingered away so long before, or so it
seemed, and I was beginning to wonder if we should have to keep up this
strain of nerve for hours, when the heavy tread was again heard in
the hall, and with a blow of the fist that argued anger or a brutal
impatience, he flung open the door and came in, I did not turn my head.

“Where’s father?” he growled, stopping where he was a foot or so from
the door.

I shook my head with a slight gesture and remained looking out.

He brought his cane down on the floor with a thump. “What do you mean by
sitting there staring out of the window like mad and not answering when
I ask you a decent question?”

Still I made no reply.

Provoked beyond endurance, yet held in check by that vague sense of
danger in the air,--which while not amounting to apprehension is often
sufficient to hold back from advance the most daring foot,--he stood
glaring at me in what I felt to be a very ferocious attitude, but made
no offer to move. Instantly I rose and still looking out of the window,
made with my hand what appeared to be a signal to some one on the
opposite side of the way. The ruse was effective. With an oath that
rings in my ears yet, he lifted his heavy cane and advanced upon me with
a bound, only to meet the same fate as his father at the hands of the
watchful detectives. Not, however, before that heavy cane came down upon
my head in a way to lay me in a heap at his feet and to sow the seeds
of that blinding head-ache, which has afflicted me by spells ever since.
But this termination of the affair was no more than I had feared from
the beginning; and indeed it was as much to protect Mrs. Blake from
the wrath of these men, as from any requirements of the situation I had
assumed the disguise I then wore. I therefore did not allow this mishap
to greatly trouble me, unpleasant as it was at the time, but, as soon
as ever I could do so, rose from the floor and throwing off my strange
habiliments, proceeded to finish up to my satisfaction, the work already
so successfully begun.



CHAPTER XVIII. LOVE AND DUTY


Dismissing the men who had assisted us in the capture of these two hardy
villains, we ranged our prisoners before us.

“Now,” said Mr. Gryce, “no fuss and no swearing; you are in for it, and
you might as well take it quietly as any other way.”

“Give me a clutch on that girl, that’s all,” said her father, “Where is
she? Let me see her; every father has a right to see his own daughter,”

“You shall see her,” returned my superior, “but not till her husband is
here to protect her.”

“Her husband? ah, you know about that do you?” growled the heavy voice
of the son. “A rich man they say he is and a proud one. Let him come
and look at us lying here like dogs and say how he will enjoy having his
wife’s father and brother grinding away their lives in prison.”

“Mr. Blake is coming,” quoth Mr. Gryce, who by some preconcerted signal
from the window had drawn that gentleman across the street. “He will
tell you himself that he considers prison the best place for you. Blast
you! but he--”

“But he, what?” inquired I, as the door opened and Mr. Blake with a pale
face and agitated mien entered the room.

The wretch did not answer. Rousing from the cowering position in which
they had both lain since their capture, the father and son struggled
up in some sort of measure to their feet, and with hot, anxious eyes
surveyed the countenance of the gentleman before them, as if they felt
their fate hung upon the expression of his pallid face. The son was the
first to speak.

“How do you do, brother-in-law,” were his sullen and insulting words.

Mr. Blake shuddered and cast a look around.

“My wife?” murmured he.

“She is well,” was the assurance given by Mr. Gryce, “and in a room not
far from this. I will send for her if you say so.”

“No, not yet,” came in a sort of gasp; “let me look at these wretches
first, and understand if I can what my wife has to suffer from her
connection with them.”

“Your wife,” broke in the father, “what’s that to do with it; the
question is how do you like it and what will you do to get us clear of
this thing.”

“I will do nothing,” returned Mr. Blake. “You amply merit your doom and
you shall suffer it to the end for all time.”

“It will read well in the papers,” exclaimed the son.

“The papers are to know nothing about it,” I broke in. “All knowledge
of your connection with Mr. or Mrs. Blake is to be buried in this spot
before we or you leave it. Not a word of her or him is to cross the lips
of either of you from this hour. I have set that down as a condition and
it has got to be kept.”

“You have, have you,” thundered in chorus from father and son. “And who
are you to make conditions, and what do you think we are that you expect
us to keep them? Can you do anymore than put us back from where we came
from?”

For reply I took from my pocket the ring I had fished out of the ashes
of their kitchen stove on that memorable visit to their house, and
holding it up before their faces, looked them steadily in the eye.

A sudden wild glare followed by a bluish palor that robbed their
countenances of their usual semblance of daring ferocity, answered me
beyond my fondest hopes.

“I got that out of the stove where you had burned your prison clothing,”
 said I. “It is a cheap affair, but it will send you to the gallows if I
choose to use it against you. The pedlar--”

“Hush,” exclaimed the father in a low choked tone greatly in contrast to
any he had yet used in all our dealings with him. “Throw that ring out
of the window and I promise to hold my tongue about any matter you don’t
want spoke of. I’m not a fool--”

“Nor I,” was my quick reply, as I restored the ring to my pocket. “While
that remains in my possession together with certain facts concerning
your habits in that old house of yours which have lately been made known
to me, your life hangs by a thread I can any minute snip in two. Mr.
Blake here, has spent some portion of a night in your house and knows
how near it lies to a certain precipice, at foot of which--”

“Mein Gott, father, why don’t you say something!” leaped in cowed
accents from the son’s white lips. “If they want us to keep quiet, let
them say so and not go talking about things that--”

“Now look here,” interposed Mr. Gryce stepping before them with a look
that closed their mouths at once. “I will just tell you what we propose
to do. You are to go back to prison and serve your time out, there is
no help for that, but as long as you behave yourselves and continue
absolutely silent regarding your relationship to the wife of this
gentleman, you shall have paid into a certain bank that he will name,
a monthly sum that upon your dismissal from jail shall be paid you with
whatever interest it may have accumulated. You are ready to promise
that, are you not?” he inquired turning to Mr. Blake.

That gentleman bowed and named the sum, which was liberal enough, and
the bank.

“But,” continued the detective, ignoring the sudden flash of eye that
passed between the father and son, “let me or any of us hear of a word
having been uttered by you, which in the remotest way shall suggest that
you have in the world such a connection as Mrs. Blake, and the money not
only stops going into the bank, but old scores shall be raked up against
you with a zeal which if it does not stop your mouth in one way, will in
another, and that with a suddenness you will not altogether relish.”

The men with a dogged air from which the bravado had however fled,
turned and looked from one to the other of us in a fearful, inquiring
way that duly confessed to the force of the impression made by these
words upon their slow but not unimaginative minds.

“Do you three promise to keep our secret if we keep yours?” muttered the
father with an uneasy glance at my pocket.

“We certainly do,” was our solemn return.

“Very well; call in the girl and let me just look at her, then, before
we go. We won’t say nothing,” continued he, seeing Mr. Blake shrink,
“only she is my daughter and if I cannot bid her good-bye--”

“Let him see his child,” cried Mr. Blake turning with a shudder to the
window. “I--I wish it,” added he.

Straightway with hasty foot I left the room. Going to the little closet
where I had ordered his wife to remain concealed, I knocked and entered.
She was crouched in an attitude of prayer on the floor, her face buried
in her hands, and her whole person breathing that agony of suspense that
is a torture to the sensitive soul.

“Mrs. Blake,” said I, dismissing the landlady who stood in helpless
distress beside her, “the arrest has been satisfactorily made and your
father calls for you to say good-bye before going away with us. Will you
come?”

“But my--my--Mr. Blake?” exclaimed she leaping to her feet. “I am sure I
heard his footstep in the hall?”

“He is with your father and brother. It was at his command I came for
you.”

A gleam hard to interpret flashed for an instant over her face. With
her eye on the door she towered in her womanly dignity, while thoughts
innumerable seemed to rush in wild succession through her mind.

“Will you not come?” I urged.

“I--,” she paused. “I will go see my father,” she murmured, “but--”

Suddenly she trembled and drew back; a step was in the hall, on the
threshold, at her side; Mr. Blake had come to reclaim his bride.

“Mr. Blake!”

The word came from her in a low tone shaken with the concentrated
anguish of many a month of longing and despair, but there was no
invitation in its sound, and he who had held out his arms, stopped and
surveying her with a certain deprecatory glance in his proud eye, said,

“You are right; I have first my acknowledgments to make and your
forgiveness to ask before I can hope--”

“No, no,” she broke in, “your coming here is enough, I request no more.
If you felt unkindly toward me--”

“Unkindly?” A world of love thrilled in that word. “Luttra, I am your
husband and rejoice that I am so; it is to lay the devotion of my heart
and life at your feet that I seek your presence this hour. The year has
taught me--ah, what has not the year taught me of the worth of her I so
recklessly threw from me on my wedding day. Luttra,”--he held out his
hand--“will you crown all your other acts of devotion with a pardon
that will restore me to my manhood and that place in your esteem which I
covet above every other earthly good?”

Her face which had been raised to his with that earnest look we knew so
well, softened with an ineffable smile, but still she did not lay her
hand in his.

“And you say this to me in the very hour of my father’s and brother’s
arrest! With the remembrance in your mind of their bound and abject
forms lying before you guarded by police; knowing too, that they deserve
their ignominy and the long imprisonment that awaits them?”

“No, I say it on the day of the discovery and the restoration of that
wife for whom I have long searched, and to whom when found I have no
word to give but welcome, welcome, welcome.”

With the same deep smile she bowed her head, “Now let come what will,
I can never again be unhappy,” were the words I caught, uttered in the
lowest of undertones. But in another moment her head had regained its
steady poise and a great change had passed over her manner.

“Mr. Blake,” said she, “you are good; how good, I alone can know and
duly appreciate who have lived in your house this last year and seen
with eyes that missed nothing, just what your surroundings are and have
been from the earliest years of your proud life. But goodness must not
lead you into the committal of an act you must and will repent to your
dying day; or if it does, I who have learned my duty in the school of
adversity, must show the courage of two and forbid what every secret
instinct of my soul declares to be only provocative of shame and sorrow.
You would take me to your heart as your wife; do you realize what that
means?”

“I think I do,” was his earnest reply. “Relief from heart-ache, Luttra.”

Her smooth brow wrinkled with a sudden spasm of pain but her firm lips
did not quiver.

“It means,” said she, drawing nearer but not with that approach which
indicates yielding, “it means, shame to the proudest family that lives
in the land. It means silence as regards a past blotted by suggestions
of crime; and apprehension concerning a future across which the shadow
of prison walls must for so many years lie. It means, the hushing of
certain words upon beloved lips; the turning of cherished eyes from
visions where fathers and daughters ay, brothers and sisters are
seen joined together in tender companionship or loving embrace. It
means,--God help me to speak out--a home without the sanctity of
memories; a husband without the honors he has been accustomed to enjoy;
a wife with a fear gnawing like a serpent into her breast; and children,
yes, perhaps children from whose innocent lips the sacred word of
grandfather can never fall without wakening a blush on the cheeks of
their parents, which all their lovesome prattle will be helpless to
chase away.”

“Luttra, your father and your brother have given their consent to go
their dark way alone and trouble you no more. The shadow you speak of
may lie on your heart, dear wife, for these men are of your own blood,
but it need never invade the hearthstone beside which I ask you to sit.
The world will never know, whether you come with me or not, that
Luttra Blake was ever Luttra Schoenmaker. Will you not then give me the
happiness of striving to make such amends for the past, that you too,
will forget you ever bore any other name than the one you now honor so
truly?”

“O do not,” she began but paused with a sudden control of her emotion
that lifted her into an atmosphere almost holy in its significance. “Mr.
Blake,” said she, “I am a woman and therefore weak to the voice of love
pleading in my ear. But in one thing I am strong, and that is in my
sense of what is due to the man I have sworn to honor. Eleven months ago
I left you because your pleasure and my own dignity demanded it; to-day
I put by all the joy and exaltation you offer, because your position as
a gentleman, and your happiness as a man equally requires it.”

“My happiness as a man!” he broke in. “Ah, Luttra if you love me as I do
you--”

“I might perhaps yield,” she allowed with a faint smile. “But I love
you as a girl brought up amid surroundings from which her whole being
recoiled, must love the one who first brought light into her darkness
and opened up to her longing feet the way to a life of culture, purity
and honor. I were the basest of women could I consent to repay such a
boundless favor--”

“But Luttra,” he again broke in, “you married me knowing what your
father and brother were capable of committing.”

“Yes, yes; I was blinded by passion, a girl’s passion, Mr. Blake, born
of glamour and gratitude; not the self-forgetting devotion of a woman
who has tasted the bitterness of life and so learned its lesson of
sacrifice. I may not have thought, certainly I did not realize, what I
was doing. Besides, my father and brother were not convicted criminals
at that time, however weak they had proved themselves under temptation.
And then I believed I had left them behind me on the road of life; that
we were sundered, irrevocably cut loose from all possible connection.
But such ties are not to be snapped so easily. They found me, you see,
and they will find me again--”

“Never!” exclaimed her husband. “They are as dead to you as if the grave
had swallowed them. I have taken care of that.”

“But the shame! you have not taken care of that. That exists and must,
and while it does I remain where I can meet it alone. I love you; God’s
sun is not dearer to my eyes; but I will never cross your threshold as
your wife till the opprobrium can be cut loose from my skirts, and the
shadow uplifted from my brow. A queen with high thoughts in her eyes and
brave hopes in her heart were not too good to enter that door with you.
Shall a girl who has lived three weeks in an atmosphere of such crime
and despair, that these rooms have often seemed to me the gateway to
hell, carry there, even in secrecy, the effects of that atmosphere? I
will cherish your goodness in my heart but do not ask me to bury that
heart in any more exalted spot, than some humble country home, where
my life may be spent in good deeds and my love in prayers for the man I
hold dear, and because I hold dear, leave to his own high path among the
straight and unshadowed courses of the world.”

And with a gesture that inexorably shut him off while it expressed the
most touching appeal, she glided by him and took her way to the room
where her father and brother awaited her presence.



CHAPTER XIX. EXPLANATIONS


“I cannot endure this,” came in one burst of feeling from the lips of
Mr. Blake. “She don’t know, she don’t realize--Sir,” cried he, suddenly
becoming conscious of my presence in the room, “will you be good enough
to see that this note,” he hastily scribbled one, “is carried across the
way to my house and given to Mrs. Daniels.”

I bowed assent, routed up one of the men in the next room and despatched
it at once.

“Perhaps she will listen to the voice of one of her own sex if not to
me,” said he; and began pacing the floor of the narrow room in which we
were, with a wildness of impatience that showed to what depths had sunk
the hope of gaining this lovely woman for his own.

Feeling myself no longer necessary in that spot, I followed where my
wishes led and entered the room where Luttra was bidding good-bye to her
father.

“I shall never forget,” I heard her say as I crossed the floor to where
Mr. Gryce stood looking out of the window, “that your blood runs in my
veins together with that of my gentle-hearted, never-to-be-forgotten
mother. Whatever my fate may be or wherever I may hide the head you have
bowed to the dust, be sure I shall always lift up my hands in prayer for
your repentance and return to an honest life. God grant that my prayers
may be heard and that I may yet receive at your hands, a father’s kindly
blessing.”

The only answer to this was a heavily muttered growl that gave but
little promise of any such peaceful termination to a deeply vicious
life. Hearing it, Mr. Gryce hastened to procure his men and remove the
hardened wretches from the spot. All through the preparations for their
departure, she stood and watched their sullen faces with a wild yearning
in her eye that could scarcely be denied, but when the door finally
closed upon them, and she was left standing there with no one in the
room but myself she steadied herself up as one who is conscious that all
the storms of heaven are about to break upon her; and turning slowly
to the door waited with arms crossed and a still determination upon her
brow, the coming of the feet of him whose resolve she felt must have, as
yet been only strengthened by her resistance.

She had not long to wait. Almost with the closing of the street door
upon the detectives and their prisoners, Mr. Blake followed by Mrs.
Daniels and another lady whose thick veil and long cloak but illy
concealed the patrician features and stately form of the Countess De
Mirac, entered the room.

The surprise had its effect; Luttra was evidently for the moment thrown
off her guard.

“Mrs. Daniels!” she breathed, holding out her hands with a longing
gesture.

“My dear mistress!” returned that good woman, taking those hands in hers
but in a respectful way that proved the constraint imposed upon her by
Mr. Blake’s presence. “Do I see you again and safe?”

“You must have thought I cared little for the anxiety you would be sure
to feel,” said that fair young mistress, gazing with earnestness into
the glad but tearful eyes of the housekeeper. “But indeed, I have
been in no position to communicate with you, nor could I do so without
risking that to protect which I so outraged my feelings as to leave the
house at all. I mean the life and welfare of its master, Mrs. Daniels.”

“Ha, what is that?” quoth Mr. Blake. “It was to save me, you consented
to follow them?”

“Yes; what else would have led me to such an action? They might have
killed me, I would not have cared, but when they began to utter threats
against you--”

“Mrs. Blake,” exclaimed Mrs. Daniels, catching hold of her mistress’s
uplifted hand, and pointing to a scar that slightly disfigured her white
arm a little above the wrist, “Mrs. Blake, what’s that?”

A pink flush, the first I had seen on her usually pale countenance, rose
for an instant to her cheeks, and she seemed to hesitate.

“It was not there when I last saw you, Mrs. Blake.”

“No,” was the slow reply, “I found myself forced that night to inflict
upon myself a little wound. It is nothing, let it go.”

“No, Luttra I cannot let it go,” said her husband, advancing towards her
with something like gentle command. “I must hear not only about this but
all the other occurrences of that night. How came they to find you in
the refuge you had attained?”

“I think,” said she in a low tone the underlying suffering of which
it would be hard to describe, “that it was not to seek me they first
invaded your house. They had heard you were a rich man, and the sight
of that ladder running up the side of the new extension was too much for
them. Indeed I know that it was for purposes of robbery they came, for
they had hired this room opposite you some days previous to making the
attempt. You see they were almost destitute of money and though they had
some buried in the cellar of the old house in Vermont, they dared not
leave the city to procure it. My brother was obliged to do so later,
however. It was a surprise to them seeing me in your house. They had
reached the roof of the extension and were just lifting up the corner of
the shade I had dropped across the open window--I always open my window
a few minutes before preparing to retire--when I rose from the chair in
which I had been brooding, and turned up the gas. I was combing my hair
at the time and so of course they recognized me. Instantly they gave
a secret signal I, alas, remembered only too well, and crouching back,
bade me put out the light that they might enter with safety. I was at
first too much startled to realize the consequences of my action, and
with some vague idea that they had discovered my retreat and come for
purposes of advice or assistance, I did what they bid. Immediately they
threw back the shade and came in, their huge figures looming frightfully
in the faint light made by a distant gas lamp in the street below.
‘What do you want?’ were my first words uttered in a voice I scarcely
recognized for my own; ‘why do you steal on me like this in the night
and through an open window fifty feet from the ground? Aren’t you afraid
you will be discovered and sent back to the prison from which you have
escaped?’ Their reply sent a chill through my blood and awoke me to a
realization of what I had done in thus allowing two escaped convicts
to enter a house not my own. ‘We want money and we’re not afraid of
anything now you are here.’ And without heeding my exclamation of
horror, they coolly told me that they would wait where they were till
the household was asleep, when they would expect me to show them the way
to the silver closet or what was better, the safe or wherever it was Mr.
Blake kept his money. I saw they took me for a servant, as indeed I was,
and for some minutes I managed to preserve that position in their eyes.
But when in a sudden burst of rage at my refusal to help them, they
pushed me aside and hurried to the door with the manifest intention of
going below, I forgot prudence in my fears and uttered some wild
appeal to them not to do injury to any one in the house for it was my
husband’s. Of course that disclosure had its natural effect.

“They stopped, but only to beset me with questions till the whole truth
came out. I could not have committed a worse folly than thus taking them
into my confidence. Instantly the advantages to be gained by using my
secret connection with so wealthy a man for the purpose of cowering me
and blackmailing him, seemed to strike both their minds at once, slow
as they usually are to receive impressions. The silver-closet and
money-safe sank to a comparatively insignificant position in their eyes,
and to get me out of the house, and with my happiness at stake, treat
with the honorable man who notwithstanding his non-approval of me as a
woman, still regarded me as his lawfully wedded wife, became in their
eyes a thing of such wonderful promise they were willing to run any and
every risk to test its value. But here to their great astonishment
I rebelled; astonishment because they could not realize my desiring
anything above money and the position to which they declared I was by
law entitled. In vain I pleaded my love; in vain I threatened exposure
of their plans if not whereabouts. The mine of gold which they fondly
believed they had stumbled upon unawares, promised too richly to be
easily abandoned. ‘You must go with us,’ said they, ‘if not peaceably
then by force,’ and they actually advanced upon me, upsetting a chair
and tearing down one of the curtains to which I clung. It was then I
committed that little act concerning which you questioned me. I wanted
to show them I was not to be moved by threats of that character; that I
did not even fear the shedding of my blood; and that they would only be
wasting their time in trying to sway me by hints of personal violence.
And they were a little impressed, sufficiently so at least to turn their
threats in another direction, awakening fears at last which I could not
conceal, much as I felt it would be policy to do so. Gathering up a few
articles I most prized, my wedding ring, Mr. Blake, and a photograph of
yourself that Mrs. Daniels had been kind enough to give me, I put on my
bonnet and cloak and said I would go with them, since they persisted in
requiring it. The fact is I no longer possessed motive or strength
to resist. Even your unexpected appearance at the door, Mrs. Daniels,
offered no prospect of hope. Arouse the house? what would that do?
only reveal my cherished secret and perhaps jeopardize the life of my
husband. Besides, they were my own near kin, remember, and so had some
little claim upon my consideration, at least to the point of my not
personally betraying them unless they menaced immediate and actual harm.
The escape by the window which would have been a difficult task for most
women to perform, was easy enough for me. I was brought up to wild
ways you know, and the descent of a ladder forty feet long was a
comparatively trivial thing for me to accomplish. It was the tearing
away from a life of silent peace, the reentrance of my soul into an
atmosphere of sin and deadly plotting, that was the hard thing, the
difficult dreadful thing which hung weights to my feet, and made me
well nigh mad. And it was this which at the sight of a policeman in the
street led me to make an effort to escape. But it was not successful.
Though I was fortunate enough to free myself from the grasp of my father
and brother, I reached the gate on ----- street only to encounter the
eyes of him whose displeasure I most feared, looking sternly upon me
from the other side. The shock was too much for me in my then weak and
unnerved condition. Without considering anything but the fact that he
never had known and never must, that I had been in the same house with
him for so long, I rushed back to the corner and into the arms of the
men who awaited me. How you came to be there, Mr. Blake, or why you did
not open the gate and follow, I cannot say.”

“The gate was locked,” returned that gentleman. “You remember it closes
with a spring, and can only be opened by means of a key which I did not
have.”

“My father had it,” she murmured; “he spent a whole week in the endeavor
to get hold of it, and finally succeeded on the evening of the very day
he used it. It was left in the lock I believe.”

“So much for servants,” I whispered to myself.

“The next morning,” continued she, “they put the case very plainly
before me. I was at liberty to return at once to my home if I would
promise to work in their interest by making certain demands upon you as
your wife. All they wanted, said they, was a snug little sum and a lift
out of the country. If I would secure them these, they would trouble me
no more. But I could not concede to anything of that nature, of course,
and the consequence was these long weeks of imprisonment and suspense;
weeks that I do not now begrudge, seeing they have brought me the
assurance of your esteem and the knowledge, that wherever I go, your
thoughts will follow me with compassion if not with love.”

And having told her story and thus answered his demands, she assumed
once more the position of lofty reserve that seemed to shut him back
from advance like a wall of invincible crystal.



CHAPTER XX. THE BOND THAT UNITES


But he was not to be discouraged. “And after all this, after all you
have suffered for my sake and your own, do you think you have a right to
deny me the one desire of my heart? How can you reconcile it with your
ideas of devotion, Luttra?”

“My ideas of devotion look beyond the present, Mr. Blake. It is to save
you from years of wearing anxiety that I consent to the infliction upon
you of a passing pang.”

He took a bold step forward. “Luttra, you do not know a man’s heart. To
lose you now would not merely inflict a passing pang, but sow the seeds
of a grief that would go with me to the grave.”

“Do you then”--she began, but paused blushing. Mrs. Daniels took the
opportunity to approach her on the other side.

“My dear mistress,” said she, “you are wrong to hold out in this
matter.” And her manner betrayed something of the peculiar agitation
that had belonged to it in the former times of her secret embarassment.
“I, who have honored the family which I have so long served, above every
other in the land, tell you that you can do it no greater good than
to join it now, or inflict upon it any greater harm than to wilfully
withdraw yourself from the position in which God has placed you.”

“And I,” said another voice, that of the Countess de Mirac, who up to
this time had held herself in the background, but who now came forward
and took her place with the rest, “I, who have borne the name of Blake,
and who am still the proudest of them all at heart, I, the Countess de
Mirac, cousin to your husband there, repeat what this good woman has
said, and in holding out my hand to you, ask you to make my cousin happy
and his family contented by assuming that position in his household
which the law as well as his love accords you.”

The girl looked at the daintily gloved hand held out to her, colored
faintly, and put her own within it.

“I thank you for your goodness,” said she, surveying with half-sad,
half-admiring glances, the somewhat pale face of the beautiful brunette.

“And you will yield to our united requests?” She cast her eye down at
the spot where her father and brother had cowered in their shackles, and
shook her head. “I dare not,” said she.

Immediately Mrs. Daniels, whose emotion had been increasing every moment
since she last spoke, plunged her hand into her bosom and drew out a
folded paper.

“Mrs. Blake,” said she, “if you could be convinced that what I have told
you was true, and that you would be irretrievably injuring your husband
and his interests, by persisting in that desertion of him which you
purpose, would you not consent to reconsider your determination, settled
as it appears to be?”

“If I could be made to see that, most certainly,” returned she in a low
voice whose broken accents betrayed at what cost she remained true to
her resolve. “But I cannot.”

“Perhaps the sight of this paper will help you,” said she. And turning
to Mr. Blake she exclaimed, “Your pardon for what I am called upon to
do. A duty has been laid upon me which I cannot avoid, hard as it is for
an old servant to perform. This paper--but it is no more than just that
you, sir, should see and read it first.” And with a hand that quivered
with fear or some equally strong emotion, she put it in his clasp.

The exclamation that rewarded the act made us all start forward. “My
father’s handwriting!” were his words.

“Executed under my eye,” observed Mrs. Daniels.

His glance ran rapidly down the sheet and rested upon the final
signature.

“Why has this been kept from me?” demanded he, turning upon Mrs. Daniels
with sternness.

“Your father so willed it,” was her reply. “‘For a year’ was his
command, ‘you shall keep this my last will and testament which I give
into your care with my dying hands, a secret from the world. At the
expiration of that time mark if my son’s wife sits at the head of her
husband’s table; if she does and is happy, suppress this by deliberately
giving it to the flames, but if from any reason other than death, she is
not seen there, carry it at once to my son, and bid him as he honors
my memory, to see that my wishes as there expressed are at once carried
out.’”

The paper in Mr. Blake’s hand fluttered.

“You are aware what those wishes are?” said he.

“I steadied his hand while he wrote,” was her sad and earnest reply.

Mr. Blake turned with a look of inexpressible deference to his wife.

“Madame,” said he “when I urged you with such warmth to join your
fate to mine and honor my house by presiding over it, I thought I was
inviting you to share the advantages of wealth as well as the love of
a lonely man’s heart. This paper undeceives me. Luttra, the
daughter-in-law of Abner Blake, not Holman, his son, is the one who
by the inheritance of his millions has the right to command in this
presence.”

With a cry she took from him the will whose purport was thus briefly
made known. “O, how could he, how could he?” exclaimed she, running her
eye down the sheet, and then crushing it spasmodically to her breast.
“Did he not realize that he could do me no greater wrong?” Then in one
yielding up of her whole womanhood to the mighty burst of passion that
had been flooding the defenses of her heart for so long, she exclaimed
in a voice the mingled rapture and determination of which rings in my
ears even now, “And is it a thing like this with its suggestions of
mercenary interest that shall bridge the gulf that separates you and me?
Shall the giving or the gaining of a fortune make necessary the unital
of lives over which holier influences have beamed and loftier hopes
shone? No, no; by the smile with which your dying father took me to his
breast, love alone, with the hope and confidence it gives, shall be the
bond to draw us together and make of the two separate planes on which we
stand, a common ground where we can meet and be happy.”

And with one supreme gesture she tore into pieces the will which she
held, and sank all aglow with woman’s divinest joy into the arms held
out to receive her.

                           * * * * *

I was present at the wedding-reception given them by the Countess De
Mirac in her elegant apartments at the Windsor. I never saw a happier
bride, nor a husband in whose eyes burned a deeper contentment. To all
questions as to who this extraordinary woman could be, where she was
found, and in what place and at what time she was married, the Countess
had apt replies whose art of hushing curiosity without absolutely
satisfying it, was one of the tokens she yet preserved, of her short
sway as grand lady, in the gayest and most hollow city of the world.

As I prepared to leave a scene perhaps the most gratifying in many
respects that I had ever witnessed, I felt a slight touch on my arm. It
came from Mrs. Blake who with her husband had crossed the room to bid me
farewell.

“Will you allow me to thank you,” said she, “for the risk you ran for
me one day and of which I have just heard. It was an act that merits the
gratitude of years, and as such shall be always remembered by me. If
the old French artist with the racking cough ever desires a favor at my
hands, let him feel free to ask it. The interest I experienced in him in
the days of my trouble, will suffer no abatement in these of my joy and
prosperity.” And with a look that was more than words, she gave me a
flower from the bouquet she held in her hand, and smilingly withdrew.



CHAPTER I.

RED LIGHT.


Mr. Gryce was melancholy. He had attained that period in life when the
spirits flag and enthusiasm needs a constant spur, and of late there had
been a lack of special excitement, and he felt dull and superannuated.
He was even contemplating resigning his position on the force and
retiring to the little farm he had bought for himself in Westchester;
and this in itself did not tend to cheerfulness, for he was one to whom
action was a necessity and the exercise of his mental faculties more
inspiring than any possible advantage which might accrue to him from
their use.

But he was not destined to carry out this impulse yet. For just at the
height of his secret dissatisfaction there came a telephone message to
Headquarters which roused the old man to something like his former vigor
and gave to the close of this gray fall day an interest he had not
expected to feel again in this or any other kind of day. It was sent
from Carter's well-known drug store, and was to the effect that a lady
had just sent a boy in from the street to say that a strange crime had
been committed in ----'s mansion round the corner. The boy did not know
the lady, and was shy about showing the money she had given him, but
that he had money was very evident, also, that he was frightened enough
for his story to be true. If the police wished to communicate with him,
he could be found at Carter's, where he would be detained till an order
for his release should be received.

A _strange_ crime! That word "strange" struck Mr. Gryce, and made him
forget his years in wondering what it meant. Meanwhile the men about him
exchanged remarks upon the house brought thus unexpectedly to their
notice. As it was one of the few remaining landmarks of the preceding
century, and had been made conspicuous moreover by the shops,
club-houses, and restaurants pressing against it on either side, it had
been a marked spot for years even to those who knew nothing of its
history or traditions.

And now a crime had taken place in it! Mr. Gryce, in whose ears that
word "strange" rang with quiet insistence, had but to catch the eye of
the inspector in charge to receive an order to investigate the affair.
He started at once, and proceeded first to the drug store. There he
found the boy, whom he took along with him to the house indicated in the
message. On the way he made him talk, but there was nothing the poor
waif could add to the story already sent over the telephone. He
persisted in saying that a lady (he did not say woman) had come up to
him while he was looking at some toys in a window, and, giving him a
piece of money, had drawn him along the street as far as the drug store.
Here she showed him another coin, promising to add it to the one he had
already pocketed if he would run in to the telephone clerk with a
message for the police. He wanted the money, and when he grabbed at it
she said that all he had to do was to tell the clerk that a strange
crime had been committed in the old house on ---- Street. This scared
him, and he was sliding off, when she caught him again and shook him
until his wits came back, after which he ran into the store and
delivered the message.

There was candor in the boy's tone, and Mr. Gryce was disposed to
believe him; but when he was asked to describe the lady, he showed that
his powers of observation were no better than those of most of his
class. All he could say was that she was a stunner, and wore shiny
clothes and jewels, and Mr. Gryce, recognizing the lad's limitations at
the very moment he found himself in view of the house he was making for,
ceased to question him, and directed all his attention to the building
he was approaching.

Nothing in the exterior bespoke crime or even disturbance. A shut door,
a clean stoop, heavily curtained windows (some of which were further
shielded by closely drawn shades) were eloquent of inner quiet and
domestic respectability, while its calm front of brick, with brownstone
trimmings, offered a pleasing contrast to the adjoining buildings
jutting out on either side, alive with signs and humming with business.

"Some mistake," muttered Gryce to himself, as the perfect calm reigning
over the whole establishment struck him anew. But before he had decided
that he had been made the victim of a hoax, a movement took place in the
area under the stoop, and an officer stepped out, with a countenance
expressive of sufficient perplexity for Mr. Gryce to motion him back
with the hurried inquiry: "Anything wrong? Any blood shed? All seems
quiet here."

The officer, recognizing the old detective, touched his hat. "Can't get
in," said he. "Have rung all the bells. Would think the house empty if I
had not seen something like a stir in one of the windows overhead. Shall
I try to make my way into the rear yard through one of the lower windows
of Knapp & Co.'s store, next door?"

"Yes, and take this boy with you. Lock him up in some one of their
offices, and then break your way into this house by some means. It ought
to be easy enough from the back yard."

The officer nodded, took the boy by the arm, and in a trice had
disappeared with him into the adjoining store. Mr. Gryce remained in the
area, where he was presently besieged by a crowd of passers-by, eager to
add their curiosity to the trouble they had so quickly scented. The
opening of the door from the inside speedily put an end to importunities
for which he had as yet no reply, and he was enabled to slip within,
where he found himself in a place of almost absolute quiet. Before him
lay a basement hall leading to a kitchen, which, even at that moment, he
noticed to be in trimmer condition than is usual where much housework is
done, but he saw nothing that bespoke tragedy, or even a break in the
ordinary routine of life as observed in houses of like size and
pretension.

Satisfied that what he sought was not to be found here, he followed the
officer upstairs. As they emerged upon the parlor floor, the latter
dropped the following information:

"Mr. Raffner of the firm next door says that the man who lives here is
an odd sort of person whom nobody knows; a bookworm, I think they call
him. He has occupied the house six months, yet they have never seen any
one about the premise but himself and a strange old servant as peculiar
and uncommunicative as his master."

"I know," muttered Mr. Gryce. He did know, everybody knew, that this
house, once the seat of one of New York's most aristocratic families,
was inhabited at present by a Mr. Adams, noted alike for his more than
common personal attractions, his wealth, and the uncongenial nature of
his temperament, which precluded all association with his kind. It was
this knowledge which had given zest to this investigation. To enter the
house of such a man was an event in itself: to enter it on an errand of
life and death--Well, it is under the inspiration of such opportunities
that life is reawakened in old veins, especially when those veins
connect the heart and brain of a sagacious, if octogenarian, detective.

The hall in which they now found themselves was wide, old-fashioned, and
sparsely furnished in the ancient manner to be observed in such
time-honored structures. Two doors led into this hall, both of which now
stood open. Taking advantage of this fact, they entered the nearest,
which was nearly opposite the top of the staircase they had just
ascended, and found themselves in a room barren as a doctor's outer
office. There was nothing here worth their attention, and they would
have left the place as unceremoniously as they had entered it if they
had not caught glimpses of richness which promised an interior of
uncommon elegance, behind the half-drawn folds of a portière at the
further end of the room.

Advancing through the doorway thus indicated, they took one look about
them and stood appalled. Nothing in their experience (and they had both
experienced much) had prepared them for the thrilling, the solemn nature
of what they were here called upon to contemplate.

Shall I attempt its description?

A room small and of circular shape, hung with strange tapestries
relieved here and there by priceless curios, and lit, although it was
still daylight, by a jet of rose-colored light concentrated, not on the
rows and rows of books around the lower portion of the room, or on the
one great picture which at another time might have drawn the eye and
held the attention, but on the upturned face of a man lying on a
bearskin rug with a dagger in his heart and on his breast a cross whose
golden lines, sharply outlined against his long, dark, swathing garment,
gave him the appearance of a saint prepared in some holy place for
burial, save that the dagger spoke of violent death, and his face of an
anguish for which Mr. Gryce, notwithstanding his lifelong experience,
found no name, so little did it answer to a sensation of fear, pain, or
surprise, or any of the emotions usually visible on the countenances of
such as have fallen under the unexpected stroke of an assassin.




CHAPTER II.

MYSTERIES.


A moment of indecision, of awe even, elapsed before Mr. Gryce recovered
himself. The dim light, the awesome silence, the unexpected surroundings
recalling a romantic age, the motionless figure of him who so lately had
been the master of the house, lying outstretched as for the tomb, with
the sacred symbol on his breast offering such violent contradiction to
the earthly passion which had driven the dagger home, were enough to
move even the tried spirit of this old officer of the law and confuse a
mind which, in the years of his long connection with the force, had had
many serious problems to work upon, but never one just like this.

It was only for a moment, though. Before the man behind him had given
utterance to his own bewilderment and surprise, Mr. Gryce had passed in
and taken his stand by the prostrate figure.

That it was that of a man who had long since ceased to breathe he could
not for a moment doubt; yet his first act was to make sure of the fact
by laying his hand on the pulse and examining the eyes, whose expression
of reproach was such that he had to call up all his professional
sangfroid to meet them.

He found the body still warm, but dead beyond all question, and, once
convinced of this, he forbore to draw the dagger from the wound, though
he did not fail to give it the most careful attention before turning his
eyes elsewhere. It was no ordinary weapon. It was a curio from some
oriental shop. This in itself seemed to point to suicide, but the
direction in which the blade had entered the body and the position of
the wound were not such as would be looked for in a case of self-murder.

The other clews were few. Though the scene had been one of bloodshed and
death, the undoubted result of a sudden and fierce attack, there were no
signs of struggle to be found in the well-ordered apartment. Beyond a
few rose leaves scattered on the floor, the room was a scene of peace
and quiet luxury. Even the large table which occupied the centre of the
room and near which the master of the house had been standing when
struck gave no token of the tragedy which had been enacted at its side.
That is, not at first glance; for though its large top was covered with
articles of use and ornament, they all stood undisturbed and presumably
in place, as if the shock which had laid their owner low had failed to
be communicated to his belongings.

The contents of the table were various. Only a man of complex tastes and
attainments could have collected and arranged in one small compass
pipes, pens, portraits, weights, measures, Roman lamps, Venetian glass,
rare porcelains, medals, rough metal work, manuscript, a scroll of
music, a pot of growing flowers, and--and--(this seemed oddest of all) a
row of electric buttons, which Mr. Gryce no sooner touched than the
light which had been burning redly in the cage of fretted ironwork
overhead changed in a twinkling to a greenish glare, filling the room
with such ghastly tints that Mr. Gryce sought in haste another button,
and, pressing it, was glad to see a mild white radiance take the place
of the sickly hue which had added its own horror to the already solemn
terrors of the spot.

"Childish tricks for a man of his age and position," ruminated Mr.
Gryce; but after catching another glimpse of the face lying upturned at
his feet he was conscious of a doubt as to whether the owner of that
countenance could have possessed an instinct which was in any wise
childish, so strong and purposeful were his sharply cut features.
Indeed, the face was one to make an impression under any circumstances.
In the present instance, and with such an expression stamped upon it, it
exerted a fascination which disturbed the current of the detective's
thoughts whenever by any chance he allowed it to get between him and his
duty. To attribute folly to a man with such a mouth and such a chin was
to own one's self a poor judge of human nature. Therefore, the lamp
overhead, with its electric connection and changing slides, had a
meaning which at present could be sought for only in the evidences of
scientific research observable in the books and apparatus everywhere
surrounding him.

Letting the white light burn on, Mr. Gryce, by a characteristic effort,
shifted his attention to the walls, covered, as I have said, with
tapestries and curios. There was nothing on them calculated to aid him
in his research into the secret of this crime, unless--yes, there _was_
something, a bent-down nail, wrenched from its place, the nail on which
the cross had hung which now lay upon the dead man's heart. The cord by
which it had been suspended still clung to the cross and mingled its red
threads with that other scarlet thread which had gone to meet it from
the victim's wounded breast. Who had torn down that cross? Not the
victim himself. With such a wound, any such movement would have been
impossible. Besides, the nail and the empty place on the wall were as
far removed from where he lay as was possible in the somewhat
circumscribed area of this circular apartment. Another's hand, then, had
pulled down this symbol of peace and pardon, and placed it where the
dying man's fleeting breath would play across it, a peculiar exhibition
of religious hope or mad remorse, to the significance of which Mr. Gryce
could not devote more than a passing thought, so golden were the moments
in which he found himself alone upon this scene of crime.

Behind the table and half-way up the wall was a picture, the only large
picture in the room. It was the portrait of a young girl of an extremely
interesting and pathetic beauty. From her garb and the arrangement of
her hair, it had evidently been painted about the end of our civil war.
In it was to be observed the same haunting quality of intellectual charm
visible in the man lying prone upon the floor, and though she was fair
and he dark, there was sufficient likeness between the two to argue some
sort of relationship between them. Below this picture were fastened a
sword, a pair of epaulettes, and a medal such as was awarded for valor
in the civil war.

"Mementoes which may help us in our task," mused the detective.

Passing on, he came unexpectedly upon a narrow curtain, so dark of hue
and so akin in pattern to the draperies on the adjoining walls that it
had up to this time escaped his attention. It was not that of a window,
for such windows as were to be seen in this unique apartment were high
upon the wall, indeed, almost under the ceiling. It must, therefore,
drape the opening into still another communicating room. And such he
found to be the case. Pushing this curtain aside, he entered a narrow
closet containing a bed, a dresser, and a small table. The bed was the
narrow cot of a bachelor, and the dresser that of a man of luxurious
tastes and the utmost nicety of habit. Both the bed and dresser were in
perfect order, save for a silver-backed comb, which had been taken from
the latter, and which he presently found lying on the floor at the other
end of the room. This and the presence of a pearl-handled parasol on a
small stand near the door proclaimed that a woman had been there within
a short space of time. The identity of this woman was soon established
in his eyes by a small but unmistakable token connecting her with the
one who had been the means of sending in the alarm to the police. The
token of which I speak was a little black spangle, called by milliners
and mantua-makers a sequin, which lay on the threshold separating this
room from the study; and as Mr. Gryce, attracted by its sparkle, stooped
to examine it, his eye caught sight of a similar one on the floor
beyond, and of still another a few steps farther on. The last one lay
close to the large centre-table before which he had just been standing.

The dainty trail formed by these bright sparkling drops seemed to affect
him oddly. He knew, minute observer that he was, that in the manufacture
of this garniture the spangles are strung on a thread which, if once
broken, allows them to drop away one by one, till you can almost follow
a woman so arrayed by the sequins that fall from her. Perhaps it was the
delicate nature of the clew thus offered that pleased him, perhaps it
was a recognition of the irony of fate in thus making a trap for unwary
mortals out of their vanities. Whatever it was, the smile with which he
turned his eye upon the table toward which he had thus been led was very
eloquent. But before examining this article of furniture more closely,
he attempted to find out where the thread had become loosened which had
let the spangles fall. Had it caught on any projection in doorway or
furniture? He saw none. All the chairs were cushioned and--But wait!
there was the cross! That had a fretwork of gold at its base. Might not
this filagree have caught in her dress as she was tearing down the cross
from the wall and so have started the thread which had given him this
exquisite clew?

Hastening to the spot where the cross had hung, he searched the floor at
his feet, but found nothing to confirm his conjecture until he had
reached the rug on which the prostrate man lay. There, amid the long
hairs of the bearskin, he came upon one other spangle, and knew that the
woman in the shiny clothes had stooped there before him.

Satisfied on this point, he returned to the table, and this time
subjected it to a thorough and minute examination. That the result was
not entirely unsatisfactory was evident from the smile with which he
eyed his finger after having drawn it across a certain spot near the
inkstand, and also from the care with which he lifted that inkstand and
replaced it in precisely the same spot from which he had taken it up.
Had he expected to find something concealed under it? Who can tell? A
detective's face seldom yields up its secrets.

He was musing quite intently before this table when a quick step behind
him made him turn. Styles, the officer, having now been over the house,
had returned, and was standing before him in the attitude of one who has
something to say.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Gryce, with a quick movement in his direction.

For answer the officer pointed to the staircase visible through the
antechamber door.

"Go up!" was indicated by his gesture.

Mr. Gryce demurred, casting a glance around the room, which at that
moment interested him so deeply. At this the man showed some excitement,
and, breaking silence, said:

"Come! I have lighted on the guilty party. He is in a room upstairs."

"He?" Mr. Gryce was evidently surprised at the pronoun.

"Yes; there can be no doubt about it. When you see him--but what is
that? Is he coming down? I'm sure there's nobody else in the house.
Don't you hear footsteps, sir?"

Mr. Gryce nodded. Some one was certainly descending the stairs.

"Let us retreat," suggested Styles. "Not because the man is dangerous,
but because it is very necessary you should see him before he sees you.
He's a very strange-acting man, sir; and if he comes in here, will be
sure to do something to incriminate himself. Where can we hide?"

Mr. Gryce remembered the little room he had just left, and drew the
officer toward it. Once installed inside, he let the curtain drop till
only a small loophole remained. The steps, which had been gradually
growing louder, kept advancing; and presently they could hear the
intruder's breathing, which was both quick and labored.

"Does he know that any one has entered the house? Did he see you when
you came upon him upstairs?" whispered Mr. Gryce into the ear of the man
beside him.

Styles shook his head, and pointed eagerly toward the opposite door. The
man for whose appearance they waited had just lifted the portière and in
another moment stood in full view just inside the threshold.

Mr. Gryce and his attendant colleague both stared. Was this the
murderer? This pale, lean servitor, with a tray in his hand on which
rested a single glass of water?

Mr. Gryce was so astonished that he looked at Styles for explanation.
But that officer, hiding his own surprise, for he had not expected this
peaceful figure, urged him in a whisper to have patience, and both,
turning toward the man again, beheld him advance, stop, cast one look at
the figure lying on the floor and then let slip the glass with a low cry
that at once changed to something like a howl.

"Look at him! Look at him!" urged Styles, in a hurried whisper. "Watch
what he will do now. You will see a murderer at work."

And sure enough, in another instant this strange being, losing all
semblance to his former self, entered upon a series of pantomimic
actions which to the two men who watched him seemed both to explain and
illustrate the crime which had just been enacted there.

With every appearance of passion, he stood contemplating the empty air
before him, and then, with one hand held stretched out behind him in a
peculiarly cramped position, he plunged with the other toward a table
from which he made a feint of snatching something which he no sooner
closed his hand upon than he gave a quick side-thrust, still at the
empty air, which seemed to quiver in return, so vigorous was his action
and so evident his intent.

The reaction following this thrust; the slow unclosing of his hand from
an imaginary dagger; the tottering of his body backward; then the moment
when with wide open eyes he seemed to contemplate in horror the result
of his own deed;--these needed no explanation beyond what was given by
his writhing features and trembling body. Gradually succumbing to the
remorse or terror of his own crime, he sank lower and lower, until,
though with that one arm still stretched out, he lay in an inert heap on
the floor.

"It is what I saw him do upstairs," murmured Styles into the ear of the
amazed detective. "He has evidently been driven insane by his own act."

Mr. Gryce made no answer. Here was a problem for the solution of which
he found no precedent in all his past experience.




CHAPTER III.

THE MUTE SERVITOR.


Meanwhile the man who, to all appearance, had just re-enacted before
them the tragedy which had so lately taken place in this room, rose to
his feet, and, with a dazed air as unlike his former violent expression
as possible, stooped for the glass he had let fall, and was carrying it
out when Mr. Gryce called to him:

"Wait, man! You needn't take that glass away. We first want to hear how
your master comes to be lying here dead."

It was a demand calculated to startle any man. But this one showed
himself totally unmoved by it, and was passing on when Styles laid a
detaining hand on his shoulder.

"Stop!" said he. "What do you mean by sliding off like this? Don't you
hear the gentleman speaking to you?"

This time the appeal told. The glass fell again from the man's hand,
mingling its clink (for it struck the floor this time and broke) with
the cry he gave--which was not exactly a cry either, but an odd sound
between a moan and a shriek. He had caught sight of the men who were
seeking to detain him, and his haggard look and cringing form showed
that he realized at last the terrors of his position. Next minute he
sought to escape, but Styles, gripping him more firmly, dragged him back
to where Mr. Gryce stood beside the bearskin rug on which lay the form
of his dead master.

Instantly, at the sight of this recumbent figure, another change took
place in the entrapped butler. Joy--that most hellish of passions in the
presence of violence and death--illumined his wandering eye and
distorted his mouth; and, seeking no disguise for the satisfaction he
felt, he uttered a low but thrilling laugh, which rang in unholy echo
through the room.

Mr. Gryce, moved in spite of himself by an abhorrence which the
irresponsible condition of this man seemed only to emphasize, waited
till the last faint sounds of this diabolical mirth had died away in the
high recesses of the space above. Then, fixing the glittering eye of
this strange creature with his own, which, as we know, so seldom dwelt
upon that of his fellow-beings, he sternly said:

"There now! Speak! Who killed this man? You were in the house with him,
and should know."

The butler's lips opened and a string of strange gutturals poured forth,
while with his one disengaged hand (for the other was held to his side
by Styles) he touched his ears and his lips, and violently shook his
head.

There was but one interpretation to be given to this. The man was deaf
and dumb.

The shock of this discovery was too much for Styles. His hand fell from
the other's arms, and the man, finding himself free, withdrew to his
former place in the room, where he proceeded to enact again and with
increased vivacity first the killing of and then the mourning for his
master, which but a few moments before had made so suggestive an
impression upon them. This done, he stood waiting, but this time with
that gleam of infernal joy in the depths of his quick, restless eyes
which made his very presence in this room of death seem a sacrilege and
horror.

Styles could not stand it. "Can't you speak?" he shouted. "Can't you
hear?"

The man only smiled, an evil and gloating smile, which Mr. Gryce thought
it his duty to cut short.

"Take him away!" he cried. "Examine him carefully for blood marks. I am
going up to the room where you saw him first. He is too nearly linked to
this crime not to carry some trace of it away with him."

But for once even this time-tried detective found himself at fault. No
marks were found on the old servant, nor could they discover in the
rooms above any signs by which this one remaining occupant of the house
could be directly associated with the crime which had taken place within
it. Thereupon Mr. Gryce grew very thoughtful and entered upon another
examination of the two rooms which to his mind held all the clews that
would ever be given to this strange crime.

The result was meagre, and he was just losing himself again in
contemplation of the upturned face, whose fixed mouth and haunting
expression told such a story of suffering and determination, when there
came from the dim recesses above his head a cry, which, forming itself
into two words, rang down with startling clearness in this most
unexpected of appeals:

"Remember Evelyn!"

Remember Evelyn! Who was Evelyn? And to whom did this voice belong, in a
house which had already been ransacked in vain for other occupants? It
seemed to come from the roof, and, sure enough, when Mr. Gryce looked up
he saw, swinging in a cage strung up nearly to the top of one of the
windows I have mentioned, an English starling, which, in seeming
recognition of the attention it had drawn upon itself, craned its neck
as Mr. Gryce looked up, and shrieked again, with fiercer insistence than
before:

"Remember Evelyn!"

It was the last uncanny touch in a series of uncanny experiences. With
an odd sense of nightmare upon him, Mr. Gryce leaned forward on the
study table in his effort to obtain a better view of this bird, when,
without warning, the white light, which since his last contact with the
electrical apparatus had spread itself through the room, changed again
to green, and he realized that he had unintentionally pressed a button
and thus brought into action another slide in the curious lamp over his
head.

Annoyed, for these changing hues offered a problem he was as yet too
absorbed in other matters to make any attempt to solve, he left the
vicinity of the table, and was about to leave the room when he heard
Styles's voice rise from the adjoining antechamber, where Styles was
keeping guard over the old butler:

"Shall I let him go, Mr. Gryce? He seems very uneasy; not dangerous, you
know, but anxious; as if he had forgotten something or recalled some
unfulfilled duty."

"Yes, let him go," was the detective's quick reply. "Only watch and
follow him. Every movement he makes is of interest. Unconsciously he may
be giving us invaluable clews." And he approached the door to note for
himself what the man might do.

"Remember Evelyn!" rang out the startling cry from above, as the
detective passed between the curtains. Irresistibly he looked back and
up. To whom was this appeal from a bird's throat so imperatively
addressed? To him or to the man on the floor beneath, whose ears were
forever closed? It might be a matter of little consequence, and it might
be one involving the very secret of this tragedy. But whether important
or not, he could pay no heed to it at this juncture, for the old butler,
coming from the front hall whither he had hurried on being released by
Styles, was at that moment approaching him, carrying in one hand his
master's hat and in the other his master's umbrella.

Not knowing what this new movement might mean, Mr. Gryce paused where he
was and waited for the man to advance. Seeing this, the mute, to whose
face and bearing had returned the respectful immobility of the trained
servant, handed over the articles he had brought, and then noiselessly,
and with the air of one who had performed an expected service, retreated
to his old place in the antechamber, where he sat down again and fell
almost immediately into his former dazed condition.

"Humph! mind quite lost, memory uncertain, testimony valueless," were
the dissatisfied reflections of the disappointed detective as he
replaced Mr. Adams's hat and umbrella on the hall rack. "Has he been
brought to this state by the tragedy which has just taken place here, or
is his present insane condition its precursor and cause?" Mr. Gryce
might have found some answer to this question in his own mind if, at
that moment, the fitful clanging of the front door bell, which had
hitherto testified to the impatience of the curious crowd outside, had
not been broken into by an authoritative knock which at once put an end
to all self-communing.

The coroner, or some equally important person, was at hand, and the
detective's golden hour was over.




CHAPTER IV.

A NEW EXPERIENCE FOR MR. GRYCE.


Mr. Gryce felt himself at a greater disadvantage in his attempt to solve
the mystery of this affair than in any other which he had entered upon
in years. First, the victim had been a solitary man, with no household
save his man-of-all-work, the mute. Secondly, he had lived in a portion
of the city where no neighbors were possible; and he had even lacked, as
it now seemed, any very active friends. Though some hours had elapsed
since his death had been noised abroad, no one had appeared at the door
with inquiries or information. This seemed odd, considering that he had
been for some months a marked figure in this quarter of the town. But,
then, everything about this man was odd, nor would it have been in
keeping with his surroundings and peculiar manner of living for him to
have had the ordinary associations of men of his class.

This absence of the usual means of eliciting knowledge from the
surrounding people, added to, rather than detracted from, the interest
which Mr. Gryce was bound to feel in the case, and it was with a feeling
of relief that a little before midnight he saw the army of reporters,
medical men, officials, and such others as had followed in the coroner's
wake, file out of the front door and leave him again, for a few hours at
least, master of the situation.

For there were yet two points which he desired to settle before he took
his own much-needed rest. The first occupied his immediate attention.
Passing before a chair in the hall on which a small boy sat dozing, he
roused him with the remark:

"Come, Jake, it's time to look lively. I want you to go with me to the
exact place where that lady ran across you to-day."

The boy, half dead with sleep, looked around him for his hat.

"I'd like to see my mother first," he pleaded. "She must be done up
about me. I never stayed away so long before."

"Your mother knows where you are. I sent a message to her hours ago. She
gave a very good report of you, Jake; says you're an obedient lad and
that you never have told her a falsehood."

"She's a good mother," the boy warmly declared. "I'd be as bad--as bad
as my father was, if I did not treat her well." Here his hand fell on
his cap, which he put on his head.

"I'm ready," said he.

Mr. Gryce at once led the way into the street.

The hour was late, and only certain portions of the city showed any real
activity. Into one of these thoroughfares they presently came, and
before the darkened window of one of the lesser shops paused, while Jake
pointed out the two stuffed frogs engaged with miniature swords in
mortal combat at which he had been looking when the lady came up and
spoke to him.

Mr. Gryce eyed the boy rather than the frogs, though probably the former
would have sworn that his attention had never left that miniature
conflict.

"Was she a pretty lady?" he asked.

The boy scratched his head in some perplexity.

"She made me a good deal afraid of her," he said. "She had very splendid
clothes; oh, gorgeous!" he cried, as if on this question there could be
no doubt.

"And she was young, and carried a bunch of flowers, and seemed troubled?
What! not young, and carried no flowers--and wasn't even anxious and
trembling?"

The boy, who had been shaking his head, looked nonplussed.

"I think as she was what you might call troubled. But she wasn't crying,
and when she spoke to me, she put more feeling into her grip than into
her voice. She just dragged me to the drug-store, sir. If she hadn't
given me money first, I should have wriggled away in spite of her. But I
likes money, sir; I don't get too much of it."

Mr. Gryce by this time was moving on. "Not young," he repeated to
himself. "Some old flame, then, of Mr. Adams; they're apt to be
dangerous, very dangerous, more dangerous than the young ones."

In front of the drug-store he paused. "Show me where she stood while you
went in."

The boy pointed out the identical spot. He seemed as eager as the
detective.

"And was she standing there when you came out?"

"Oh, no, sir; she went away while I was inside."

"Did you see her go? Can you tell me whether she went up street or
down?"

"I had one eye on her, sir; I was afraid she was coming into the shop
after me, and my arm was too sore for me to want her to clinch hold on
it again. So when she started to go, I took a step nearer, and saw her
move toward the curbstone and hold up her hand. But it wasn't a car she
was after, for none came by for several minutes."

The fold between Mr. Gryce's eyes perceptibly smoothed out.

"Then it was some cabman or hack-driver she hailed. Were there any empty
coaches about that you saw?"

The boy had not noticed. He had reached the limit of his observations,
and no amount of further questioning could elicit anything more from
him. This Mr. Gryce soon saw, and giving him into the charge of one of
his assistants who was on duty at this place, he proceeded back to the
ill-omened house where the tragedy itself had occurred.

"Any one waiting for me?" he inquired of Styles, who came to the door.

"Yes, sir; a young man; name, Hines. Says he's an electrician."

"That's the man I want. Where is he?"

"In the parlor, sir."

"Good! I'll see him. But don't let any one else in. Anybody upstairs?"

"No, sir, all gone. Shall I go up or stay here?"

"You'd better go up. I'll look after the door."

Styles nodded, and went toward the stairs, up which he presently
disappeared. Mr. Gryce proceeded to the parlor.

A dapper young man with an intelligent eye rose to meet him. "You sent
for me," said he.

The detective nodded, asked a few questions, and seeming satisfied with
the replies he received, led the way into Mr. Adams's study, from which
the body had been removed to an upper room. As they entered, a mild
light greeted them from a candle which, by Mr. Gryce's orders, had been
placed on a small side table near the door. But once in, Mr. Gryce
approached the larger table in the centre of the room, and placing his
hand on one of the buttons before him, asked his companion to be kind
enough to blow out the candle. This he did, leaving the room for a
moment in total darkness. Then with a sudden burst of illumination, a
marvellous glow of a deep violet color shot over the whole room, and the
two men turned and faced each other both with inquiry in their looks, so
unexpected was this theatrical effect to the one, and so inexplicable
its cause and purpose to the other.

"That is but one slide," remarked Mr. Gryce. "Now I will press another
button, and the color changes to--pink, as you see. This one produces
green, this one white, and this a bilious yellow, which is not becoming
to either of us, I am sure. Now will you examine the connection, and see
if there is anything peculiar about it?"

Mr. Hines at once set to work. But beyond the fact that the whole
contrivance was the work of an amateur hand, he found nothing strange
about it, except the fact that it worked so well.

Mr. Gryce showed disappointment.

"He made it, then, himself?" he asked.

"Undoubtedly, or some one else equally unacquainted with the latest
method of wiring."

"Will you look at these books over here and see if sufficient knowledge
can be got from them to enable an amateur to rig up such an arrangement
as this?"

Mr. Hines glanced at the shelf which Mr. Gryce had pointed out, and
without taking out the books, answered briefly:

"A man with a deft hand and a scientific turn of mind might, by the aid
of these, do all you see here and more. The aptitude is all."

"Then I'm afraid Mr. Adams had the aptitude," was the dry response.
There was disappointment in the tone. Why, his next words served to
show. "A man with a turn for mechanical contrivances often wastes much
time and money on useless toys only fit for children to play with. Look
at that bird cage now. Perched at a height totally beyond the reach of
any one without a ladder, it must owe its very evident usefulness (for
you see it holds a rather lively occupant) to some contrivance by which
it can be raised and lowered at will. Where is that contrivance? Can you
find it?"

The expert thought he could. And, sure enough, after some ineffectual
searching, he came upon another button well hid amid the tapestry on the
wall, which, when pressed, caused something to be disengaged which
gradually lowered the cage within reach of Mr. Gryce's hand.

"We will not send this poor bird aloft again," said he, detaching the
cage and holding it for a moment in his hand. "An English starling is
none too common in this country. Hark! he is going to speak."

But the sharp-eyed bird, warned perhaps by the emphatic gesture of the
detective that silence would be more in order at this moment than his
usual appeal to "remember Evelyn," whisked about in his cage for an
instant, and then subsided into a doze, which may have been real, and
may have been assumed under the fascinating eye of the old gentleman who
held him. Mr. Gryce placed the cage on the floor, and idly, or because
the play pleased him, old and staid as he was, pressed another button on
the table--a button he had hitherto neglected touching--and glanced
around to see what color the light would now assume.

But the yellow glare remained. The investigation which the apparatus had
gone through had probably disarranged the wires. With a shrug he was
moving off, when he suddenly made a hurried gesture, directing the
attention of the expert to a fact for which neither of them was
prepared. The opening which led into the antechamber, and which was the
sole means of communication with the rest of the house, was slowly
closing. From a yard's breadth it became a foot; from a foot it became
an inch; from an inch----

"Well, that is certainly the contrivance of a lazy man," laughed the
expert. "Seated in his chair here, he can close his door at will. No
shouting after a deaf servant, no awkward stumbling over rugs to shut it
himself. I don't know but I approve of this contrivance, only----" here
he caught a rather serious expression on Mr. Gryce's face--"the slide
seems to be of a somewhat curious construction. It is not made of wood,
as any sensible door ought to be, but of----"

"Steel," finished Mr. Gryce in an odd tone. "This is the strangest thing
yet. It begins to look as if Mr. Adams was daft on electrical
contrivances."

"And as if we were prisoners here," supplemented the other. "I do not
see any means for drawing this slide back."

"Oh, there's another button for that, of course," Mr. Gryce carelessly
remarked.

But they failed to find one.

"If you don't object," observed Mr. Gryce, after five minutes of useless
search, "I will turn a more cheerful light upon the scene. Yellow does
not seem to fit the occasion."

"Give us rose, for unless you have some one on the other side of this
steel plate, we seem likely to remain here till morning."

"There is a man upstairs whom we may perhaps make hear, but what does
this contrivance portend? It has a serious look to me, when you consider
that every window in these two rooms has been built up almost under the
roof."

"Yes; a very strange look. But before engaging in its consideration I
should like a breath of fresh air. I cannot do anything while in
confinement. My brain won't work."

Meanwhile Mr. Gryce was engaged in examining the huge plate of steel
which served as a barrier to their egress. He found that it had been
made--certainly at great expense--to fit the curve of the walls through
which it passed. This was a discovery of some consequence, causing Mr.
Gryce to grow still more thoughtful and to eye the smooth steel plate
under his hand with an air of marked distrust.

"Mr. Adams carried his taste for the mechanical to great extremes," he
remarked to the slightly uneasy man beside him. "This slide is very
carefully fitted, and, if I am not mistaken, it will stand some
battering before we are released."

"I wish that his interest in electricity had led him to attach such a
simple thing as a bell."

"True, we have come across no bell."

"It would have smacked too much of the ordinary to please him."

"Besides, his only servant was deaf."

"Try the effect of a blow, a quick blow with this silver-mounted
alpenstock. Some one should hear and come to our assistance."

"I will try my whistle first; it will be better understood."

But though Mr. Gryce both whistled and struck many a resounding knock
upon the barrier before them, it was an hour before he could draw the
attention of Styles, and five hours before an opening could be effected
in the wall large enough to admit of their escape, so firmly was this
barrier of steel fixed across the sole outlet from this remarkable room.




CHAPTER V.

FIVE SMALL SPANGLES.


Such an experience could not fail to emphasize Mr. Gryce's interest in
the case and heighten the determination he had formed to probe its
secrets and explain all its extraordinary features. Arrived at
Headquarters, where his presence was doubtless awaited with some anxiety
by those who knew nothing of the cause of his long detention, his first
act was to inquire if Bartow, the butler, had come to his senses during
the night.

The answer was disappointing. Not only was there no change in his
condition, but the expert in lunacy who had been called in to pass upon
his case had expressed an opinion unfavorable to his immediate recovery.

Mr. Gryce looked sober, and, summoning the officer who had managed
Bartow's arrest, he asked how the mute had acted when he found himself
detained.

The answer was curt, but very much to the point.

"Surprised, sir. Shook his head and made some queer gestures, then went
through his pantomime. It's quite a spectacle, sir. Poor fool, he keeps
holding his hand back, so."

Mr. Gryce noted the gesture; it was the same which Bartow had made when
he first realized that he had spectators. Its meaning was not wholly
apparent. He had made it with his right hand (there was no evidence that
the mute was left-handed), and he continued to make it as if with this
movement he expected to call attention to some fact that would relieve
him from custody.

"Does he mope? Is his expression one of fear or anger?"

"It varies, sir. One minute he looks like a man on the point of falling
asleep; the next he starts up in fury, shaking his head and pounding the
walls. It's not a comfortable sight, sir. He will have to be watched
night and day."

"Let him be, and note every change in him. His testimony may not be
valid, but there is suggestion in every movement he makes. To-morrow I
will visit him myself."

The officer went out, and Mr. Gryce sat for a few moments communing with
himself, during which he took out a little package from his pocket, and
emptying out on his desk the five little spangles it contained, regarded
them intently. He had always been fond of looking at some small and
seemingly insignificant object while thinking. It served to concentrate
his thoughts, no doubt. At all events, some such result appeared to
follow the contemplation of these five sequins, for after shaking his
head doubtfully over them for a time, he made a sudden move, and
sweeping them into the envelope from which he had taken them, he gave a
glance at his watch and passed quickly into the outer office, where he
paused before a line of waiting men. Beckoning to one who had followed
his movements with an interest which had not escaped the eye of this old
reader of human nature, he led the way back to his own room.

"You want a hand in this matter?" he said interrogatively, as the door
closed behind them and they found themselves alone.

"Oh, sir--" began the young man in a glow which made his more than plain
features interesting to contemplate, "I do not presume----"

"Enough!" interposed the other. "You have been here now for six months,
and have had no opportunity as yet for showing any special adaptability.
Now I propose to test your powers with something really difficult. Are
you up to it, Sweetwater? Do you know the city well enough to attempt to
find a needle in this very big haystack?"

"I should at least like to try," was the eager response. "If I succeed
it will be a bigger feather in my cap than if I had always lived in New
York. I have been spoiling for some such opportunity. See if I don't
make the effort judiciously, if only out of gratitude."

"Well, we shall see," remarked the old detective. "If it's difficulty
you long to encounter, you will be likely to have all you want of it.
Indeed, it is the impossible I ask. A woman is to be found of whom we
know nothing save that she wore when last seen a dress heavily
bespangled with black, and that she carried in her visit to Mr. Adams,
at the time of or before the murder, a parasol, of which I can procure
you a glimpse before you start out. She came from, I don't know where,
and she went--but that is what you are to find out. You are not the only
man who is to be put on the job, which, as you see, is next door to a
hopeless one, unless the woman comes forward and proclaims herself.
Indeed, I should despair utterly of your success if it were not for one
small fact which I will now proceed to give you as my special and
confidential agent in this matter. When this woman was about to
disappear from the one eye that was watching her, she approached the
curbstone in front of Hudson's fruit store on 14th Street and lifted up
her right hand, so. It is not much of a clew, but it is all I have at my
disposal, except these five spangles dropped from her dress, and my
conviction that she is not to be found among the questionable women of
the town, but among those who seldom or never come under the eye of the
police. Yet don't let this conviction hamper you. Convictions as a rule
are bad things, and act as a hindrance rather than an inspiration."

Sweetwater, to whom the song of the sirens would have sounded less
sweet, listened with delight and responded with a frank smile and a gay:

"I'll do my best, sir, but don't show me the parasol, only describe it.
I wouldn't like the fellows to chaff me if I fail; I'd rather go quietly
to work and raise no foolish expectations."

"Well, then, it is one of those dainty, nonsensical things made of gray
chiffon, with pearl handle and bows of pink ribbon. I don't believe it
was ever used before, and from the value women usually place on such
fol-de-rols, could only have been left behind under the stress of
extraordinary emotion or fear. The name of the owner was not on it."

"Nor that of the maker?"

Mr. Gryce had expected this question, and was glad not to be
disappointed.

"No, that would have helped us too much."

"And the hour at which this lady was seen on the curbstone at Hudson's?"

"Half-past four; the moment at which the telephone message arrived."

"Very good, sir. It is the hardest task I have ever undertaken, but
that's not against it. When shall I see you again?"

"When you have something to impart. Ah, wait a minute. I have my
suspicion that this woman's first name is Evelyn. But, mind, it is only
a suspicion."

"All right, sir," and with an air of some confidence, the young man
disappeared.

Mr. Gryce did not look as if he shared young Sweetwater's cheerfulness.
The mist surrounding this affair was as yet impenetrable to him. But
then he was not twenty-three, with only triumphant memories behind him.

His next hope lay in the information likely to accrue from the published
accounts of this crime, now spread broadcast over the country. A man of
Mr. Adams's wealth and culture must necessarily have possessed many
acquaintances, whom the surprising news of his sudden death would
naturally bring to light, especially as no secret was made of his means
and many valuable effects. But as if this affair, destined to be one of
the last to engage the powers of this sagacious old man, refused on this
very account to yield any immediate results to his investigation, the
whole day passed by without the appearance of any claimant for Mr.
Adams's fortune or the arrival on the scene of any friend capable of
lifting the veil which shrouded the life of this strange being. To be
sure, his banker and his lawyer came forward during the day, but they
had little to reveal beyond the fact that his pecuniary affairs were in
good shape and that, so far as they knew, he was without family or kin.

Even his landlord could add little to the general knowledge. He had
first heard of Mr. Adams through a Philadelphia lawyer, since dead, who
had assured him of his client's respectability and undoubted ability to
pay his rent. When they came together and Mr. Adams was introduced to
him, he had been struck, first, by the ascetic appearance of his
prospective tenant, and, secondly, by his reserved manners and quiet
intelligence. But admirable as he had found him, he had never succeeded
in making his acquaintance. The rent had been uniformly paid with great
exactitude on the very day it was due, but his own visits had never been
encouraged or his advances met by anything but the cold politeness of a
polished and totally indifferent man. Indeed, he had always looked upon
his tenant as a bookworm, absorbed in study and such scientific
experiments as could be carried on with no other assistance than that of
his deaf and dumb servant.

Asked if he knew anything about this servant, he answered that his
acquaintance with him was limited to the two occasions on which he had
been ushered by him into his master's presence; that he knew nothing of
his character and general disposition, and could not say whether his
attitude toward his master had been one of allegiance or antagonism.

And so the way was blocked in this direction.

Taken into the room where Mr. Adams had died, he surveyed in amazement
the huge steel plate which still blocked the doorway, and the high
windows through which only a few straggling sunbeams could find their
way.

Pointing to the windows, he remarked:

"These were filled in at Mr. Adams's request. Originally they extended
down to the wainscoting."

He was shown where lath and plaster had been introduced and also how the
plate had been prepared and arranged as a barrier. But he could give no
explanation of it or divine the purpose for which it had been placed
there at so great an expense.

The lamp was another curiosity, and its varying lights the cause of
increased astonishment. Indeed he had known nothing of these
arrangements, having been received in the parlor when he visited the
house, where there was nothing to attract his attention or emphasize the
well-known oddities of his tenant.

He was not shown the starling. That loquacious bird had been removed to
police headquarters for the special delectation of Mr. Gryce.

Other inquiries failed also. No clew to the owner of the insignia found
on the wall could be gained at the pension office or at any of the G. A.
R. posts inside the city. Nor was the name of the artist who had painted
the portrait which adorned so large a portion of the wall a recognized
one in New York City. Otherwise a clew might have been obtained through
him to Mr. Adams's antecedents. All the drawers and receptacles in Mr.
Adams's study had been searched, but no will had been found nor any
business documents. It was as if this strange man had sought to suppress
his identity, or, rather, as if he had outgrown all interest in his kind
or in anything beyond the walls within which he had immured himself.

Late in the afternoon reports began to come in from the various
tradesmen with whom Mr. Adams had done business. They all had something
to say as to the peculiarity of his habits and the freaks of his mute
servant. They were both described as hermits, differing from the rest of
their kind only in that they denied themselves no reasonable luxury and
seemed to have adopted a shut-in life from a pure love of seclusion. The
master was never seen at the stores. It was the servant who made the
purchases, and this by means of gestures which were often strangely
significant. Indeed, he seemed to have great power of expressing himself
by looks and actions, and rarely caused a mistake or made one. He would
not endure cheating, and always bought the best.

Of his sanity up to the day of his master's death there was no question;
but more than one man with whom he had had dealings was ready to testify
that there had been a change in his manner for the past few weeks--a
sort of subdued excitement, quite unlike his former methodical bearing.
He had shown an inclination to testiness, and was less easily pleased
than formerly. To one clerk he had shown a nasty spirit under very
slight provocation, and was only endured in the store on account of his
master, who was too good a customer for them to offend. Mr. Kelly, a
grocer, went so far as to say he acted like a man with a grievance who
burned to vent his spite on some one, but held himself in forcible
restraint.

Perhaps if no tragedy had taken place in the house on ---- Street these
various persons would not have been so ready to interpret thus
unfavorably a nervousness excusable enough in one so cut off from all
communication with his kind. But with the violent end of his master in
view, and his own unexplained connection with it, who could help
recalling that his glance had frequently shown malevolence?

But this was not evidence of the decided character required by the law,
and Mr. Gryce was about to regard the day as a lost one, when Sweetwater
made his reappearance at Headquarters. The expression of his face put
new life into Mr. Gryce.

"What!" he cried, "you have not found her?"

Sweetwater smiled. "Don't ask me, sir, not yet. I've come to see if
there's any reason why I should not be given the loan of that parasol
for about an hour. I'll bring it back. I only want to make a certain
test with it."

"What test, my boy? May I ask, what test?"

"Please to excuse me, sir; I have only a short time in which to act
before respectable business houses shut up for the night, and the test I
speak of has to be made in a respectable house."

"Then you shall not be hindered. Wait here, and I will bring you the
parasol. There! bring it back soon, my boy. I have not the patience I
used to have."

"An hour, sir; give me an hour, and then----"

The shutting of the door behind his flying figure cut short his
sentence.

That was a long hour to Mr. Gryce, or would have been if it had not
mercifully been cut short by the return of Sweetwater in an even more
excited state of mind than he had been before. He held the parasol in
his hand.

"My test failed," said he, "but the parasol has brought me luck,
notwithstanding. I have found the lady, sir, and----"

He had to draw a long breath before proceeding.

"And she is what I said," began the detective; "a respectable person in
a respectable house."

"Yes, sir; very respectable, more respectable than I expected to see.
Quite a lady, sir. Not young, but----"

"Her name, boy. Is it--Evelyn?"

Sweetwater shook his head with a look as naive in its way as the old
detective's question.

"I cannot say, sir. Indeed, I had not the courage to ask. She is
here----"

"Here!" Mr. Gryce took one hurried step toward the door, then came
gravely back. "I can restrain myself," he said. "If she is here, she
will not go till I have seen her. Are you sure you have made no mistake;
that she is the woman we are after; the woman who was in Mr. Adams's
house and sent us the warning?"

"Will you hear my story, sir? It will take only a moment. Then you can
judge for yourself."

"Your story? It must be a pretty one. How came you to light on this
woman so soon? By using the clew I gave you?"

Again Sweetwater's expression took on a touch of naïveté.

"I'm sorry, sir; but I was egotistical enough to follow my own idea. It
would have taken too much time to hunt up all the drivers of hacks in
the city, and I could not even be sure she had made use of a public
conveyance. No, sir; I bethought me of another way by which I might
reach this woman. You had shown me those spangles. They were portions of
a very rich trimming; a trimming which has only lately come into vogue,
and which is so expensive that it is worn chiefly by women of means, and
sold only in shops where elaborate garnitures are to be found. I have
seen and noticed dresses thus trimmed, in certain windows and on certain
ladies; and before you showed me the spangles you picked up in Mr.
Adams's study could have told you just how I had seen them arranged.
They are sewed on black net, in figures, sir; in scrolls or wreaths or
whatever you choose to call them; and so conspicuous are these wreaths
or figures, owing to the brilliance of the spangles composing them, that
any break in their continuity is plainly apparent, especially if the net
be worn over a color, as is frequently the case. Remembering this, and
recalling the fact that these spangles doubtless fell from one of the
front breadths, where their loss would attract not only the attention of
others, but that of the wearer, I said to myself, 'What will she be
likely to do when she finds her dress thus disfigured?' And the answer
at once came: 'If she is the lady Mr. Gryce considers her, she will seek
to restore these missing spangles, especially if they were lost on a
scene of crime. But where can she get them to sew on? From an extra
piece of net of the same style. But she will not be apt to have an extra
piece of net. She will, therefore, find herself obliged to buy it, and
since only a few spangles are lacking, she will buy the veriest strip.'
Here, then, was my clew, or at least my ground for action. Going the
rounds of the few leading stores on Broadway, 23d Street, and Sixth
Avenue, I succeeded in getting certain clerks interested in my efforts,
so that I speedily became assured that if a lady came into these stores
for a very small portion of this bespangled net, they would note her
person and, if possible, procure some clew to her address. Then I took
up my stand at Arnold's emporium. Why Arnold's? I do not know. Perhaps
my good genius meant me to be successful in this quest; but whether
through luck or what not, I was successful, for before the afternoon was
half over, I encountered a meaning glance from one of the men behind the
counter, and advancing toward him, saw him rolling a small package which
he handed over to a very pretty and rosy young girl, who at once walked
away with it. 'For one of our leading customers,' he whispered, as I
drew nearer. 'I don't think she is the person you want.' But I would
take no chances. I followed the young girl who had carried away the
parcel, and by this means came to a fine brownstone front in one of our
most retired and aristocratic quarters. When I had seen her go in at the
basement door, I rang the bell above, and then--well, I just bit my lips
to keep down my growing excitement. For such an effort as this might
well end in disappointment, and I knew if I were disappointed now--But
no such trial awaited me. The maid who came to the door proved to be the
same merry-eyed lass I had seen leave the store. Indeed, she had the
identical parcel in her hand which was the connecting link between the
imposing house at whose door I stood and the strange murder in ----
Street. But I did not allow my interest in this parcel to become
apparent, and by the time I addressed her I had so mastered myself as to
arouse no suspicion of the importance of my errand. You, of course,
foresee the question I put to the young girl. 'Has your mistress lost a
parasol? One has been found--' I did not finish the sentence, for I
perceived by her look that her mistress had met with such a loss, and as
this was all I wanted to know just then, I cried out, 'I will bring it.
If it is hers, all right,' and bounded down the steps.

"My intention was to inform you of what I had done and ask your advice.
But my egotism got the better of me. I felt that I ought to make sure
that I was not the victim of a coincidence. Such a respectable house!
Such a respectable maidservant! Should she recognize the parasol as
belonging to her mistress, then, indeed, I might boast of my success. So
praying you for a loan of this article, I went back and rang the bell
again. The same girl came to the door. I think fortune favored me
to-day. 'Here is the parasol,' said I, but before the words were out of
my mouth I saw that the girl had taken the alarm or that some grievous
mistake had been made. 'That is not the one my mistress lost,' said she.
'She never carries anything but black.' And the door was about to close
between us when I heard a voice from within call out peremptorily: 'Let
me see that parasol. Hold it up, young man. There! at the foot of the
stairs. Ah!'

"If ever an exclamation was eloquent that simple 'ah!' was. I could not
see the speaker, but I knew she was leaning over the banisters from the
landing above. I listened to hear her glide away. But she did not move.
She was evidently collecting herself for the emergency of the moment.
Presently she spoke again, and I was astonished at her tone: 'You have
come from Police Headquarters,' was the remark with which she hailed me.

"I lowered the parasol. I did not think it necessary to say yes.

"'From a man there, called Gryce,' she went on, still in that strange
tone I can hardly describe, sir.

"'Since you ask me,' I now replied, 'I acknowledge that it is through
his instructions I am here. He was anxious to restore to you your lost
property. Is not this parasol yours? Shall I not leave it with this
young girl?'

"The answer was dry, almost rasping: 'Mr. Gryce has made a mistake. The
parasol is not mine; yet he certainly deserves credit for the use he has
made of it, in this search. I should like to tell him so. Is he at his
office, and do you think I would be received?'

"'He would be delighted,' I returned, not imagining she was in earnest.
But she was, sir. In less time than you would believe, I perceived a
very stately, almost severe, lady descend the stairs. She was dressed
for the street, and spoke to me with quite an air of command. 'Have you
a cab?' she asked.

"'No,' said I.

"'Then get one.'

"Here was a dilemma. Should I leave her and thus give her an opportunity
to escape, or should I trust to her integrity and the honesty of her
look, which was no common one, sir, and obey her as every one about her
was evidently accustomed to do?

"I concluded to trust to her integrity, and went for the cab. But it was
a risk, sir, which I promise not to repeat in the future. She was
awaiting me on the stoop when I got back, and at once entered the hack
with a command to drive immediately to Police Headquarters. I saw her as
I came in just now sitting in the outer office, waiting for you. Are you
ready to say I have done well?"

Mr. Gryce, with an indescribable look of mingled envy and indulgence,
pressed the hand held out to him, and passed out. His curiosity could be
restrained no longer, and he went at once to where this mysterious woman
was awaiting him. Did he think it odd that she knew him, that she sought
him? If so, he did not betray this in his manner, which was one of great
respect. But that manner suddenly changed as he came face to face with
the lady in question. Not that it lost its respect, but that it betrayed
an astonishment of a more pronounced character than was usually indulged
in by this experienced detective. The lady before him was one well known
to him; in fact, almost an associate of his in certain bygone matters;
in other words, none other than that most reputable of ladies, Miss
Amelia Butterworth of Gramercy Park.




CHAPTER VI.

SUGGESTIONS FROM AN OLD FRIEND.


The look with which this amiable spinster met his eye was one which a
stranger would have found it hard to understand. He found it hard to
understand himself, perhaps because he had never before seen this lady
when she was laboring under an opinion of herself that was not one of
perfect complacency.

"Miss Butterworth! What does this mean? Have you----"

"There!" The word came with some sharpness. "You have detected me at my
old tricks, and I am correspondingly ashamed, and you triumphant. The
gray parasol you have been good enough to send to my house is not mine,
but I was in the room where you picked it up, as you have so cleverly
concluded, and as it is useless for me to evade your perspicacity, I
have come here to confess."

"Ah!" The detective was profoundly interested at once. He drew a chair
up to Miss Butterworth's side and sat down. "You were there!" he
repeated; "and when? I do not presume to ask for what purpose."

"But I shall have to explain my purpose not to find myself at too great
a disadvantage," she replied with grim decision. "Not that I like to
display my own weakness, but that I recognize the exigencies of the
occasion, and fully appreciate your surprise at finding that I, a
stranger to Mr. Adams, and without the excuse which led to my former
interference in police matters, should have so far forgotten myself as
to be in my present position before you. This was no affair of my
immediate neighbor, nor did it seek me. I sought it, sir, and in this
way. I wish I had gone to Jericho first; it might have meant longer
travel and much more expense; but it would have involved me in less
humiliation and possible publicity. Mr. Gryce, I never meant to be mixed
up with another murder case. I have shown my aptitude for detective work
and received, ere now, certain marks of your approval; but my head was
not turned by them--at least I thought not--and I was tolerably sincere
in my determination to keep to my own _metier_ in future and not suffer
myself to be allured by any inducements you might offer into the
exercise of gifts which may have brought me praise in the past, but
certainly have not brought me happiness. But the temptation came, not
through you, or I might have resisted it, but through a combination of
circumstances which found me weak, and, in a measure, unprepared. In
other words, I was surprised into taking an interest in this affair. Oh,
I am ashamed of it, so ashamed that I have made the greatest endeavor to
hide my participation in the matter, and thinking I had succeeded in
doing so, was congratulating myself upon my precautions, when I found
that parasol thrust in my face and realized that you, if no one else,
knew that Amelia Butterworth had been in Mr. Adams's room of death prior
to yourself. Yet I thought I had left no traces behind me. Could you
have seen----"

"Miss Butterworth, you dropped five small spangles from your robe. You
wore a dress spangled with black sequins, did you not? Besides, you
moved the inkstand, and--Well, I will never put faith in circumstantial
evidence again. I saw these tokens of a woman's presence, heard what the
boy had to say of the well-dressed lady who had sent him into the
drug-store with a message to the police, and drew the conclusion--I may
admit it to you--that it was this woman who had wielded the assassin's
dagger, and not the deaf-and-dumb butler, who, until now, has borne the
blame of it. Therefore I was anxious to find her, little realizing what
would be the result of my efforts, or that I should have to proffer her
my most humble apologies."

"Do not apologize to me. I had no business to be there, or, at least, to
leave the five spangles you speak of, behind me on Mr. Adams's miserable
floor. I was simply passing by the house; and had I been the woman I
once was, that is, a woman who had never dipped into a mystery, I should
have continued on my way, instead of turning aside. Sir, it's a curious
sensation to find yourself, however innocent, regarded by a whole city
full of people as the cause or motive of a terrible murder, especially
when you have spent some time, as I have, in the study of crime and the
pursuit of criminals. I own I don't enjoy the experience. But I have
brought it on myself. If I had not been so curious--But it was not
curiosity I felt. I will never own that I am subject to mere curiosity;
it was the look on the young man's face. But I forget myself. I am
rambling in all directions when I ought to be telling a consecutive
tale. Not my usual habit, sir; this you know; but I am not quite myself
at this moment. I declare I am more upset by this discovery of my
indiscretion than I was by Mr. Trohm's declaration of affection in Lost
Man's Lane! Give me time, Mr. Gryce; in a few minutes I will be more
coherent."

"I am giving you time," he returned with one of his lowest bows. "The
half-dozen questions I long to ask have not yet left my lips, and I sit
here, as you must yourself acknowledge, a monument of patience."

"So you thought this deed perpetrated by an outsider," she suddenly
broke in. "Most of the journals--I read them very carefully this
morning--ascribed the crime to the man you have mentioned. And there
seems to be good reason for doing so. The case is not a simple one, Mr.
Gryce; it has complications--I recognized that at once, and that is
why--but I won't waste another moment in apologies. You have a right to
any little fact I may have picked up in my unfortunate visit, and there
is one which I failed to find included in any account of the murder. Mr.
Adams had other visitors besides myself in those few fatal minutes
preceding his death. A young man and woman were with him. I saw them
come out of the house. It was at the moment I was passing----"

"Tell your story more simply, Miss Butterworth. What first drew your
attention to the house?"

"There! That is the second time you have had to remind me to be more
direct. You will not have to do so again, Mr. Gryce. To begin, then, I
noticed the house, because I always notice it. I never pass it without
giving a thought to its ancient history and indulging in more or less
speculation as to its present inmates. When, therefore, I found myself
in front of it yesterday afternoon on my way to the art exhibition, I
naturally looked up, and--whether by an act of providence or not, I
cannot say--it was precisely at that instant the inner door of the
vestibule burst open, and a young man appeared in the hall, carrying a
young woman in his arms. He seemed to be in a state of intense
excitement, and she in a dead faint; but before they had attracted the
attention of the crowd, he had placed her on her feet, and, taking her
on his arm, dragged her down the stoop and into the crowd of passers-by,
among whom they presently disappeared. I, as you may believe, stood
rooted to the ground in my astonishment, and not only endeavored to see
in what direction they went, but lingered long enough to take a peep
into the time-honored interior of this old house, which had been left
open to view by the young man's forgetting to close the front door
behind him. As I did so, I heard a cry from within. It was muffled and
remote, but unmistakably one of terror and anguish: and, led by an
impulse I may live to regret, as it seems likely to plunge me into much
unpleasantness, I rushed up the stoop and went in, shutting the door
behind me, lest others should be induced to follow.

"So far, I had acted solely from instinct; but once in that semi-dark
hall, I paused and asked what business I had there, and what excuse I
should give for my intrusion if I encountered one or more of the
occupants of the house. But a repetition of the cry, coming as I am
ready to swear from the farthest room on the parlor floor, together with
a sharp remembrance of the wandering eye and drawn countenance of the
young man whom I had seen stagger hence a moment before, with an almost
fainting woman in his arms, drew me on in spite of my feminine
instincts; and before I knew it, I was in the circular study and before
the prostrate form of a seemingly dying man. He was lying as you
probably found him a little later, with the cross on his breast and a
dagger in his heart; but his right hand was trembling, and when I
stooped to lift his head, he gave a shudder and then settled into
eternal stillness. I, a stranger from the street, had witnessed his last
breath while the young man who had gone out----"

"Can you describe him? Did you encounter him close enough for
recognition?"

"Yes, I think I would know him again. I can at least describe his
appearance. He wore a checked suit, very natty, and was more than
usually tall and fine-looking. But his chief peculiarity lay in his
expression. I never saw on any face, no, not on the stage, at the climax
of the most heart-rending tragedy, a greater accumulation of mortal
passion struggling with the imperative necessity for restraint. The
young girl whose blond head lay on his shoulder looked like a saint in
the clutch of a demon. She had seen death, but he--But I prefer not to
be the interpreter of that expressive countenance. It was lost to my
view almost immediately, and probably calmed itself in the face of the
throng he entered, or we would be hearing about him to-day. The girl
seemed to be devoid of almost all feeling. I should not remember her."

"And was that all? Did you just look at that recumbent man and vanish?
Didn't you encounter the butler? Haven't you some definite knowledge to
impart in his regard which will settle his innocence or fix his guilt?"

"I know no more about him than you do, sir, except that he was not in
the room by the time I reached it, and did not come into it during my
presence there. Yet it was his cry that led me to the spot; or do you
think it was that of the bird I afterward heard shouting and screaming
in the cage over the dead man's head?"

"It might have been the bird," admitted Mr. Gryce. "Its call is very
clear, and it seems strangely intelligent. What was it saying while you
stood there?"

"Something about Eva. 'Lovely Eva, maddening Eva! I love Eva! Eva!
Eva!'"

"Eva? Wasn't it 'Evelyn? Poor Evelyn?'"

"No, it was Eva. I thought he might mean the girl I had just seen
carried out. It was an unpleasant experience, hearing this bird shriek
out these cries in the face of the man lying dead at my feet."

"Miss Butterworth, you didn't simply stand over that man. You knelt down
and looked in his face."

"I acknowledge it, and caught my dress in the filagree of the cross.
Naturally I would not stand stock still with a man drawing his last
breath under my eye."

"And what else did you do? You went to the table----"

"Yes, I went to the table."

"And moved the inkstand?"

"Yes, I moved the inkstand, but very carefully, sir, very carefully."

"Not so carefully but that I could see where it had been sitting before
you took it up: the square made by its base in the dust of the table did
not coincide with the place afterwards occupied by it."

"Ah, that comes from your having on your glasses and I not. I endeavored
to set it down in the precise place from which I lifted it."

"Why did you take it up at all? What were you looking for?"

"For clews, Mr. Gryce. You must forgive me, but I was seeking for clews.
I moved several things. I was hunting for the line of writing which
ought to explain this murder."

"The line of writing?"

"Yes. I have not told you what the young girl said as she slipped with
her companion into the crowd."

"No; you have spoken of no words. Have you any such clew as that? Miss
Butterworth, you are fortunate, very fortunate."

Mr. Gryce's look and gesture were eloquent, but Miss Butterworth, with
an access of dignity, quietly remarked:

"I was not to blame for being in the way when they passed, nor could I
help hearing what she said."

"And what was it, madam? Did she mention a paper?"

"Yes, she cried in what I now remember to have been a tone of affright:
'You have left that line of writing behind!' I did not attach much
importance to these words then, but when I came upon the dying man, so
evidently the victim of murder, I recalled what his late visitor had
said and looked about for this piece of writing."

"And did you find it, Miss Butterworth? I am ready, as you see, for any
revelation you may now make."

"For one which would reflect dishonor on me? If I had found any paper
explaining this tragedy, I should have felt bound to have called the
attention of the police to it. I did notify them of the crime itself."

"Yes, madam; and we are obliged to you; but how about your silence in
regard to the fact of two persons having left that house immediately
upon, or just preceding, the death of its master?"

"I reserved that bit of information. I waited to see if the police would
not get wind of these people without my help. I sincerely wished to keep
my name out of this inquiry. Yet I feel a decided relief now that I have
made my confession. I never could have rested properly after seeing so
much, and----"

"Well?"

"Thinking my own thoughts in regard to what I saw, if I had found myself
compelled to bridle my tongue while false scents were being followed and
delicate clews overlooked or discarded without proper attention. I
regard this murder as offering the most difficult problem that has ever
come in my way, and, therefore----"

"Yes, madam."

"I cannot but wonder if an opportunity has been afforded me for
retrieving myself in your eyes. I do not care for the opinion of any one
else as to my ability or discretion; but I should like to make you
forget my last despicable failure in Lost Man's Lane. It is a sore
remembrance to me, Mr. Gryce, which nothing but a fresh success can make
me forget."

"Madam, I understand you. You have formulated some theory. You consider
the young man with the tell-tale face guilty of Mr. Adams's death. Well,
it is very possible. I never thought the butler was rehearsing a crime
he had himself committed."

"Do you know who the young man is I saw leaving that house so
hurriedly?"

"Not the least in the world. You are the first to bring him to my
attention."

"And the young girl with the blonde hair?"

"It is the first I have heard of her, too."

"I did not scatter the rose leaves that were found on that floor."

"No, it was she. She probably wore a bouquet in her belt."

"Nor was that frippery parasol mine, though I did lose a good, stout,
serviceable one somewhere that day."

"It was hers; I have no doubt of it."

"Left by her in the little room where she was whiling away the time
during which the gentlemen conversed together, possibly about that bit
of writing she afterward alluded to."

"Certainly."

"Her mind was not expectant of evil, for she was smoothing her hair when
the shock came----"

"Yes, madam, I follow you."

"And had to be carried out of the place after----"

"What?"

"She had placed that cross on Mr. Adams's breast. That was a woman's
act, Mr. Gryce."

"I am glad to hear you say so. The placing of that cross on a layman's
breast was a mystery to me, and is still, I must own. Great remorse or
great fright only can account for it."

"You will find many mysteries in this case, Mr. Gryce."

"As great a number as I ever encountered."

"I have to add one."

"Another?"

"It concerns the old butler."

"I thought you did not see him."

"I did not see him in the room where Mr. Adams lay."

"Ah! Where, then?"

"Upstairs. My interest was not confined to the scene of the murder.
Wishing to spread the alarm, and not being able to rouse any one below,
I crept upstairs, and so came upon this poor wretch going through the
significant pantomime that has been so vividly described in the papers."

"Ah! Unpleasant for you, very. I imagine you did not stop to talk to
him."

"No, I fled. I was extremely shaken up by this time and knew only one
thing to do, and that was to escape. But I carried one as yet unsolved
enigma with me. How came I to hear this man's cries in Mr. Adams's
study, and yet find him on the second floor when I came to search the
house? He had not time to mount the stairs while I was passing down the
hall."

"It is a case of mistaken impression. Your ears played you false. The
cries came from above, not from Mr. Adams's study."

"My ears are not accustomed to play me tricks. You must seek another
explanation."

"I have ransacked the house; there are no back stairs."

"If there were, the study does not communicate with them."

"And you heard his voice in the study?"

"Plainly."

"Well, you have given me a poser, madam."

"And I will give you another. If he was the perpetrator of this crime,
how comes it that he was not detected and denounced by the young people
I saw going out? If, on the contrary, he was simply the witness of
another man's blow--a blow which horrified him so much that it unseated
his reason--how comes it that he was able to slide away from the door
where he must have stood without attracting the attention and bringing
down upon himself the vengeance of the guilty murderer?"

"He may be one of the noiseless kind, or, rather, may have been such
before this shock unsettled his mind."

"True, but he would have been seen. Recall the position of the doorway.
If Mr. Adams fell where he was struck, the assailant must have had that
door directly before him. He could not have helped seeing any one
standing in it."

"That is true; your observations are quite correct. But those young
people were in a disordered state of mind. The condition in which they
issued from the house proves this. They probably did not trouble
themselves about this man. Escape was all they sought. And, you see,
they did escape."

"But you will find them. A man who can locate a woman in this great city
of ours with no other clew than five spangles, dropped from her gown,
will certainly make this parasol tell the name of its owner."

"Ah, madam, the credit of this feat is not due to me. It was the initial
stroke of a young man I propose to adopt into my home and heart; the
same who brought you here to-night. Not much to look at, madam, but
promising, very promising. But I doubt if even he can discover the young
lady you mean, with no other aid than is given by this parasol. New York
is a big place, ma'am, a big place. Do you know how Sweetwater came to
find you? Through your virtues, ma'am; through your neat and methodical
habits. Had you been of a careless turn of mind and not given to mending
your dresses when you tore them, he might have worn his heart out in a
vain search for the lady who had dropped the five spangles in Mr.
Adams's study. Now luck, or, rather, your own commendable habit, was in
his favor this time; but in the prospective search you mentioned, he
will probably have no such assistance."

"Nor will he need it. I have unbounded faith in your genius, which,
after all, is back of the skilfulness of this new pupil of yours. You
will discover by some means the lady with the dove-colored plumes, and
through her the young gentleman who accompanied her."

"We shall at least put our energies to work in that direction.
Sweetwater may have an idea----"

"And I may have one."

"You?"

"Yes; I indulged in but little sleep last night. That dreadful room with
its unsolved mystery was ever before me. Thoughts would come;
possibilities would suggest themselves. I imagined myself probing its
secrets to the bottom and----"

"Wait, madam; how many of its so-called secrets do you know? You said
nothing about the lantern."

"It was burning with a red light when I entered."

"You did not touch the buttons arranged along the table top?"

"No; if there is one thing I do not touch, it is anything which suggests
an electrical contrivance. I am intensely feminine, sir, in all my
instincts, and mechanisms of any kind alarm me. To all such things I
give a wide berth. I have not even a telephone in my house. Some
allowance must be made for the natural timidity of woman."

Mr. Gryce suppressed a smile. "It is a pity," he remarked. "Had you
brought another light upon the scene, you might have been blessed with
an idea on a subject that is as puzzling as any connected with the whole
affair."

"You have not heard what I have to say on a still more important
matter," said she. "When we have exhausted the one topic, we may both
feel like turning on the fresh lights you speak of. Mr. Gryce, on what
does this mystery hinge? On the bit of writing which these young people
were so alarmed at having left behind them."

"Ah! It is from that you would work! Well, it is a good point to start
from. But we have found no such bit of writing."

"Have you searched for it? You did not know till now that any importance
might be attached to a morsel of paper with some half-dozen words
written on it."

"True, but a detective searches just the same. We ransacked that room as
few rooms have been ransacked in years. Not for a known clew, but for an
unknown one. It seemed necessary in the first place to learn who this
man was. His papers were consequently examined. But they told nothing.
If there had been a scrap of writing within view or in his desk----"

"It was not on his person? You had his pockets searched, his
clothes----"

"A man who has died from violence is always searched, madam. I leave no
stone unturned in a mysterious case like this."

Miss Butterworth's face assumed an indefinable expression of
satisfaction, which did not escape Mr. Gryce's eye, though that member
was fixed, according to his old habit, on the miniature of her father
which she wore, in defiance of fashion, at her throat.

"I wonder," said she, in a musing tone, "if I imagined or really saw on
Mr. Adams's face a most extraordinary expression; something more than
the surprise or anguish following a mortal blow? A look of
determination, arguing some superhuman resolve taken at the moment of
death, or--can you read that face for me? Or did you fail to perceive
aught of what I say? It would really be an aid to me at this moment to
know."

"I noted that look. It was not a common one. But I cannot read it for
you----"

"I wonder if the young man you call Sweetwater can. I certainly think it
has a decided bearing on this mystery; such a fold to the lips, such a
look of mingled grief and--what was that you said? Sweetwater has not
been admitted to the room of death? Well, well, I shall have to make my
own suggestion, then. I shall have to part with an idea that may be
totally valueless, but which has impressed me so that it must out, if I
am to have any peace to-night. Mr. Gryce, allow me to whisper in your
ear. Some things lose force when spoken aloud."

And leaning forward, she breathed a short sentence into his ear which
made him start and regard her with an amazement which rapidly grew into
admiration.

"Madam!" he cried, rising up that he might the better honor her with one
of his low bows, "your idea, whether valueless or not, is one which is
worthy of the acute lady who proffers it. We will act on it, ma'am, act
at once. Wait till I have given my orders. I will not keep you long."

And with another bow, he left the room.




CHAPTER VII.

AMOS'S SON.


Miss Butterworth had been brought up in a strict school of manners. When
she sat, she sat still; when she moved, she moved quickly, firmly, but
with no unnecessary disturbance. Fidgets were unknown to her. Yet when
she found herself alone after this interview, it was with difficulty she
could restrain herself from indulging in some of those outward
manifestations of uneasiness which she had all her life reprobated in
the more nervous members of her own sex. She was anxious, and she showed
it, like the sensible woman she was, and was glad enough when Mr. Gryce
finally returned and, accosting her with a smile, said almost gayly:

"Well, that is seen to! And all we have to do now is to await the
result. Madam, have you any further ideas? If so, I should be glad to
have the benefit of them."

Her self-possession was at once restored.

"You would?" she repeated, eying him somewhat doubtfully. "I should like
to be assured of the value of the one I have already advanced, before I
venture upon another. Let us enter into a conference instead; compare
notes; tell, for instance, why neither of us look on Bartow as the
guilty man."

"I thought we had exhausted that topic. Your suspicions were aroused by
the young couple you saw leaving the house, while mine--well, madam, to
you, at least, I may admit that there is something in the mute's
gestures and general manner which conveys to my mind the impression that
he is engaged in rehearsing something he has seen, rather than something
he has done; and as yet I have seen no reason for doubting the truth of
this impression."

"I was affected in the same way, and would have been, even if I had not
already had my suspicions turned in another direction. Besides, it is
more natural for a man to be driven insane by another's act than by his
own."

"Yes, if he loved the victim."

"And did not Bartow?"

"He does not mourn Mr. Adams."

"But he is no longer master of his emotions."

"Very true; but if we take any of his actions as a clew to the
situation, we must take all. We believe from his gestures that he is
giving us a literal copy of acts he has seen performed. Then, why pass
over the gleam of infernal joy that lights his face after the whole is
over? It is as if he rejoiced over the deed, or at least found
immeasurable satisfaction in it."

"Perhaps it is still a copy of what he saw; the murderer may have
rejoiced. But no, there was no joy in the face of the young man I saw
rushing away from this scene of violence. Quite the contrary. Mr. Gryce,
we are in deep waters. I feel myself wellnigh submerged by them."

"Hold up your head, madam. Every flood has its ebb. If you allow
yourself to go under, what will become of me?"

"You are disposed to humor, Mr. Gryce. It is a good sign. You are never
humorous when perplexed. Somewhere you must see daylight."

"Let us proceed with our argument. Illumination frequently comes from
the most unexpected quarter."

"Very well, then, let us put the old man's joy down as one of the
mysteries to be explained later. Have you thought of him as a possible
accomplice?"

"Certainly; but this supposition is open to the same objection as that
which made him the motive power in this murder. One is not driven insane
by an expected horror. It takes shock to unsettle the brain. He was not
looking for the death of his master."

"True. We may consider that matter as settled. Bartow was an innocent
witness of this crime, and, having nothing to fear, may be trusted to
reproduce in his pantomimic action its exact features."

"Very good. Continue, madam. Nothing but profit is likely to follow an
argument presented by Miss Butterworth."

The old detective's tone was serious, his manner perfect; but Miss
Butterworth, ever on the look-out for sarcasm from his lips, bridled a
little, though in no other way did she show her displeasure.

"Let us, then, recall his precise gestures, remembering that he must
have surprised the assailant from the study doorway, and so have seen
the assault from over his master's shoulder."

"In other words, directly in front of him. Now what was his first move?"

"His first move, as now seen, is to raise his right arm and stretch it
behind him, while he leans forward for the imaginary dagger. What does
that mean?"

"I should find it hard to say. But I did not see him do that. When I
came upon him, he was thrusting with his left hand across his own
body--a vicious thrust and with his left hand. That is a point, Mr.
Gryce."

"Yes, especially as the doctors agree that Mr. Adams was killed by a
left-handed blow."

"You don't say! Don't you see the difficulty, then?"

"The difficulty, madam?"

"Bartow was standing face to face with the assailant. In imitating him,
especially in his unreasoning state of mind, he would lift the arm
opposite to the one whose action he mimics, which, in this case, would
be the assailant's right. Try, for the moment, to mimic my actions. See!
I lift this hand, and instinctively (nay, I detected the movement, sir,
quickly as you remembered yourself), you raise the one directly opposite
to it. It is like seeing yourself in a mirror. You turn your head to the
right, but your image turns to the left."

Mr. Gryce's laugh rang out in spite of himself. He was not often caught
napping, but this woman exercised a species of fascination upon him at
times, and it rather amused than offended him, when he was obliged to
acknowledge himself defeated.

"Very good! You have proved your point quite satisfactorily; but what
conclusions are to be drawn from it? That the man was not left-handed,
or that he was not standing in the place you have assigned to him?"

"Shall we go against the doctors? They say that the blow was a
left-handed one. Mr. Gryce, I would give anything for an hour spent with
you in Mr. Adams's study, with Bartow free to move about at his will. I
think we would learn more by watching him for a short space of time than
in talking as we are doing for an hour."

It was said tentatively, almost timidly. Miss Butterworth had some sense
of the temerity involved in this suggestion even if, according to her
own declaration, she had no curiosity. "I don't want to be
disagreeable," she smiled.

She was so far from being so that Mr. Gryce was taken unawares, and for
once in his life became impulsive.

"I think it can be managed, madam; that is, after the funeral. There are
too many officials now in the house, and----"

"Of course, of course," she acceded. "I should not think of obtruding
myself at present. But the case is so interesting, and my connection
with it so peculiar, that I sometimes forget myself. Do you think"--here
she became quite nervous for one of her marked self-control--"that I
have laid myself open to a summons from the coroner?"

Mr. Gryce grew thoughtful, eyed the good lady, or rather her folded
hands, with an air of some compassion, and finally replied:

"The facts regarding this affair come in so slowly that I doubt if the
inquest is held for several days. Meanwhile we may light on those two
young people ourselves. If so, the coroner may _overlook_ your share in
bringing them to our notice."

There was a sly emphasis on the word, and a subtle humor in his look
that showed the old detective at his worst. But Miss Butterworth did not
resent it; she was too full of a fresh confession she had to make.

"Ah," said she, "if they had been the only persons I encountered there.
But they were not. Another person entered the house before I left it,
and I may be obliged to speak of him."

"Of him? Really, madam, you are a mine of intelligence."

"Yes, sir," was the meek reply; meek, when you consider from whose lips
it came. "I ought to have spoken of him before, but I never like to mix
matters, and this old gentleman----"

"Old gentleman!"

"Yes, sir, very old and very much of a gentleman, did not appear to have
any connection with the crime beyond knowing the murdered man."

"Ah, but that's a big connection, ma'am. To find some one who knew Mr.
Adams--really, madam, patience has its limits, and I must press you to
speak."

"Oh, I will speak! The time has come for it. Besides, I'm quite ready to
discuss this new theme; it is very interesting."

"Suppose we begin, then, by a detailed account of your adventures in
this house of death," dryly suggested the detective. "Your full
adventures, madam, with nothing left out."

"I appreciate the sarcasm, but nothing has been left out except what I
am about to relate to you. It happened just as I was leaving the house."

"What did? I hate to ask you to be more explicit. But, in the interests
of justice----"

"You are quite right. As I was going out, then, I encountered an elderly
gentleman coming in. His hand had just touched the bell handle. You will
acknowledge that it was a perplexing moment for me. His face, which was
well preserved for his years, wore an air of expectation that was almost
gay. He glanced in astonishment at mine, which, whatever its usual
serenity, certainly must have borne marks of deep emotion. Neither of us
spoke. At last he inquired politely if he might enter, and said
something about having an appointment with some one in the study. At
which I stepped briskly enough aside, I assure you, for this might
mean--What did you say? Did I close the door? I assuredly did. Was I to
let the whole of ---- Street into the horrors of this house at a moment
when a poor old man--No, I didn't go out myself. Why should I? Was I to
leave a man on the verge of eighty--excuse me, not every man of eighty
is so hale and vigorous as yourself--to enter such a scene alone?
Besides, I had not warned him of the condition of the only other living
occupant of the house."

"Discreet, very. Quite what was to be expected of you, Miss Butterworth.
More than that. You followed him, no doubt, with careful supervision,
down the hall."

"Most certainly! What would you have thought of me if I had not? He was
in a strange house; there was no servant to guide him, he wanted to know
the way to the study, and I politely showed him there."

"Kind of you, madam,--very. It must have been an interesting moment to
you."

"Very interesting! Too interesting! I own that I am not made entirely of
steel, sir, and the shock he received at finding a dead man awaiting
him, instead of a live one, was more or less communicated to me. Yet I
stood my ground."

"Admirable! I could have done no better myself. And so this man who had
an appointment with Mr. Adams was shocked, really shocked, at finding
him lying there under a cross, dead?"

"Yes, there was no doubting that. Shocked, surprised, terrified, and
something more. It is that something more which has proved my
perplexity. I cannot make it out, not even in thinking it over. Was it
the fascination which all horrible sights exert on the morbid, or was it
a sudden realization of some danger he had escaped, or of some
difficulty yet awaiting him? Hard to say, Mr. Gryce, hard to say; but
you may take my word for it that there was more to him in this meeting
than an unexpected stumbling upon a dead man where he expected to find a
live one. Yet he made no sound after that first cry, and hardly any
movement. He just stared at the figure on the floor; then at his face,
which he seemed to devour, at first with curiosity, then with hate, then
with terror, and lastly--how can I express myself?--with a sort of
hellish humor that in another moment might have broken into something
like a laugh, if the bird, which I had failed to observe up to this
moment, had not waked in its high cage, and, thrusting its beak between
the bars, shrilled out in the most alarming of tones: 'Remember Evelyn!'
That startled the old man even more than the sight on the floor had
done. He turned round, and I saw his fist rise as if against some
menacing intruder, but it quickly fell again as his eyes encountered the
picture which hung before him, and with a cringe painful to see in one
of his years, he sidled back till he reached the doorway. Here he paused
a minute to give another look at the man outstretched at his feet, and I
heard him say:

"'It is Amos's son, not Amos! Is it fatality, or did he plan this
meeting, thinking----'

"But here he caught sight of my figure in the antechamber beyond, and
resuming in an instant his former debonair manner, he bowed very low and
opened his lips as if about to ask a question. But he evidently thought
better of it, for he strode by me and made his way to the front door
without a word. Being an intruder myself, I did not like to stop him.
But I am sorry now for the consideration I showed him; for just before
he stepped out, his emotion--the special character of which, I own to
you, I find impossible to understand--culminated in a burst of raucous
laughter which added the final horror to this amazing adventure. Then he
went out, and in the last glimpse I had of him before the door shut he
wore the same look of easy self-satisfaction with which he had entered
this place of death some fifteen minutes before."

"Remarkable! Some secret history there! That man must be found. He can
throw light upon Mr. Adams's past. 'Amos's son,' he called him? Who is
Amos? Mr. Adams's name was Felix. Felix, the son of Amos. Perhaps this
connection of names may lead to something. It is not a common one, and
if given to the papers, may result in our receiving a clew to a mystery
which seems impenetrable. Your stay in Mr. Adams's house was quite
productive, ma'am. Did you prolong it after the departure of this old
man?"

"No, sir, I had had my fill of the mysterious, and left immediately
after him. Ashamed of the spirit of investigation which had led me to
enter the house, I made a street boy the medium of my communication to
the police, and would have been glad if I could have so escaped all
responsibility in the matter. But the irony of fate follows me as it
does others. A clew was left of my presence, which involves me in this
affair, whether I will or no. Was the hand of Providence in this?
Perhaps. The future will tell. And now, Mr. Gryce, since my budget is
quite empty and the hour late, I will take my leave. If you hear from
that bit of paper----"

"If I hear from it in the way you suggest I will let you know. It will
be the least I can do for a lady who has done so much for me."

"Now you flatter me--proof positive that I have stayed a minute longer
than was judicious. Good evening, Mr. Gryce. What? I have not stayed too
long? You have something else to ask."

"Yes, and this time it is concerning a matter personal to yourself. May
I inquire if you wore the same bonnet yesterday that you do to-day?"

"No, sir. I know you have a good reason for this question, and so will
not express my surprise. Yesterday I was in reception costume, and my
bonnet was a jet one----"

"With long strings tied under the chin?"

"No, sir, short strings; long strings are no longer the fashion."

"But you wore something which fell from your neck?"

"Yes, a boa--a feather boa. How came you to know it, sir? Did I leave my
image in one of the mirrors?"

"Hardly. If so, I should not have expected it to speak. You merely wrote
the fact on the study table top. Or so I have dared to think. You or the
young lady--did she wear ribbons or streamers, too?"

"That I cannot say. Her face was all I saw, and the skirt of a
dove-colored silk dress."

"Then you must settle the question for me in this way. If on the tips of
that boa of yours you find the faintest evidence of its having been
dipped in blood, I shall know that the streaks found on the top of the
table I speak of were evidences of your presence there. But if your boa
is clean, or was not long enough to touch that dying man as you leaned
over him, then we have proof that the young lady with the dove-colored
plumes fingered that table also, instead of falling at once into the
condition in which you saw her carried out."

"I fear that it is my boa which will tell the tale: another proof of the
fallibility of man, or, rather, woman. In secret search for clews I left
behind me traces of my own presence. I really feel mortified, sir, and
you have quite the advantage of me."

And with this show of humility, which may not have been entirely
sincere, this estimable lady took her departure.

Did Mr. Gryce suffer from any qualms of conscience at having elicited so
much and imparted so little? I doubt it. Mr. Gryce's conscience was
quite seared in certain places.




CHAPTER VIII.

IN THE ROUND OF THE STAIRCASE.


The next morning Mr. Gryce received a small communication from Miss
Butterworth at or near the very time she received one from him. Hers
ran:

     You were quite correct. So far as appears, I was the only person to
     lean over Mr. Adams's study table after his unfortunate death. I
     have had to clip the ends of my boa.

His was equally laconic:

     My compliments, madam! Mr. Adams's jaws have been forced apart. A
     small piece of paper was found clinched between his teeth. This
     paper has been recovered, and will be read at the inquest. Perhaps
     a few favored persons may be granted the opportunity of reading it
     before then, notably yourself.

Of the two letters the latter naturally occasioned the greater
excitement in the recipient. The complacency of Miss Butterworth was
superb, and being the result of something that could not be communicated
to those about her, occasioned in the household much speculation as to
its cause.

At Police Headquarters more than one man was kept busy listening to the
idle tales of a crowd of would-be informers. The results which had
failed to follow the first day's publication of the crime came rapidly
in during the second. There were innumerable persons of all ages and
conditions who were ready to tell how they had seen this and that one
issue from Mr. Adams's house on the afternoon of his death, but when
asked to give a description of these persons, lost themselves in
generalities as tedious as they were unprofitable. One garrulous old
woman had observed a lady of genteel appearance open the door to an
elderly gentleman in a great-coat; and a fashionably dressed young woman
came in all breathless to relate how a young man with a very pale young
lady on his arm ran against her as she was going by this house at the
very hour Mr. Adams was said to have been murdered. She could not be
sure of knowing the young man again, and could not say if the young lady
was blonde or brunette, only that she was awfully pale and had a
beautiful gray feather in her hat.

Others were ready with similar stories, which confirmed, without adding
to, the facts already known, and night came on without much progress
having been made toward the unravelling of this formidable mystery.

On the next day Mr. Adams's funeral took place. No relatives or intimate
friends having come forward, his landlord attended to these rites and
his banker acted the part of chief mourner. As his body was carried out
of the house, a half-dozen detectives mingled with the crowd blocking
the thoroughfare in front, but nothing came of their surveillance here
or at the cemetery to which the remains were speedily carried. The
problem which had been presented to the police had to be worked out from
such material as had already come to hand; and, in forcible recognition
of this fact, Mr. Gryce excused himself one evening at Headquarters and
proceeded quite alone and on foot to the dark and apparently closed
house in which the tragedy had occurred.

He entered with a key, and once inside, proceeded to light up the whole
house. This done, he took a look at the study, saw that the cross had
been replaced on the wall, the bird-cage rehung on its hook under the
ceiling, and everything put in its wonted order, with the exception of
the broken casings, which still yawned in a state of disrepair on either
side of the doorway leading into the study. The steel plate had been
shoved back into the place prepared for it by Mr. Adams, but the
glimpses still to be seen of its blue surface through the hole made in
the wall of the antechamber formed anything but an attractive feature
in the scene, and Mr. Gryce, with something of the instinct and much of
the deftness of a housewife, proceeded to pull up a couple of rugs from
the parlor floor and string them over these openings. Then he consulted
his watch, and finding that it was within an hour of nine o'clock, took
up his stand behind the curtains of the parlor window. Soon, for the
person expected was as prompt as himself, he saw a carriage stop and a
lady alight, and he hastened to the front door to receive her. It was
Miss Butterworth.

"Madam, your punctuality is equal to my own," said he. "Have you ordered
your coachman to drive away?"

"Only as far as the corner," she returned, as she followed him down the
hall. "There he will await the call of your whistle."

"Nothing could be better. Are you afraid to remain for a moment alone,
while I watch from the window the arrival of the other persons we
expect? At present there is no one in the house but ourselves."

"If I was subject to fear in a matter of this kind, I should not be here
at all. Besides, the house is very cheerfully lighted. I see you have
chosen a crimson light for illuminating the study."

"Because a crimson light was burning when Mr. Adams died."

"Remember Evelyn!" called out a voice.

"Oh, you have brought back the bird!" exclaimed Miss Butterworth. "That
is not the cry with which it greeted me before. It was 'Eva! Lovely
Eva!' Do you suppose Eva and Evelyn are the same?"

"Madam, we have so many riddles before us that we will let this one go
for the present. I expect Mr. Adams's valet here in a moment."

"Sir, you relieve me of an immense weight. I was afraid that the
privilege of being present at the test you propose to make was not to be
accorded me."

"Miss Butterworth, you have earned a seat at this experiment. Bartow has
been given a key, and will enter as of old in entire freedom to do as he
wills. We have simply to watch his movements."

"In this room, sir? I do not think I shall like that. I had rather not
meet this madman face to face."

"You will not be called upon to do so. We do not wish him to be startled
by encountering any watchful eye. Irresponsible as he is, he must be
allowed to move about without anything to distract his attention.
Nothing must stand in the way of his following those impulses which may
yield us a clew to his habits and the ways of this peculiar household. I
propose to place you where the chances are least in favor of your being
seen by him--in this parlor, madam, which we have every reason to
believe was seldom opened during Mr. Adams's lifetime."

"You must put out the gas, then, or the unaccustomed light will attract
his attention."

"I will not only put out the gas, but I will draw the portières close,
making this little hole for your eye and this one for mine. A common
expedient, madam; but serviceable, madam, serviceable."

The snort which Miss Butterworth gave as she thus found herself drawn up
in darkness before a curtain, in company with this plausible old man,
but feebly conveyed her sensations, which were naturally complex and a
little puzzling to herself. Had she been the possessor of a lively
curiosity (but we know from her own lips that she was not), she might
have found some enjoyment in the situation. But being where she was
solely from a sense of duty, she probably blushed behind her screen at
the position in which she found herself, in the cause of truth and
justice; or would have done so if the opening of the front door at that
moment had not told her that the critical moment had arrived and that
the deaf-and-dumb valet had just been introduced into the house.

The faintest "Hush!" from Mr. Gryce warned her that her surmise was
correct, and, bending her every energy to listen, she watched for the
expected appearance of this man in the antechamber of Mr. Adams's former
study.

He came even sooner than she was prepared to see him, and laying down
his hat on a table near the doorway, advanced with a busy air toward the
portière he had doubtless been in the habit of lifting twenty times a
day. But he barely touched it this time. Something seen, or unseen,
prevented him from entering. Was it the memory of what he had last
beheld there? Or had he noticed the rugs hanging in an unaccustomed way
on either side of the damaged casings? Neither, apparently, for he
simply turned away with a meek look, wholly mechanical, and taking up
his hat again, left the antechamber and proceeded softly upstairs.

"I will follow him," whispered Mr. Gryce. "Don't be afraid, ma'am. This
whistle will bring a man in from the street at once."

"I am not afraid. I would be ashamed----"

But it was useless for her to finish this disclaimer. Mr. Gryce was
already in the hall. He returned speedily, and saying that the
experiment was likely to be a failure, as the old man had gone to his
own room and was preparing himself for bed, he led the way into the
study, and with purpose, or without a purpose--who knows?--idly touched
a button on the table top, thus throwing a new light on the scene. It
was Miss Butterworth's first experience of this change of light, and she
was observing the effect made by the violet glow now thrown over the
picture and the other rich articles in the room when her admiration was
cut short, and Mr. Gryce's half-uttered remark also, by the faint sound
of the valet's descending steps.

Indeed, they had barely time to regain their old position behind the
parlor portières when Bartow was seen hurrying in from the hall with his
former busy air, which this time remained unchecked.

Crossing to his master's study, he paused for an infinitesimal length of
time on the threshold, as if conscious of something being amiss, then
went into the room beyond, and, without a glance in the direction of the
rug, which had been carefully relaid on the spot where his master had
fallen, began to make such arrangements for the night as he was in the
habit of making at this hour. He brought a bottle of wine from the
cupboard and set it on the table, and then a glass, which he first wiped
scrupulously clean. Then he took out his master's dressing gown and
slippers, and, placing them to hand, went into the bedroom.

By this time the two watchers had crept from their concealment near
enough to note what he was doing in the bedroom. He was stooping over
the comb which Mr. Gryce had left lying on the floor. This small object
in such a place seemed to surprise him. He took it up, shook his head,
and put it back on the dresser. Then he turned down his master's bed.

"Poor fool!" murmured Miss Butterworth as she and her companion crept
back to their old place behind the parlor curtains, "he has forgotten
everything but his old routine duties. We shall get nothing from this
man."

But she stopped suddenly; they both stopped. Bartow was in the middle of
the study, with his eyes fixed on his master's empty chair in an
inquiring way that spoke volumes. Then he turned, and gazed earnestly at
the rug where he had last seen that master lying outstretched and
breathless; and awakening to a realization of what had happened, fell
into his most violent self and proceeded to go through the series of
actions which they were now bound to consider a reproduction of what he
had previously seen take place there. Then he went softly out, and crept
away upstairs.

Mr. Gryce and Miss Butterworth stepped at once into the light, and
surveyed each other with a look of marked discouragement. Then the
latter, with a sudden gleam of enthusiasm, cried quickly:

"Turn on another color, and let us see what will happen. I have an idea
it will fetch the old man down again."

Mr. Gryce's brows went up.

"Do you think he can see through the floor?"

But he touched a button, and a rich blue took the place of the violet.

Nothing happened.

Miss Butterworth looked disturbed.

"I have confidence in your theories," began Mr. Gryce, "but when they
imply the possibility of this man seeing through blank walls and obeying
signals which can have no signification to any one on the floor
above----"

"Hark!" she cried, holding up one finger with a triumphant air. The old
man's steps could be heard descending.

This time he approached with considerable feebleness, passed slowly into
the study, advanced to the table, and reached out his hands as if to
lift something which he expected to find there. Seeing nothing, he
glanced in astonishment up at the book shelves and then back to the
table, shook his head, and suddenly collapsing, sank in a doze on the
nearest chair.

Miss Butterworth drew a long breath, eyed Mr. Gryce with some curiosity,
and then triumphantly exclaimed:

"Can you read the meaning of all that? I think I can. Don't you see that
he came expecting to find a pile of books on the table which it was
probably his business to restore to their shelves?"

"But how can he know what light is burning here? You can see for
yourself that there is no possible communication between this room and
the one in which he has always been found by any one going above."

Miss Butterworth's manner showed a hesitation that was almost naive. She
smiled, and there was apology in her smile, though none in her voice, as
she remarked with odd breaks:

"When I went upstairs--you know I went upstairs when I was here
before--I saw a little thing--a very little thing--which you doubtless
observed yourself and which may explain, though I do not know how, why
Bartow can perceive these lights from the floor above."

"I shall be very glad to hear about it, madam. I thought I had
thoroughly searched those rooms----"

"And the halls?"

"And the halls; and that nothing in them could have escaped my eyes. But
if you have a more patient vision than myself----"

"Or make it my business to look lower----"

"How?"

"To look lower; to look on the floor, say."

"On the floor?"

"The floor sometimes reveals much: shows where a person steps the
oftenest, and, therefore, where he has the most business. You must have
noticed how marred the woodwork is at the edge of the carpeting on that
little landing above."

"In the round of the staircase?"

"Yes."

Mr. Gryce did not think it worth his while to answer. Perhaps he had not
time; for leaving the valet where he was, and Miss Butterworth where she
was (only she would not be left, but followed him), he made his way
upstairs, and paused at the place she had mentioned, with a curious look
at the floor.

"You see, it has been much trodden here," she said; at which gentle
reminder of her presence he gave a start; possibly he had not heard her
behind him, and after sixty years of hard service even a detective may
be excused a slight nervousness. "Now, why should it be trodden here?
There is no apparent reason why any one should shuffle to and fro in
this corner. The stair is wide, especially here, and there is no
window----"

Mr. Gryce, whose eye had been travelling over the wall, reached over her
shoulder to one of the dozen pictures hanging at intervals from the
bottom to the top of the staircase, and pulling it away from the wall,
on which it hung decidedly askew, revealed a round opening through which
poured a ray of blue light which could only proceed from the vault of
the adjoining study.

"No window," he repeated. "No, but an opening into the study wall which
answers the same purpose. Miss Butterworth, your eye is to be trusted
every time. I only wonder you did not pull this picture aside yourself."

"It was not hanging crooked then. Besides I was in a hurry. I had just
come from my encounter with this demented man. I had noticed the marks
on the landing, and the worn edges of the carpet, on my way upstairs. I
was in no condition to observe them on my way down."

"I see."

Miss Butterworth ran her foot to and fro over the flooring they were
examining.

"Bartow was evidently in the habit of coming here constantly," said she,
"probably to learn whether his master had need of him. Ingenious in Mr.
Adams to contrive signals for communication with this man! He certainly
had great use for his deaf-and-dumb servant. So one mystery is solved!"

"And if I am not mistaken, we can by a glance through this loophole
obtain the answer to another. You are wondering, I believe, how Bartow,
if he followed the movements of the assailant from the doorway, came to
thrust with his left hand, instead of with his right. Now if he saw the
tragedy from this point, he saw it over the assailant's shoulder,
instead of face to face. What follows? He would imitate literally the
movements of the man he saw, turn in the same direction and strike with
the same hand."

"Mr. Gryce, we are beginning to untangle the threads that looked so
complicated. Ah, what is that? Why, it's that bird! His cage must be
very nearly under this hole."

"A little to one side, madam, but near enough to give you a start. What
was it he cried then?"

"Oh, those sympathetic words about Eva! 'Poor Eva!'"

"Well, give a glance to Bartow. You can see him very well from here."

Miss Butterworth put her eye again to the opening, and gave a grunt, a
very decided grunt. With her a grunt was significant of surprise.

"He is shaking his fist; he is all alive with passion. He looks as if he
would like to kill the bird."

"Perhaps that is why the creature was strung up so high. You may be sure
Mr. Adams had some basis for his idiosyncrasies."

"I begin to think so. I don't know that I care to go back where that man
is. He has a very murderous look."

"And a very feeble arm, Miss Butterworth. You are safe under my
protection. My arm is not feeble."

[Illustration: A-Table. B-Small Stand. C-Door to Bedroom. D-Evelyn's
Picture E-Loophole on Stair Landing. F-Entrance to Study.] [1]

[Footnote 1: Since my readers may not understand how an opening above
the stairway might communicate with Mr. Adams's study, I here submit a
diagram of the same. The study walls were very high, forming a rounded
extension at the back of the house.]




CHAPTER IX.

HIGH AND LOW.


At the foot of the stairs, Mr. Gryce excused himself, and calling in two
or three men whom he had left outside, had the valet removed before
taking Miss Butterworth back into the study. When all was quiet again,
and they found an opportunity to speak, Mr. Gryce remarked:

"One very important thing has been settled by the experiment we have
just made. Bartow is acquitted of participation in this crime."

"Then we can give our full attention to the young people. You have heard
nothing from them, I suppose?"

"No."

"Nor from the old man who laughed?"

"No."

Miss Butterworth looked disappointed.

"I thought--it seemed very probable--that the scrap of writing you found
would inform you who these were. If it was important enough for the
dying man to try to swallow it, it certainly should give some clew to
his assailant."

"Unfortunately, it does not do so. It was a veritable scrawl, madam,
running something like this: 'I return your daughter to you. She is
here. Neither she nor you will ever see me again. Remember Evelyn!' And
signed, 'Amos's son.'"

"Amos's son! That is Mr. Adams himself."

"So we have every reason to believe."

"Strange! Unaccountable! And the paper inscribed with these words was
found clinched between his teeth! Was the handwriting recognized?"

"Yes, as his own, if we can judge from the specimens we have seen of his
signature on the fly-leaves of his books."

"Well, mysteries deepen. And the retaining of this paper was so
important to him that even in his death throe he thrust it in this
strangest of all hiding-places, as being the only one that could be
considered safe from search. And the girl! Her first words on coming to
herself were: 'You have left that line of writing behind.' Mr. Gryce,
those words, few and inexplicable as they are, contain the key to the
whole situation. Will you repeat them again, if you please, sentence by
sentence?"

"With pleasure, madam; I have said them often enough to myself. First,
then: 'I return your daughter to you!'"

"So! Mr. Adams had some one's daughter in charge whom he returns. Whose
daughter? Not that young man's daughter, certainly, for that would
necessitate her being a small child. Besides, if these words had been
meant for his assailant, why make so remarkable an effort to hide them
from him?"

"Very true! I have said the same thing to myself."

"Yet, if not for him, for whom, then? For the old gentleman who came in
later?"

"It is possible; since hearing of him I have allowed myself to regard
this as among the possibilities, especially as the next words of this
strange communication are: 'She is here.' Now the only woman who was
there a few minutes previous to this old gentleman's visit was the
light-haired girl whom you saw carried out."

"Very true; but why do you reason as if this paper had just been
written? It might have been an old scrap, referring to past sorrows or
secrets."

"These words were written that afternoon. The paper on which they were
scrawled was torn from a sheet of letter paper lying on the desk, and
the pen with which they were inscribed--you must have noticed where it
lay, quite out of its natural place on the extreme edge of the table."

"Certainly, sir; but I had little idea of the significance we might come
to attach to it. These words are connected, then, with the girl I saw.
And she is not Evelyn or he would not have repeated in this note the
bird's catch-word, 'Remember Evelyn!' I wonder if she is Evelyn?"
proceeded Miss Butterworth, pointing to the one large picture which
adorned the wall.

"We may call her so for the nonce. So melancholy a face may well suggest
some painful family secret. But how explain the violent part played by
the young man, who is not mentioned in these abrupt and hastily penned
sentences! It is all a mystery, madam, a mystery which we are wasting
time to attempt to solve."

"Yet I hate to give it up without an effort. Those words, now. There
were some other words you have not repeated to me."

"They came before that injunction, 'Remember Evelyn!' They bespoke a
resolve. 'Neither she nor you will ever see me again.'"

"Ah! but these few words are very significant, Mr. Gryce. Could he have
dealt that blow himself? May he have been a suicide after all?"

"Madam, you have the right to inquire; but from Bartow's pantomime, you
must have perceived it is not a self-inflicted blow he mimics, but a
maddened thrust from an outraged hand. Let us keep to our first
conclusions; only--to be fair to every possibility--the condition of Mr.
Adams's affairs and the absence of all family papers and such documents
as may usually be found in a wealthy man's desk prove that he had made
some preparation for possible death. It may have come sooner than he
expected and in another way, but it was a thought he had indulged in,
and--madam, I have a confession to make also. I have not been quite fair
to my most valued colleague. The study--that most remarkable of
rooms--contains a secret which has not been imparted to you; a very
peculiar one, madam, which was revealed to me in a rather startling
manner. This room can be, or rather could be, cut off entirely from the
rest of the house; made a death-trap of, or rather a tomb, in which this
incomprehensible man may have intended to die. Look at this plate of
steel. It is worked by a mechanism which forces it across this open
doorway. I was behind that plate of steel the other night, and these
holes had to be made to let me out."

"Ha! You detectives have your experiences! I should not have enjoyed
spending that especial evening with you. But what an old-world tragedy
we are unearthing here! I declare"--and the good lady actually rubbed
her eyes--"I feel as if transported back to mediæval days. Who says we
are living in New York within sound of the cable car and the singing of
the telegraph wire?"

"Some men are perfectly capable of bringing the mediæval into Wall
Street. I think Mr. Adams was one of those men. Romanticism tinged all
his acts, even the death he died. Nor did it cease with his death. It
followed him to the tomb. Witness the cross we found lying on his
bosom."

"That was the act of another's hand, the result of another's
superstition. That shows the presence of a priest or a woman at the
moment he died."

"Yet," proceeded Mr. Gryce, with a somewhat wondering air, "he must have
had a grain of hard sense in his make-up. All his contrivances worked.
He was a mechanical genius, as well as a lover of mystery."

"An odd combination. Strange that we do not feel his spirit infecting
the very air of this study. I could almost wish it did. We might then be
led to grasp the key to this mystery."

"That," remarked Mr. Gryce, "can be done in only one way. You have
already pointed it out. We must trace the young couple who were present
at his death struggle. If they cannot be found the case is hopeless."

"And so," said she, "we come around to the point from which we
started--proof positive that we are lost in the woods." And Miss
Butterworth rose. She felt that for the time being she, at least, had
come to the end of her resources.

Mr. Gryce did not seek to detain her. Indeed, he appeared to be anxious
to leave the place himself. They, however, stopped long enough to cast
one final look around them. As they did so Miss Butterworth's finger
slowly rose.

"See!" said she, "you can hardly perceive from this side of the wall the
opening made by the removal of that picture on the stair landing.
Wouldn't you say that it was in the midst of those folds of dark-colored
tapestry up there?"

"Yes, I had already located that spot as the one. With the picture hung
up on the other side, it would be quite invisible."

"One needs to keep one's eyes moving in a case like this. That picture
must have been drawn aside several times while we were in this room. Yet
we failed to notice it."

"That was from not looking high enough. High and low, Mr. Gryce! What
goes on at the level of the eye is apparent to every one."

The smile with which he acknowledged this parting shot and prepared to
escort her to the door had less of irony than sadness in it. Was he
beginning to realize that years tell even on the most sagacious, and
that neither high places nor low would have escaped his attention a
dozen years before?




CHAPTER X.

BRIDE ROSES.


"A blonde, you say, sir?"

"Yes, Sweetwater; not of the usual type, but one of those frail,
ethereal creatures whom we find it so hard to associate with crime. He,
on the contrary, according to Miss Butterworth's description (and her
descriptions may be relied upon), is one of those gentlemanly athletes
whose towering heads and powerful figures attract universal attention.
Seen together, you would be apt to know them. But what reason have we
for thinking they will be found together?"

"How were they dressed?"

"Like people of fashion and respectability. He wore a brown-checked suit
apparently fresh from the tailor; she, a dove-colored dress with white
trimmings. The parasol shows the color of her hat and plumes. Both were
young, and (still according to Miss Butterworth) of sensitive
temperament and unused to crime; for she was in a fainting condition
when carried from the house, and he, with every inducement to
self-restraint, showed himself the victim of such powerful emotion that
he would have been immediately surrounded and questioned if he had not
set his burden down in the vestibule and at once plunged with the girl
into the passing crowd. Do you think you can find them, Sweetwater?"

"Have you no clews to their identity beyond this parasol?"

"None, Sweetwater, if you except these few faded rose leaves picked up
from the floor of Mr. Adams's study."

"Then you have given me a problem, Mr. Gryce," remarked the young
detective dubiously, as he eyed the parasol held out to him and let the
rose-leaves drop carelessly through his fingers. "Somehow I do not feel
the same assurances of success that I did before. Perhaps I more fully
realize the difficulties of any such quest, now that I see how much
rests upon chance in these matters. If Miss Butterworth had not been a
precise woman, I should have failed in my former attempt, as I am likely
to fail in this one. But I will make another effort to locate the owner
of this parasol, if only to learn my business by failure. And now, sir,
where do you think I am going first? To a florist's, with these faded
rose-leaves. Just because every other young fellow on the force would
make a start from the parasol, I am going to try and effect one from
these rose-leaves. I may be an egotist, but I cannot help that. I can do
nothing with the parasol."

"And what do you hope to do with the rose-leaves? How can a florist help
you in finding this young woman by means of them?"

"He may be able to say from what kind of a rose they fell, and once I
know that, I may succeed in discovering the particular store from which
the bouquet was sold to this more or less conspicuous couple."

"You may. I am not the man to throw cold water on any one's schemes.
Every man has his own methods, and till they are proved valueless I say
nothing."

Young Sweetwater, who was now all nerve, enthusiasm, and hope, bowed. He
was satisfied to be allowed to work in his own way.

"I may be back in an hour, and you may not see me for a week," he
remarked on leaving.

"Luck to your search!" was the short reply. This ended the interview. In
a few minutes more Sweetwater was off.

The hour passed; he did not come back; the day, and still no Sweetwater.
Another day went by, enlivened only by an interchange of notes between
Mr. Gryce and Miss Butterworth. Hers was read by the old detective with
a smile. Perhaps because it was so terse; perhaps because it was so
characteristic.

     Dear Mr. Gryce:

     I do not presume to dictate or even to offer a suggestion to the
     New York police, but have you inquired of the postman in a certain
     district whether he can recall the postmark on any of the letters
     he delivered to Mr. Adams?

     A. B.

His, on the contrary, was perused with a frown by his exacting colleague
in Gramercy Park. The reason is obvious.

     Dear Miss Butterworth:

     Suggestions are always in order, and even dictation can be endured
     from you. The postman delivers too many letters on that block to
     concern himself with postmarks. Sorry to close another
     thoroughfare.

     E. G.

Meanwhile, the anxiety of both was great; that of Mr. Gryce excessive.
He was consequently much relieved when, on the third morning, he found
Sweetwater awaiting him at the office, with a satisfied smile lighting
up his plain features. He had reserved his story for his special patron,
and as soon as they were closeted together he turned with beaming eyes
toward the old detective, crying:

"News, sir; good news! I have found them; I have found them both, and by
such a happy stroke! It was a blind trail, but when the florist said
that those petals might have fallen from a bride rose--well, sir, I know
that any woman can carry bride roses, but when I remembered that the
clothes of her companion looked as though they had just come from the
tailor's, and that she wore gray and white--why, it gave me an idea, and
I began my search after this unknown pair at the Bureau of Vital
Statistics."

"Brilliant!" ejaculated the old detective. "That is, if the thing
worked."

"And it did, sir; it did. I may have been born under a lucky star,
probably was, but once started on this line of search, I went straight
to the end. Shall I tell you how? Hunting through the list of such
persons as had been married within the city limits during the last two
weeks, I came upon the name of one Eva Poindexter. Eva! that was a name
well-known in the house on ---- Street. I decided to follow up this
Eva."

"A wise conclusion! And how did you set about it?"

"Why, I went directly to the clergyman who had performed the ceremony.
He was a kind and affable dominie, sir, and I had no trouble in talking
to him."

"And you described the bride?"

"No, I led the conversation so that he described her."

"Good; and what kind of a woman did he make her out to be? Delicate?
Pale?"

"Sir, he had not read the service for so lovely a bride in years. Very
slight, almost fragile, but beautiful, and with a delicate bloom which
showed her to be in better health than one would judge from her dainty
figure. It was a private wedding, sir, celebrated in a hotel parlor; but
her father was with her----"

"Her father?" Mr. Gryce's theory received its first shock. Then the old
man who had laughed on leaving Mr. Adams's house was not the father to
whom those few lines in Mr. Adams's handwriting were addressed. Or this
young woman was not the person referred to in those lines.

"Is there anything wrong about that?" inquired Sweetwater.

Mr. Gryce became impassive again.

"No; I had not expected his attendance at the wedding; that is all."

"Sorry, sir, but there is no doubt about his having been there. The
bridegroom----"

"Yes, tell me about the bridegroom."

"Was the very man you described to me as leaving Mr. Adams's house with
her. Tall, finely developed, with a grand air and gentlemanly manners.
Even his clothes correspond with what you told me to expect: a checked
suit, brown in color, and of the latest cut. Oh, he is the man!"

Mr. Gryce, with a suddenly developed interest in the lid of his
inkstand, recalled the lines which Mr. Adams had written immediately
before his death, and found himself wholly at sea. How reconcile facts
so diametrically opposed? What allusion could there be in these lines to
the new-made bride of another man? They read, rather, as if she were his
own bride, as witness:

     I return your daughter to you. She is here. Neither she nor you
     will ever see me again. Remember Evelyn!

     AMOS'S SON.

There must be something wrong. Sweetwater must have been led astray by a
series of extraordinary coincidences. Dropping the lid of the inkstand
in a way to make the young man smile, he looked up.

"I'm afraid it's been a fool chase, Sweetwater. The facts you relate in
regard to this couple, the fact of their having been married at all,
tally so little with what we have been led to expect from certain other
evidences which have come in----"

"Pardon me, sir, but will you hear me out? At the Imperial, where they
were married, I learned that the father and daughter had registered as
coming from a small place in Pennsylvania; but I could learn nothing in
regard to the bridegroom. He had not appeared on the scene till the time
for the ceremony, and after the marriage was seen to take his bride away
in one carriage while the old gentleman departed in another. The latter
concerned me little; it was the young couple I had been detailed to
find. Employing the usual means of search, I tracked them to the
Waldorf, where I learned what makes it certain that I have been
following the right couple. On the afternoon of the very day of Mr.
Adams's death, this young husband and wife left the hotel on foot and
did not come back. Their clothes, which had all been left behind, were
taken away two days later by an elderly gentleman who said he was her
father and whose appearance coincides with that of the person
registering as such at the Imperial. All of which looks favorable to my
theory, does it not, especially when you remember that the bridegroom's
name----"

"You have not told it."

"Is Adams, Thomas Adams. Same family as the murdered man, you see. At
least, he has the same name."

Mr. Gryce surveyed the young man with admiration, but was not yet
disposed to yield him entire credence.

"Humph! I do not wonder you thought it worth your while to follow up the
pair, if one of them is named Adams and the other Eva. But, Sweetwater,
the longer you serve on the force the more you will learn that
coincidences as strange and unexpected as these do occur at times, and
must be taken into account in the elucidation of a difficult problem.
Much as I may regret to throw cold water on your hopes, there are
reasons for believing that the young man and woman whom we are seeking
are not the ones you have busied yourself about for the last two days.
Certain facts which have come to light would seem to show that if she
had a husband at all, his name would not be Thomas Adams, but Felix, and
as the facts I have to bring forward are most direct and unimpeachable,
I fear you will have to start again, and on a new tack."

But Sweetwater remained unshaken, and eyed his superior with a vague
smile playing about his lips.

"You have not asked me, sir, where I have spent all the time which has
elapsed since I saw you last. The investigations I have mentioned did
not absorb more than a day."

"Very true. Where have you been, Sweetwater?"

"To Montgomery, sir, to that small town in Pennsylvania from which Mr.
Poindexter and his daughter registered."

"Ah, I see! And what did you learn there? Something directly to the
point?"

"I learned this, that John Poindexter, father of Eva, had for a friend
in early life one Amos Cadwalader."

"Amos!" repeated Mr. Gryce, with an odd look.

"Yes, and that this Amos had a son, Felix."

"Ah!"

"You see, sir, we must be on the right track; coincidences cannot extend
through half a dozen names."

"You are right. It is I who have made a mistake in drawing my
conclusions too readily. Let us hear about this Amos. You gathered
something of his history, no doubt."

"All that was possible, sir. It is closely woven in with that of
Poindexter, and presents one feature which may occasion you no surprise,
but which, I own, came near nonplussing me. Though the father of Felix,
his name was not Adams. I say was not, for he has been dead six months.
It was Cadwalader. And Felix went by the name of Cadwalader, too, in the
early days of which I have to tell, he and a sister whose name----"

"Well?"

"Was Evelyn."

"Sweetwater, you are an admirable fellow. So the mystery is ours."

"The history, not the mystery; that still holds. Shall I relate what I
know of those two families?"

"At once: I am as anxious as if I were again twenty-three and had been
in your shoes instead of my own for the last three days."

"Very well, sir. John Poindexter and Amos Cadwalader were, in their
early life, bosom friends. They had come from Scotland together and
settled in Montgomery in the thirties. Both married there, but John
Poindexter was a prosperous man from the first, while Cadwalader had
little ability to support a family, and was on the verge of bankruptcy
when the war of the rebellion broke out and he enlisted as a soldier.
Poindexter remained at home, caring for his own family and for the two
children of Cadwalader, whom he took into his own house. I say his own
family, but he had no family, save a wife, up to the spring of '80. Then
a daughter was born to him, the Eva who has just married Thomas Adams.
Cadwalader, who was fitted for army life, rose to be a captain; but he
was unfortunately taken prisoner at one of the late battles and confined
in Libby Prison, where he suffered the tortures of the damned till he
was released, in 1865, by a forced exchange of prisoners. Broken, old,
and crushed, he returned home, and no one living in the town at that
time will ever forget the day he alighted from the cars and took his way
up the main street. For not having been fortunate enough, or unfortunate
enough, perhaps, to receive any communication from home, he advanced
with a cheerful haste, not knowing that his only daughter then lay dead
in his friend's house, and that it was for her funeral that the people
were collecting in the green square at the end of the street. He was so
pale, broken, and decrepit that few knew him. But there was one old
neighbor who recognized him and was kind enough to lead him into a quiet
place, and there tell him that he had arrived just too late to see his
darling daughter alive. The shock, instead of prostrating the old
soldier, seemed to nerve him afresh and put new vigor into his limbs. He
proceeded, almost on a run, to Poindexter's house, and arrived just as
the funeral cortège was issuing from the door. And now happened a
strange thing. The young girl had been laid on an open bier, and was
being carried by six sturdy lads to her last resting place. As the
father's eye fell on her young body under its black pall, a cry of
mortal anguish escaped him, and he sank on his knees right in the line
of the procession.

"At the same minute another cry went up, this time from behind the bier,
and John Poindexter could be seen reeling at the side of Felix
Cadwalader, who alone of all present (though he was the youngest and the
least) seemed to retain his self-possession at this painful moment.
Meanwhile the bereaved father, throwing himself at the side of the bier,
began tearing away at the pall in his desire to look upon the face of
her he had left in such rosy health four years before. But he was
stopped, not by Poindexter, who had vanished from the scene, but by
Felix, the cold, severe-looking boy who stood like a guard behind his
sister. Reaching out a hand so white it was in itself a shock, he laid
it in a certain prohibitory way on the pall, as if saying no. And when
his father would have continued the struggle, it was Felix who
controlled him and gradually drew him into the place at his own side
where a minute before the imposing figure of Poindexter had stood; after
which the bearers took up their burden again and moved on.

"But the dramatic scene was not over. As they neared the churchyard
another procession, similar in appearance to their own, issued from an
adjoining street, and Evelyn's young lover, who had died almost
simultaneously with herself, was brought in and laid at her side. But
not in the same grave: this was noticed by all, though most eyes and
hearts were fixed upon Cadwalader, who had escaped his loathsome prison
and returned to the place of his affections for _this_.

"Whether he grasped then and there the full meaning of this double
burial (young Kissam had shot himself upon hearing of Evelyn's death),
or whether all explanations were deferred till he and Felix walked away
together from the grave, has never transpired. From that minute till
they both left town on the following day, no one had any word with him,
save Poindexter, whom he went once to see, and young Kissam's mother,
who came once to see him. Like a phantom he had risen upon the sight of
the good people of Montgomery, and like a phantom he disappeared, never
to be seen by any of them again, unless, as many doubt, the story is
true which was told some twenty years ago by one of the little village
lads. He says (it was six years after the tragic scene I have just
related) that one evening as he was hurrying by the churchyard, in great
anxiety to reach home before it was too dark, he came upon the figure of
a man standing beside a grave, with a little child in his arms. This man
was tall, long-bearded, and terrifying. His attitude, as the lad
describes it, was one of defiance, if not of cursing. High in his right
hand he held the child, almost as if he would hurl him at the village
which lies under the hill on which the churchyard is perched; and though
the moment passed quickly, the boy, now a man, never has forgotten the
picture thus presented or admitted that it was anything but a real one.
As the description he gave of this man answered to the appearance of
Amos Cadwalader, and as the shoe of a little child was found next
morning on the grave of Cadwalader's daughter, Evelyn, it has been
thought by many that the boy really beheld this old soldier, who for
some mysterious reason had chosen nightfall for this fleeting visit to
his daughter's resting-place. But to others it was only a freak of the
lad's imagination, which had been much influenced by the reading of
romances. For, as these latter reasoned, had it really been Cadwalader,
why did he not show himself at John Poindexter's house--that old friend
who now had a little daughter and no wife and who could have made him so
comfortable? Among these was Poindexter himself, though some thought he
looked oddly while making this remark, as if he spoke more from custom
than from the heart. Indeed, since the unfortunate death of Evelyn in
his house, he had never shown the same interest in the Cadwaladers. But
then he was a man much occupied with great affairs, while the
Cadwaladers, except for their many griefs and misfortunes, were regarded
as comparatively insignificant people, unless we except Felix, who from
his earliest childhood had made himself feared even by grown people,
though he never showed a harsh spirit or exceeded the bounds of decorum
in speech or gesture. A year ago news came to Montgomery of Amos
Cadwalader's death, but no particulars concerning his family or burial
place. And that is all I have been able to glean concerning the
Cadwaladers."

Mr. Gryce had again become thoughtful.

"Have you any reason to believe that Evelyn's death was not a natural
one?"

"No, sir. I interviewed the old mother of the young man who shot himself
out of grief at Evelyn's approaching death, and if any doubt had existed
concerning a matter which had driven her son to a violent end, she could
not have concealed it from me. But there seemed to have been none.
Evelyn Cadwalader was always of delicate health, and when a quick
consumption carried her off no one marvelled. Her lover, who adored her,
simply could not live without her, so he shot himself. There was no
mystery about the tragic occurrence except that it seemed to sever an
old friendship that once was firm as a rock. I allude to that between
the Poindexters and Cadwaladers."

"Yet in this tragedy which has just occurred in ---- Street we see them
brought together again. Thomas Adams marries Eva Poindexter. But who is
Thomas Adams? You have not mentioned him in this history."

"Not unless he was the child who was held aloft over Evelyn's grave."

"Humph! That seems rather far-fetched. What did you learn about him in
Montgomery? Is he known there?"

"As well as any stranger can be who spends his time in courting a young
girl. He came to Montgomery a few months ago, from some foreign
city--Paris, I think--and, being gifted with every personal charm
calculated to please a cultivated young woman, speedily won the
affections of Eva Poindexter, and also the esteem of her father. But
their favorable opinion is not shared by every one in the town. There
are those who have a good deal to say about his anxious and unsettled
eye."

"Naturally; he could not marry all their daughters. But this history you
have given me: it is meagre, Sweetwater, and while it hints at something
deeply tragic, does not supply the key we want. A girl who died some
thirty years ago! A father who disappeared! A brother who, from being a
Cadwalader, has become an Adams! An Eva whose name, as well as that of
the long-buried Evelyn, was to be heard in constant repetition in the
place where the murdered Felix lay with those inscrutable lines in his
own writing, clinched between his teeth! It is a snarl, a perfect snarl,
of which we have as yet failed to pull the right thread. But we'll get
hold of it yet. I'm not going to be baffled in my old age by
difficulties I would have laughed at a dozen years ago."

"But this right thread? How shall we know it among the fifty I see
entangled in this matter?"

"First, find the whereabouts of this young couple--but didn't you tell
me you had done so; that you know where they are?"

"Yes. I learned from the postmaster in Montgomery that a letter
addressed to Mrs. Thomas Adams had been sent from his post-office to
Belleville, Long Island."

"Ah! I know that place."

"And wishing to be assured that the letter was not a pretense, I sent a
telegram to the postmaster at Belleville. Here is his answer. It is
unequivocal: 'Mr. Poindexter of Montgomery, Pa. Mr. Thomas Adams and
Mrs. Adams of the same place have been at the Bedell House in this place
five days.'"

"Very good; then we have them! Be ready to start for Belleville by one
o'clock sharp. And mind, Sweetwater, keep your wits alert and your
tongue still. Remember that as yet we are feeling our way blindfold, and
must continue to do so till some kind hand tears away the bandage from
our eyes. Go! I have a letter to write, for which you may send in a boy
at the end of five minutes."

This letter was for Miss Butterworth, and created, a half-hour later,
quite a stir in the fine old mansion in Gramercy Park. It ran thus:

     Have you sufficient interest in the outcome of a certain matter to
     take a short journey into the country? I leave town at 1
     P.M. for Belleville, Long Island. If you choose to do the
     same, you will find me at the Bedell House, in that town, early in
     the afternoon. If you enjoy novels, take one with you, and let me
     see you reading it on the hotel piazza at five o'clock. I may be
     reading too; if so, and my choice is a book, all is well, and you
     may devour your story in peace. But if I lay aside my book and take
     up a paper, devote but one eye to your story and turn the other on
     the people who are passing you. If after you have done so, you
     leave your book open, I shall understand that you fail to recognize
     these persons. But if you shut the volume, you may expect to see me
     also fold up my newspaper; for by so doing you will have signaled
     me that you have identified the young man and woman you saw leaving
     Mr. Adams's house on the fatal afternoon of your first entrance. E.
     G.




CHAPTER XI.

MISERY.


It is to be hoped that the well-dressed lady of uncertain age who was to
be seen late that afternoon in a remote corner of the hotel piazza at
Belleville had not chosen a tale requiring great concentration of mind,
for her eyes (rather fine ones in their way, showing both keenness and
good nature) seemed to find more to interest them in the scene before
her than in the pages she so industriously turned over.

The scene was one calculated to interest an idle mind, no doubt. First,
there was the sea, a wide expanse of blue, dotted by numerous sails;
then the beach, enlivened by groups of young people dressed like
popinjays in every color; then the village street, and, lastly, a lawn
over which there now and then strayed young couples with tennis rackets
in their hands or golf sticks under their arms. Children, too--but
children did not seem to interest this amiable spinster. (There could be
no doubt about her being a spinster.) She scarcely glanced at them
twice, while a young married pair, or even an old gentleman, if he were
only tall and imperious-looking, invariably caused her eyes to wander
from her book, which, by the way, she held too near for seeing, or such
might have been the criticism of a wary observer.

This criticism, if criticism it would be called, could not have been
made of the spruce, but rather feeble octogenarian at the other end of
the piazza. He was evidently absorbed in the novel he held so
conspicuously open, and which, from the smiles now and then disturbing
the usual placidity of his benevolent features, we can take for granted
was sufficiently amusing. Yet right in the midst of it, and certainly
before he had finished his chapter, he closed his book and took out a
newspaper, which he opened to its full width before sitting down to
peruse its columns. At the same moment the lady at the other end of the
piazza could be seen looking over her spectacles at two gentlemen who
just at that moment issued from the great door opening between her and
the elderly person just alluded to. Did she know them, or was it only
her curiosity that was aroused? From the way she banged together her
book and rose, it looked as if she had detected old acquaintances in the
distinguished-looking pair who were now advancing slowly toward her. But
if so, she could not have been overjoyed to see them, for after the
first hint of their approach in her direction she turned, with an aspect
of some embarrassment, and made her way out upon the lawn, where she
stood with her back to these people, caressing a small dog in a way that
betrayed her total lack of sympathy with these animals, which were
evidently her terror when she was sufficiently herself to be swayed by
her natural impulses.

The two gentlemen, on the contrary, with an air of total indifference to
her proximity, continued their walk until they reached the end of the
piazza, and then turned and proceeded mechanically to retrace their
steps.

Their faces now being brought within view of the elderly person who was
so absorbed in his newspaper, the latter shifted that sheet the merest
trifle, possibly because the sun struck his eyes too directly, possibly
because he wished to catch sight of two very remarkable men. If so, the
opportunity was good, as they stopped within a few feet of his chair.
One of them was elderly, as old as, if not older than, the man watching
him; but he was of that famous Scotch stock whose members are tough and
hale at eighty. This toughness he showed not only in his figure, which
was both upright and graceful, but in the glance of his calm, cold eye,
which fell upon everybody and everything unmoved, while that of his
young, but equally stalwart companion seemed to shrink with the most
acute sensitiveness from every person he met, save the very mild old
reader of news near whom they now paused for a half-dozen words of
conversation.

"I don't think it does me any good," was the young man's gloomy remark.
"I am wretched when with her, and doubly wretched when I try to forget
myself for a moment out of her sight. I think we had better go back. I
had rather sit where she can see me than have her wonder--Oh, I will be
careful; but you must remember how unnerving is the very silence I am
obliged to keep about what is destroying us all. I am nearly as ill as
she."

Here they drew off, and their apparently disinterested hearer turned the
page of his paper. It was five minutes before they came back. This time
it was the old gentleman who was speaking, and as he was more discreet
than his companion or less under the influence of his feelings, his
voice was lower and his words less easy to be distinguished.

"Escape? South coast--she will forget to watch you for--a clinging
nature--impetuous, but foolishly affectionate--you know that--no
danger--found out--time--a cheerful home--courage--happiness--all
forgotten."

A gesture from the young man as he moved away showed that he did not
share these hopes. Meanwhile Miss Butterworth--you surely have
recognized Miss Butterworth--had her opportunities too. She was still
stooping over the dog, which wriggled under her hand, yet did not offer
to run away, fascinated perhaps by that hesitating touch which he may or
may not have known had never inflicted itself upon a dog before. But her
ears, and attention, were turned toward two girls chatting on a bench
near her as freely as if they were quite alone on the lawn. They were
gossiping about a fellow-inmate of the big hotel, and Miss Butterworth
listened intently after hearing them mention the name Adams. These are
some of the words she caught:

"But she is! I tell you she is sick enough to have a nurse and a doctor.
I caught a glimpse of her as I was going by her room yesterday, and I
never saw two such big eyes or such pale cheeks. Then, look at him! He
must just adore her, for he won't speak to another woman, and just moves
about in that small, hot room all day. I wonder if they are bride and
groom? They are young enough, and if you have noticed her clothes----"

"Oh, don't talk about clothes. I saw her the first day she came, and was
the victim of despair until she suddenly got sick and so couldn't wear
those wonderful waists and jackets. I felt like a dowdy when I saw that
pale blue----"

"Oh, well, blue becomes blondes. You would look like a fright in it. I
didn't care about her clothes, but I did feel that it was all up with us
if she chose to talk, or even to smile, upon the few men that are good
enough to stay out a week in this place. Yet she isn't a beauty; she has
not a good nose, nor a handsome eye, nor even an irreproachable
complexion. It must be her mouth, which is lovely, or her walk--did you
notice her walk? It was just as if she were floating; that is, before
she fell down in that faint. I wonder why she fainted. Nobody was doing
anything, not even her husband. But perhaps that was what troubled her.
I noticed that for some cause he was looking very serious--and when she
had tried to attract his attention two or three times and failed, she
just fell from her chair to the floor. That roused him. He has hardly
left her since."

"I don't think they look very happy, do you, for so rich and handsome a
couple?"

"Perhaps he is dissipated. I have noticed that the old gentleman never
leaves them."

"Well, well, he may be dissipated; handsome men are very apt to be. But
I wouldn't care if----"

Here the dog gave a yelp and bolted. Miss Butterworth had unconsciously
pinched him, in her indignation, possibly, at the turn these
rattle-pated young ladies' conversation was taking. This made a
diversion, and the young girls moved off, leaving Miss Butterworth
without occupation. But a young man who at that moment crossed her path
gave her enough to think about.

"You recognize them? There is no mistake?" he whispered.

"None; the one this way is the young man I saw leave Mr. Adams's house,
and the other is the old gentleman who came in afterward."

"Mr. Gryce advises you to return home. He is going to arrest the young
man." And Sweetwater passed on.

Miss Butterworth strolled to a seat and sat down. She felt weak; she
seemed to see that young wife, sick, overwhelmed, struggling with her
great fear, sink under this crushing blow, with no woman near her
capable of affording the least sympathy. The father did not impress her
as being the man to hold up her fainting head or ease her bruised heart.
He had an icy look under his polished exterior which repelled this
keen-eyed spinster, and as she remembered the coldness of his ways, she
felt herself seized by an irresistible impulse to be near this young
creature when the blow fell, if only to ease the tension of her own
heartstrings, which at that moment ached keenly over the part she had
felt herself obliged to play in this matter.

But when she rose to look for Mr. Gryce, she found him gone; and upon
searching the piazza for the other two gentlemen, she saw them just
vanishing round the corner in the direction of a small smoking-room. As
she could not follow them, she went upstairs, and, meeting a maid in the
upper hall, asked for Mrs. Adams. She was told that Mrs. Adams was sick,
but was shown the door of her room, which was at the end of a long hall.
As all the halls terminated in a window under which a sofa was to be
found, she felt that circumstances were in her favor, and took her seat
upon the sofa before her in a state of great complacency. Instantly a
sweet voice was heard through the open transom of the door behind which
her thoughts were already concentrated.

"Where is Tom? Oh, where is Tom? Why does he leave me? I'm afraid of
what he may be tempted to do or say down on those great piazzas alone."

"Mr. Poindexter is with him," answered a voice, measured, but kind. "Mr.
Adams was getting very tired, and your father persuaded him to go down
and have a smoke."

"I must get up; indeed I must get up. Oh! the camphor--the----"

There was a bustle; this poor young wife had evidently fainted again.

Miss Butterworth cast very miserable glances at the door.

Meanwhile in that small and retired smoking-room a terrible scene was in
progress. The two gentlemen had lit their cigars and were sitting in
certain forced attitudes that evinced their non-enjoyment of the weed
each had taken out of complaisance to the other, when an old man,
strangely serious, strangely at home, yet as strangely a guest of the
house like themselves, came in, and shut the door behind him.

"Gentlemen," he at once announced, "I am Detective Gryce of the New York
police, and I am here--but I see that one of you at least knows why I am
here."

One? Both of them! This was evident in a moment. No denial, no
subterfuge was possible. At the first word uttered in the strange,
authoritative tone which old detectives acquire after years of such
experiences, the young man sank down in sudden collapse, while his
companion, without yielding so entirely to his emotions, showed that he
was not insensible to the blow which, in one moment, had brought
destruction to all their hopes.

When Mr. Gryce saw himself so completely understood, he no longer
hesitated over his duty. Directing his full attention to Mr. Adams, he
said, this time with some feeling, for the misery of this young man had
impressed him:

"You are wanted in New York by Coroner D----, whose business it is to
hold an inquest over the remains of Mr. Felix Adams, of whose
astonishing death you are undoubtedly informed. As you and your wife
were seen leaving that gentleman's house a few minutes before he
expired, you are naturally regarded as valuable witnesses in determining
whether his death was one of suicide or murder."

It was an accusation, or so nearly one, that Mr. Gryce was not at all
surprised to behold the dark flush of shame displace the livid terror
which but an instant before had made the man before him look like one of
those lost spirits we sometimes imagine as flitting across the open
mouth of hell. But he said nothing, seemingly had no power to do so, and
his father-in-law was about to make some effort to turn aside this blow
when a voice in the hall outside was heard inquiring for Mr. Adams,
saying that his wife had fainted again and required his help.

The young husband started, cast a look full of despair at Mr.
Poindexter, and thrusting his hand against the door as if to hold it
shut, sank on his knees before Mr. Gryce, saying:

"She knows! She suspects! Her nature is so sensitive."

This he managed to utter in gasps as the detective bent compassionately
over him. "Don't, don't disturb her! She is an angel, a saint from
heaven. Let me bear the blame--he was my brother--let me go with you,
but leave her in ignorance----"

Mr. Gryce, with a vivid sense of justice, laid his hand on the young
man's arm.

"Say nothing," he enjoined. "My memory is good, and I would rather hear
nothing from your lips. As for your wife, my warrant does in no way
include her; and if you promise to come with me quietly, I will even let
you bid her adieu, so that you do it in my presence."

The change which passed over the young man's face at these significant
words was of a nature to surprise Mr. Gryce. Rising slowly, he took his
stand by Mr. Poindexter, who, true to his inflexible nature, had
scarcely moved in limb and feature since Mr. Gryce came in.

"What have you against me?" he demanded. And there was a surprising ring
to his voice, as if courage had come with the necessity of the moment.
"Of what am I accused? I want you to tell me. I had rather you would
tell me in so many words. I cannot leave in peace until you do."

Mr. Poindexter made a movement at this, and cast a half-suspicious,
half-warning glance at his son-in-law. But the young man took no notice
of his interference. He kept his eye on the detective, who quietly took
out his warrant.

At this instant the door shook.

"Lock it!" was the hoarse command of the accused man. "Don't let any one
pass that door, even if it is to bring the tidings of my wife's death."

Mr. Gryce reached out his hand, and turned the key in the lock. Young
Adams opened the paper which he had taken from the detective's hand, and
while his blood-shot eyes vainly sought to master the few lines there
written, Mr. Poindexter attracted the attention of Mr. Gryce, and,
fixing him with his eye, formed his lips with three soundless words:

"For murder? Him?"

The detective's bow and a very long-drawn sigh from his son-in-law
answered him simultaneously. With a curious lift of his upper lip, which
showed his teeth somewhat unpleasantly for a moment, he drew back a
step, and sank into his previous immobility.

"I am indebted to you," declared the young man. "Now I know where I
stand. I am quite ready to go with you and stand trial, if such be
deemed necessary by the officials in New York. You," he cried, turning
with almost an air of command to the old gentleman beside him, "will
watch over Eva. Not like a father, sir, but like a mother. You will be
at her side when she wakes, and, if possible, leave her only when she
sleeps. Do not let her suffer--not too much. No newspapers, no gossiping
women. Watch! watch! as I would watch, and when I come back--for I will
come back, will I not?" he appealed to Mr. Gryce, "my prayers will bless
you and----" A sob stuck in his throat, and he turned for a minute
aside; then he took the detective's arm quite calmly and remarked:

"I do not want to say good-by to my wife. I cannot bear it. I had rather
go straight from here without another glance at her unconscious face.
When I have told my story, for I shall tell it to the first man who asks
me, I may find courage to write her. Meanwhile, get me away as quickly
as you can. Time enough for the world to know my shame to-morrow."

Mr. Gryce tapped on the window overlooking the piazza. A young man
stepped in.

"Here is a gentleman," he cried, "who finds himself forced to return in
great haste to New York. See that he gets to the train in time, without
fuss and without raising the least comment. I will follow with his
portmanteau. Mr. Poindexter, you are now at liberty to attend your
suffering daughter." And with a turn of the key, he unlocked the door,
and one of the most painful scenes of his long life was over.




CHAPTER XII.

THOMAS EXPLAINS.


Mr. Gryce was not above employing a little finesse. He had expressed his
intention of following Mr. Adams, and he did follow him, but so
immediately that he not only took the same train, but sat in the same
car. He wished to note at his leisure the bearing of this young man, who
interested him in quite a different way from what he had anticipated, a
way that vaguely touched his own conscience and made him feel his years
as he had no right to feel them when he had just brought to an end an
intricate and difficult pursuit.

Seated at a distance, he watched with increasing interest the changes
which passed over his prisoner's handsome countenance. He noted the
calmness which now marked the features he had so lately seen writhing in
deepest agony, and wondered from what source the strength came which
enabled this young man to sit so stoically under the eyes of people from
whose regard, an hour before, he had shrunk with such apparent
suffering. Was it that courage comes with despair? Or was he too
absorbed in his own misery to note the shadow it cast about him? His
brooding brow and vacant eye spoke of a mind withdrawn from present
surroundings. Into what depths of remorse, who could say? Certainly not
this old detective, seasoned though he was by lifelong contact with
criminals, some of them of the same social standing and cultured aspect
as this young man.

At the station in Brooklyn he rejoined his prisoner, who scarcely looked
up as he approached. In another hour they were at Police Headquarters
and the serious questioning of Mr. Adams had begun.

He did not attempt to shirk it. Indeed, he seemed anxious to talk. He
had a burden on his mind, and longed to throw it off. But the burden was
not of the exact nature anticipated by the police. He did not
acknowledge having killed his brother, but confessed to having been the
incidental cause of that brother's death. The story he told was this:

"My name is Cadwalader, not Adams. My father, a Scotchman by birth, was
a naturalized citizen of Pennsylvania, having settled in a place called
Montgomery when a young married man. He had two children then, one of
whom died in early life; the other was my brother Felix, whose violent
death under the name of Adams you have called me here to explain. I am
the fruit of a later marriage, entered into by my father some years
after leaving Montgomery. When I was born he was living in Harrisburg,
but, as he left there shortly after I had reached my third year, I have
no remembrances connected with that city. Indeed, my recollections are
all of very different scenes than this country affords. My mother having
died while I was still an infant, I was sent very early in life to the
Old World, from which my father had originally come. When I returned,
which was not till this very year, I found my father dying, and my
brother a grown man with money--a great deal of money--which I had been
led to think he was ready to share with me. But after my father was laid
away, Felix" (with what effort he uttered that name!) "Felix came to New
York, and I was left to wander about without settled hopes or any
definite promise of means upon which to base a future or start a career.
While wandering, I came upon the town where my father had lived in early
youth, and, hunting up his old friends, I met in the house of one who
had come over from Scotland with my father a young lady" (how his voice
shook, and with what a poignant accent he uttered that beloved name) "in
whom I speedily became interested to the point of wishing to marry her.
But I had no money, no business, no home to give her, and, as I was fain
to acknowledge, no prospects. Still I could not give up the hope of
making her my wife. So I wrote to my brother, Felix Cadwalader, or,
rather, Felix Adams, as he preferred to be called in later years for
family reasons entirely disconnected with the matter of his sudden
demise, and, telling him I had become interested in a young girl of good
family and some wealth, asked him to settle upon me a certain sum which
would enable me to marry her with some feeling of self-respect. My only
answer was a repetition of the vague promise he had thrown out before.
But youth is hopeful, even to daring, and I decided to make her mine
without further parley, in the hope that her beauty and endearing
qualities would win from him, at first view, the definite concession he
had so persistently denied me.

"This I did, and the fault with which I have most to reproach myself is
that I entered into this alliance without taking her or her father into
my confidence. They thought me well off, possibly rich, and while Mr.
Poindexter is a man of means, I am sure, if he had known I had nothing
but the clothes I wore and the merest trifle in the way of pocket money,
he would have cried halt to the marriage, for he is a very ambitious man
and considers his daughter well worth a millionaire's devotion--as she
is.

"Felix (you must pardon me if I show no affection for my brother--he was
a very strange man) was notified of my marriage, but did not choose to
witness it, neither did he choose to prohibit it; so it was conducted
quietly, with strangers for witnesses, in a hotel parlor. Then, with
vague hopes, as well as certain vague fears, I prepared to take my young
bride into the presence of my brother, who, hardened as he was by years
of bachelorhood, could not be so entirely impervious to feminine charms
as not to recognize my wife as a woman deserving of every consideration.

"But I had counted without my host. When, two days after the ceremony
which had made us one, I took her to the house which has since become so
unhappily notorious, I found that my brother had but shown me one facet,
and that the least obdurate, of his many-sided nature.

"Brilliant as steel, he was as hard, and not only professed himself
unmoved by my wife's many charms, but also as totally out of sympathy
with such follies as love and marriage, which were, he said, the fruit
of unoccupied minds and a pastime wholly unworthy of men boasting of
such talents and attainments as ourselves. Then he turned his back upon
us, and I, moved by an anger little short of frenzy, began an abuse for
which he was so little prepared that he crouched like a man under blows,
and, losing minute by minute his self-control, finally caught up a
dagger lying close at hand, and crying, 'You want my money? Well, then,
take it!' stabbed himself to the heart with one desperate blow.

"I fear I shall not be believed, but that is the story of this crime,
gentlemen."




CHAPTER XIII.

DESPAIR.


Was it? Tragedies as unpremeditated as this had doubtless occurred, and
inconsistencies in character shown themselves in similar impetuosities,
from the beginning of time up till now. Yet there was not a man present,
with or without the memory of Bartow's pantomime, which, as you will
recall, did not tally at all with this account of Mr. Adams's violent
end, who did not show in a greater or less degree his distrust and
evident disbelief in this tale, poured out with such volubility before
them.

The young man, gifted as he was with the keenest susceptibilities,
perceived this, and his head drooped.

"I shall add nothing to and take nothing from what I have said," was his
dogged remark. "Make of it what you will."

The inspector who was conducting the inquiry glanced dubiously at Mr.
Gryce as these words left Thomas Adams's lips; whereupon the detective
said:

"We are sorry you have taken such a resolution. There are many things
yet left to be explained, Mr. Adams; for instance, why, if your brother
slew himself in this unforeseen manner, you left the house so
precipitately, without giving an alarm or even proclaiming your
relationship to him?"

"You need not answer, you know," the inspector's voice broke in. "No man
is called upon to incriminate himself in this free and independent
country."

A smile, the saddest ever seen, wandered for a minute over the
prisoner's pallid lips. Then he lifted his head and replied with a
certain air of desperation:

"Incrimination is not what I fear now. From the way you all look at me I
perceive that I am lost, for I have no means of proving my story."

This acknowledgment, which might pass for the despairing cry of an
innocent man, made his interrogator stare.

"You forget," suggested that gentleman, "that you had your wife with
you. She can corroborate your words, and will prove herself, no doubt,
an invaluable witness in your favor."

"My wife!" he repeated, choking so that his words could be barely
understood. "Must she be dragged into this--so sick, so weak a woman? It
would kill her, sir. She loves me--she----"

"Was she with you in Mr. Adams's study? Did she see him lift the dagger
against his own breast?"

"No." And with this denial the young man seemed to take new courage.
"She had fainted several moments previously, while the altercation
between my brother and myself was at its height. She did not see the
final act, and--gentlemen, I might as well speak the truth (I have
nothing to gain by silence), she finds it as difficult as you do to
believe that Mr. Adams struck himself. I--I have tried with all my arts
to impress the truth upon her, but oh, what can I hope from the world
when the wife of my bosom--an angel, too, who loves me--oh, sirs, she
can never be a witness for me; she is too conscientious, too true to her
own convictions. I should lose--she would die----"

Mr. Gryce tried to stop him; he would not be stopped.

"Spare me, sirs! Spare my wife! Write me down guilty, anything you
please, rather than force that young creature to speak----"

Here the inspector cut short these appeals which were rending every
heart present. "Have you read the newspapers for the last few days?" he
asked.

"I? Yes, yes, sir. How could I help it? Blood is blood; the man was my
brother; I had left him dying--I was naturally anxious, naturally saw my
own danger, and I read them, of course."

"Then you know he was found with a large cross on his breast, a cross
which was once on the wall. How came it to be torn down? Who put it on
his bosom?"

"I, sir. I am not a Catholic but Felix was, and seeing him dying without
absolution, without extreme unction, I thought of the holy cross, and
tore down the only one I saw, and placed it in his arms."

"A pious act. Did he recognize it?"

"I cannot say. I had my fainting wife to look after. She occupied all my
thoughts."

"I see, and you carried her out and were so absorbed in caring for her
you did not observe Mr. Adams's valet----"

"He's innocent, sir. Whatever people may think, he had nothing to do
with this crime----"

"You did not observe him, I say, standing in the doorway and watching
you?"

Now the inspector knew that Bartow had not been standing there, but at
the loophole above; but the opportunity for entrapping the witness was
too good to lose.

Mr. Adams was caught in the trap, or so one might judge from the beads
of perspiration which at that moment showed themselves on his pale
forehead. But he struggled to maintain the stand he had taken, crying
hotly:

"But that man is crazy, and deaf-and-dumb besides! or so the papers give
out. Surely his testimony is valueless. You would not confront me with
him?"

"We confront you with no one. We only asked you a question. You did not
observe the valet, then?"

"No, sir."

"Or understand the mystery of the colored lights?"

"No, sir."

"Or of the plate of steel and the other contrivances with which your
brother enlivened his solitude?"

"I do not follow you, sir." But there was a change in his tone.

"I see," said the inspector, "that the complications which have
disturbed us and made necessary this long delay in the collection of
testimony have not entered into the crime as described by you. Now this
is possible; but there is still a circumstance requiring explanation; a
little circumstance, which is, nevertheless, one of importance, since
your wife mentioned it to you as soon as she became conscious. I allude
to the half dozen or more words which were written by your brother
immediately preceding his death. The paper on which they were written
has been found, and that it was a factor in your quarrel is evident,
since she regretted that it had been left behind you, and he--Do you
know where we found this paper?"

The eyes which young Adams raised at this interrogatory had no
intelligence in them. The sight of this morsel of paper seemed to have
deprived him in an instant of all the faculties with which he had been
carrying on this unequal struggle. He shook his head, tried to reach out
his hand, but failed to grasp the scrap of paper which the inspector
held out. Then he burst into a loud cry:

"Enough! I cannot hold out, with no other support than a wicked lie. I
killed my brother for reasons good as any man ever had for killing
another. But I shall not impart them. I would rather be tried for murder
and hanged."

It was a complete breakdown, pitiful from its contrast with the man's
herculean physique and fine, if contracted, features. If the end, it was
a sad end, and Mr. Gryce, whose forehead had taken on a deep line
between the eyebrows, slowly rose and took his stand by the young man,
who looked ready to fall. The inspector, on the contrary, did not move.
He had begun a tattoo with his fingers on the table, and seemed bound to
beat it out, when another sudden cry broke from the young man's lips:

"What is that?" he demanded, with his eyes fixed on the door, and his
whole frame shaking violently.

"Nothing," began the inspector, when the door suddenly opened and the
figure of a woman white as a wraith and wonderful with a sort of holy
passion darted from the grasp of a man who sought to detain her, and
stood before them, palpitating with a protest which for a moment she
seemed powerless to utter.

It was Adams's young, invalid wife, whom he had left three hours before
at Belleville. She was so frail of form, so exquisite of feature, that
she would have seemed some unearthly visitant but for the human anguish
which pervaded her look and soon found vent in this touching cry:

"What is he saying? Oh, I know well what he is saying. He is saying that
he killed his brother, that he held the dagger which rid the world of a
monster of whose wickedness none knew. But you must not heed him. Indeed
you must not heed him. He is innocent; I, his wife, have come twenty
miles, from a bed of weakness and suffering, to tell you so. He----"

But here a hand was laid gently, but firmly on her mouth. She looked up,
met her husband's eyes filled with almost frantic appeal, and giving him
a look in return that sank into the heart of every man who beheld it,
laid her own hand on his and drew it softly away.

"It is too late, Tom, I must speak. My father, my own weakness, or your
own peremptory commands could not keep me at Belleville when I knew you
had been brought here. And shall I stop now, in the presence of these
men who have heard your words and may believe them? No, that would be a
cowardice unworthy of our love and the true lives we hope to lead
together. Sirs!" and each man there held his breath to catch the words
which came in faint and fainter intonation from her lips, "I know my
husband to be innocent, because the hand that held the dagger was mine.
I killed Felix Cadwalader!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The horror of such a moment is never fully realized till afterward. Not
a man there moved, not even her husband, yet on every cheek a slow
pallor was forming, which testified to the effect of such words from
lips made for smiles and showing in every curve the habit of gentle
thought and the loftiest instincts. Not till some one cried out from the
doorway, "Catch her! she is falling!" did any one stir or release the
pent-up breath which awe and astonishment had hitherto held back on
every lip. Then he in whose evident despair all could read the real
cause of the great dread which had drawn him into a false confession,
sprang forward, and with renewed life showing itself in every feature,
caught her in his arms. As he staggered with her to a sofa and laid her
softly down, he seemed another man in look and bearing; and Mr. Gryce,
who had been watching the whole wonderful event with the strongest
interest, understood at once the meaning of the change which had come
over his prisoner at that point in his memorable arrest when he first
realized that it was for himself they had come, and not for the really
guilty person, the idolized object of his affections.

Meanwhile, he was facing them all, with one hand laid tenderly on that
unconscious head.

"Do not think," he cried, "that because this young girl has steeped her
hand in blood, she is a wicked woman. There is no purer heart on earth
than hers, and none more worthy of the worship of a true man. See! she
killed my brother, son of my father, beloved by my mother, yet I can
kiss her hand, kiss her forehead, her eyes, her feet, not because I hate
him, but because I worship her, the purest--the best----" He left her,
and came and stood before those astonished men. "Sirs!" he cried, "I
must ask you to listen to a strange, a terrible tale."




CHAPTER XIV.

MEMORANDA.


"It is like and unlike what I have just related to you," began young
Adams. "In my previous confession I mixed truth and falsehood, and to
explain myself fully and to help you to a right understanding of my
wife's act, I shall have to start afresh and speak as if I had already
told you nothing."

"Wait!" cried Mr. Gryce, in an authoritative manner. "We will listen to
you presently;" and, leaning over the inspector, he whispered a few
words, after which he took out a pencil and jotted down certain
sentences, which he handed over to this gentleman.

As they had the appearance of a memorandum, and as the inspector glanced
more than once at them while Mr. Adams (or Cadwalader, as he should now
rightfully be called) was proceeding with his story, I will present them
to you as written.

Points to be made clear by Mr. Adams in his account of this crime:

1. Why a woman who was calm enough to stop and arrange her hair during
the beginning of an interview should be wrought up to such a pitch of
frenzy and exasperation before it was over as to kill with her own hand
a man against whom she had evidently no previous grudge. (Remember the
comb found on the floor of Mr. Adams's bedroom.)

2. What was the meaning of the following words, written just previous to
this interview by the man thus killed: "I return you your daughter.
Neither you nor she shall ever see me again. Remember Evelyn!"

3. Why was the pronoun "I" used in this communication? What position did
Mr. Felix Adams hold toward this young girl qualifying him to make use
of such language after her marriage to his brother?

4. And having used it, why did he, upon being attacked by her, attempt
to swallow the paper upon which he had written these words, actually
dying with it clinched between his teeth?

5. If he was killed in anger and died as monsters do (her own word), why
did his face show sorrow rather than hate, and a determination as far as
possible removed from the rush of over-whelming emotions likely to follow
the reception of a mortal blow from the hand of an unexpected
antagonist?

6. Why, if he had strength to seize the above-mentioned paper and convey
it to his lips, did he not use that strength in turning on a light
calculated to bring him assistance, instead of leaving blazing the
crimson glow which, according to the code of signals as now understood
by us, means: "Nothing more required just now. Keep away."

7. What was the meaning of the huge steel plate found between the
casings of the doorway, and why did it remain at rest within its socket
at this, the culminating moment of his life?

8. An explanation of how old Poindexter came to appear on the scene so
soon after the event. His words as overheard were: "It is Amos's son,
not Amos!" Did he not know whom he was to meet in this house? Was the
condition of the man lying before him with a cross on his bosom and a
dagger in his heart less of a surprise to him than the personality of
the victim?

9. Remember the conclusions we have drawn from Bartow's pantomime. Mr.
Adams was killed by a left-handed thrust. Watch for an acknowledgment
that the young woman is left-handed, and do not forget that an
explanation is due why for so long a time she held her other arm
stretched out behind her.

10. Why did the bird whose chief cry is "Remember Evelyn!" sometimes
vary it with "Poor Eva! Lovely Eva! Who would strike Eva?" The story of
this tragedy, to be true, must show that Mr. Adams knew his brother's
bride both long and well.

11. If Bartow is, as we think, innocent of all connection with this
crime save as witness, why does he show such joy at its result? This may
not reasonably be expected to fall within the scope of Thomas Adams's
confession, but it should not be ignored by us. This deaf-and-dumb
servitor was driven mad by a fact which caused him joy. Why?

12. Notice the following schedule. It has been drawn up after repeated
experiments with Bartow and the various slides of the strange lamp which
cause so many different lights to shine out in Mr. Adams's study:

    White light--Water wanted.
    Green light--Overcoat and hat to be brought.
    Blue light--Put back books on shelves.
    Violet light--Arrange study for the night.
    Yellow light--Watch for next light.
    Red light--Nothing wanted; stay away.

The last was on at the final scene. Note if this fact can be explained
by Mr. Adams's account of the same.

With these points in our mind, let us peruse the history of this crime
and of the remote and possibly complicated causes which led to it.




BOOK II

REMEMBER EVELYN




CHAPTER I.

THE SECRET OF THE CADWALADERS.


Thomas Cadwalader suggested rather than told his story. We dare not
imitate him in this, nor would it be just to your interest to relate
these facts with all the baldness and lack of detail imposed upon this
unhappy man by the hurry and anxiety of the occasion. Remarkable
tragedies have their birth in remarkable facts, and as such facts are
but the outcome of human passions, we must enter into those passions if
we would understand either the facts or their appalling consequences. In
this case, the first link of the chain which led to Felix Adams's
violent death was forged before the birth of the woman who struck him.
We must begin, then, with almost forgotten days, and tell the story, as
her pleader did, from the standpoint of Felix and Thomas Cadwalader.

Thomas Cadwalader--now called Adams--never knew his mother; she died in
his early infancy. Nor could he be said to have known his father, having
been brought up in France by an old Scotch lawyer, who, being related to
his mother, sometimes spoke of her, but never of his father, till Thomas
had reached his fifteenth year. Then he put certain books into his
hands, with this remarkable injunction:

"Here are romances, Thomas. Read them; but remember that none of them,
no matter how thrilling in matter or effect, will ever equal the story
of your father's bitterly wronged and suffering life."

"My father!" he cried; "tell me about him; I have never heard."

But his guardian, satisfied with an allusion which he knew must bear
fruit in the extremely susceptible nature of this isolated boy, said no
more that day, and Thomas turned to the books. But nothing after that
could ever take his mind away from his father. He had scarcely thought
of him for years, but now that that father had been placed before him in
the light of a wronged man, he found himself continually hunting back in
the deepest recesses of his memory for some long-forgotten recollection
of that father's features calculated to restore his image to his eyes.
Sometimes he succeeded in this, or thought he did; but this image, if
image it was, was so speedily lost in a sensation of something strange
and awe-compelling enveloping it, that he found himself more absorbed by
the intangible impressions associated with this memory than by the
memory itself. What were these impressions, and in what had they
originated? In vain he tried to determine. They were as vague as they
were persistent. A stretch of darkness--two bars of orange light, always
shining, always the same--black lines against these bars, like the tops
of distant gables--an inner thrill--a vague affright--a rush about him
as of a swooping wind--all this came with his father's image, only to
fade away with it, leaving him troubled, uneasy, and perplexed. Finding
these impressions persistent, and receiving no explanation of them in
his own mind, he finally asked his guardian what they meant. But that
guardian was as ignorant as himself on this topic; and satisfied with
having roused the boy's imagination, confined himself to hints, dropped
now and then with a judiciousness which proved the existence of a
deliberate purpose, of some duty which awaited him on the other side of
the water, a duty which would explain his long exile from his only
parent and for which he must fit himself by study and the acquirement of
such accomplishments as render a young man a positive power in society,
whether that society be of the Old World or the New. He showed his
shrewdness in thus dealing with this pliable and deeply affectionate
nature. From this time forth Thomas felt himself leading a life of
mystery and interest.

To feel himself appointed for a work whose unknown character only
heightened its importance gave point to every effort now made by this
young man, and lent to his studies that vague touch of romance which
made them a delight, and him an adept in many things he might otherwise
have cared little about. At eighteen he was a graduate from the
Sorbonne, and a musical virtuoso as well. He could fence, ride, and
carry off the prize in games requiring physical prowess as well as
mental fitness. He was, in fact, a prodigy in many ways, and was so
considered by his fellow-students. He, however, was not perfect; he
lacked social charm, and in so far failed of being the complete
gentleman. This he was made to realize in the following way:

One morning his guardian came to him with a letter from his father, in
which, together with some words of commendation for his present
attainments, that father expressed a certain dissatisfaction with his
general manner as being too abrupt and self-satisfied with those of his
own sex, and much too timid and deprecatory with those of the other.
Thomas felt the criticism and recognized its justice; but how had his
father, proved by his letter to be no longer a myth, become acquainted
with defects which Thomas instinctively felt could never have attracted
the attention of his far from polished guardian?

His questions on this point elicited a response that confounded him. He
was not the only son of his father; he had a brother living, and this
brother, older than himself by some twenty years or more, had just been
in Paris, where, in all probability, he had met him, talked with him,
and perhaps pressed his hand.

It was a discovery calculated to deepen the impression already made upon
Thomas's mind. Only a purpose of the greatest importance could account
for so much mystery. What could it be? What was he destined to do or say
or be? He was not told, but while awaiting enlightenment he was resolved
not to be a disappointment to the two anxious souls who watched his
career so eagerly and exacted from him such perfection. He consequently
moderated his manner, and during the following year acquired by constant
association with the gilded youth about him that indescribable charm of
the perfect gentleman which he was led to believe would alone meet with
the approval of those he now felt bound to please. At the end of the
year he found himself a finished man of the world. How truly so, he
began to realize when he noted the blush with which his presence was
hailed by women and the respect shown him by men of his own stamp. In
the midst of the satisfaction thus experienced his guardian paid him a
final visit.

"You are now ready," said he, "for your father's summons. It will come
in a few weeks. Be careful, then. Form no ties you cannot readily break;
for, once recalled from France, you are not likely to return here. What
your father's purpose concerning you may be I do not know, but it is no
ordinary one. You will have money, a well-appointed home, family
affection, all that you have hitherto craved in vain, and in return you
will carry solace to a heart which has awaited your healing touch for
twenty years. So much I am ordered to say; the rest you will hear from
your father's own lips."

Aroused, encouraged, animated by the wildest hopes, the most extravagant
anticipations, Thomas awaited his father's call with feverish
impatience, and when it came, hastened to respond to it by an immediate
voyage to America. This was some six months previous to the tragedy in
---- Street. On his arrival at the wharf in New York he was met, not by
his brother, as he had every reason to expect, but by a messenger in
whose face evil tidings were apparent before he spoke. Thomas was soon
made acquainted with them. His father, who he now learned was called
Cadwalader (he himself had always been called Adams), was ill, possibly
dying. He must therefore hasten, and, being provided with minute
instructions as to his way, took the train at once for a small village
in northern Pennsylvania.

All that followed was a dream to him. He was hurried through the night,
with the motion of the ship still in his blood, to meet--what? He dared
not think. He swam in a veritable nightmare. Then came a stop, a
hurrying from the train, a halt on a platform reeking with rain (for the
night was stormy), a call from some one to hurry, the sight of a panting
horse steaming under a lamp whose blowing flame he often woke in after
nights to see, a push from a persuasive hand, then a ride over a country
road the darkness of which seemed impenetrable, and, finally, the
startling vision of an open door, with a Meg Merrilies of a woman
standing in it, holding a flaming candle in her hand. The candle went
out while he looked at it, and left only a voice to guide him--a voice
which, in tones shaken by chill or feeling, he could not tell which,
cried eagerly:

"Is that you, laddie? Come awa in. Come awa in. Dinna heed the rain. The
maister's been crying on you a' day. I'm glad you're no ower late."

He got down, followed the voice, and, stumbling up a step or two,
entered a narrow door, which was with difficulty held open behind him,
and which swung to with a loud noise the minute he crossed the
threshold. This or the dreariness of the place in which he found himself
disturbed him greatly. Bare floors, stained walls, meagre doorways, and
a common pine staircase, lighted only by the miserable candle which the
old woman had relit--were these the appointments of the palatial home he
had been led to expect? These the surroundings, this the abode of him
who had exacted such perfection on his part, and to satisfy whose
standard he had devoted years of hourly, daily effort, in every
department of art and science? A sickening revolt seized him, aggravated
by the smiles of the old woman, who dipped and courtesied before him in
senile delight. She may have divined his feelings, for, drawing him
inside, she relieved him of his overcoat, crying all the while, with an
extravagant welcome more repulsive than all the rest:

"O the fine laddie! Wad your puir mither could see you the noo! Bonnie
and clever! No your faither's bairn ava! All mither, laddie, all
mither!"

The room was no better than the hall.

"Where is my father?" he asked, authoritatively, striving to keep down
his strong repugnance.

"Dinna ye hear him? He's crying on ye. Puir man, he's wearying to see
ye."

Hear him? He could scarcely hear her. The driving rain, the swish of
some great boughs against the house, the rattling of casements and
doors, and the shrieking of wind in the chimney made all other sounds
wellnigh inaudible. Yet as he listened he seemed to catch the accents of
a far-off voice calling, now wistfully, now imperatively, "Thomas!
Thomas!" And, thrilled with an emotion almost superstitious in its
intensity, he moved hastily toward the staircase.

But the old woman was there before him. "Na! Na!" she cried. "Come in by
and eat something first."

But Thomas shook his head. It seemed to him at that moment as if he
never could eat or sleep again, the disillusion was so bitter, his
disappointment so keen.

"You will na? Then haste ye--haste ye. But it's a peety you wadna ha'e
eaten something. Ye'll need it, laddie; ye'll need it."

"Thomas! Thomas!" wailed the voice.

He tore himself away. He forced himself to go upstairs, following the
cry, which at every moment grew louder. At the top he cast a final
glance below. The old woman stood at the stair-foot, shading the candle
from the draught with a hand that shook with something more than age.
She was gazing after him in vague affright, and with the shadow of this
fear darkening her weazen face, formed a picture from which he was glad
to escape.

Plunging on, he found himself before a window whose small panes dripped
and groaned under a rain that was fast becoming a torrent. Chilled by
the sight, he turned toward the door faintly outlined beside it, and in
the semi-darkness seized an old-fashioned latch rattling in the wind
that permeated every passageway, and softly raised it.

Instantly the door fell back, and two eyes blazing with fever and that
fire of the soul of which fever is the mere physical symbol greeted him
from the midst of a huge bed drawn up against the opposite wall. Then
two arms rose, and the moaning cry of "Thomas! Thomas!" changed to a
shout, and he knew himself to be in the presence of his father.

Falling on his knees in speechless emotion, he grasped the wasted hands
held out to him. Such a face, rugged though it was and far from
fulfilling the promise held out to him in his dreams, could not but move
any man. As he gazed into it and pressed the hands in which the life
blood only seemed to linger for this last, this only embrace, all his
filial instincts were aroused and he forgot the common surroundings, the
depressing rain, his own fatigue and bitter disappointment, in his
lifelong craving for love and family recognition.

But the old man on whose breast he fell showed other emotions than those
by which he was himself actuated. It was not an embrace he craved, but
an opportunity to satisfy an almost frenzied curiosity as to the
appearance and attributes of the son who had grown to manhood under
other eyes. Pushing him gently back, he bade him stand in the light of
the lamp burning on a small pine table, and surveyed him, as it were,
from the verge of his own fast failing life, with moans of mingled pain
and weariness, amid which Thomas thought he heard the accents of a
supreme satisfaction.

Meanwhile in Thomas himself, as he stood there, the sense of complete
desolation filled his breast almost to bursting. To have come home for
this! To find a father only to be weighed in the scales of that father's
judgment! To be admired, instead of loved!

As he realized his position and listened to the shrieking of the wind
and rain, he felt that the wail of the elements but echoed the cry of
his own affections, thus strangled in their birth. Indeed the sensations
of that moment made so deep an impression upon him that he was never
afterward able to hear a furious gust of wind or rain without the
picture rising up before him of this great hollow room, with the
trembling figure of his father struggling in the grasp of death and
holding it at bay, while he gauged with worldly wisdom the physical,
mental, and moral advantages of the son so long banished and so lately
restored to his arms.

A rush of impetuous words followed by the collapse of his father's form
upon the pillow showed that the examination was over. Rushing forward,
he grasped again that father's hands, but soon shrank back, stunned by
what he heard and the prospect it opened before him. A few of his
father's words will interpret the rest. They came in a flood, and among
others Thomas caught these:

"The grace of God be thanked! Our efforts have not failed. Handsome,
strong, noble in look and character, we could ask nothing more, hope for
nothing more. My revenge will succeed! John Poindexter will find that he
has a heart, and that that heart can be wrung. I do not need to live to
see it. For me it exists now; it exists here!" And he struck his breast
with hands that seemed to have reserved their last strength for this
supreme gesture.

John Poindexter! Who was he? It was a new name to Thomas. Venturing to
say so, he reeled under the look he received from his father's eyes.

"You do not know who John Poindexter is, and what he has done to me and
mine? They have kept their promise well, too well, but God will accord
me strength to tell you what has been left unsaid by them. He would not
bring me up to this hour to let me perish before you have heard the
story destined to make you the avenger of innocence upon that enemy of
your race. Listen, Thomas. With the hand of death encircling my heart, I
speak, and if the story find you cold--But it will not. Your name is
Cadwalader, and it will not."

Constrained by passions such as he had never imagined even in dreams,
Thomas fell upon his knees. He could not listen otherwise. His father,
gasping for breath, fixed him with his hollow eyes, in which the last
flickering flames of life flared up in fitful brightness.

"Thomas"--the pause was brief--"you are not my only child."

"I know it," fell from Thomas's white lips. "I have a brother; his name
is Felix."

The father shook his head with a look suggestive of impatience.

"Not him! Not him!" he cried. "A sister! a sister, who died before you
were born--beautiful, good, with a voice like an angel's and a
heart--she should be standing by my side to-day, and she would have been
if--if he--but none of that. I have no breath to waste. Facts, facts,
just facts! Afterward may come emotions, hatred, denunciation, not now.
This is my story, Thomas.

"John Poindexter and I were friends. From boyhood we shared each other's
bed, food, and pleasures, and when he came to seek his fortune in
America I accompanied him. He was an able man, but cold. I was of an
affectionate nature, but without any business capacity. As proof of
this, in fifteen years he was rich, esteemed, the master of a fine
house, and the owner of half a dozen horses; while I was the same nobody
I had been at first, or would have been had not Providence given me two
beautiful children and blessed, or rather cursed, me with the friendship
of this prosperous man. When Felix was fourteen and Evelyn three years
older, their mother died. Soon after, the little money I had vanished in
an unfortunate enterprise, and life began to promise ill, both for
myself and for my growing children. John Poindexter, who was honest
enough then, or let me hope so, and who had no children of his own,
though he had been long married, offered to take one of mine to educate.
But I did not consent to this till the war of the rebellion broke out;
then I sent him both son and daughter, and went into the army. For four
years I fought for the flag, suffering all that a man can suffer and
live, and being at last released from Libby Prison, came home with a
heart full of gratitude and with every affection keyed up by a long
series of unspeakable experiences, to greet my son and clasp once more
within my wasted arms the idolized form of my deeply loved daughter.
What did I find? A funeral in the streets--hers--and Felix, your
brother, walking like a guard between her speechless corpse and the man
under whose protection I had placed her youth and innocence.

"Betrayed!" shrieked the now frenzied parent, rising on his pillow. "Her
innocence! Her sweetness! And he, cold as the stone we laid upon her
grave, had seen her perish with the anguish and shame of it, without a
sign of grief or a word of contrition."

"O God!" burst from lips the old man was watching with frenzied cunning.

"Ay, God!" repeated the father, shaking his head as if in defiance
before he fell back on his pillow. "He allowed it and I--But this does
not tell the story. I must keep to facts as Felix did--Felix, who was
but fifteen years old and yet found himself the only confidant and
solace of this young girl betrayed by her protector. It was after her
burial----"

"Cease!" cried a voice, smooth, fresh, and yet strangely commanding,
from over Thomas's shoulder. "Let me tell the rest. No man can tell the
rest as I can."

"Felix!" ejaculated Amos Cadwalader below his breath.

"Felix!" repeated Thomas, shaken to his very heart by this new presence.
But when he sought to rise, to turn, he felt the pressure of a hand on
his shoulder and heard that voice again, saying softly, but
peremptorily:

"Wait! Wait till you hear what I have to say. Think not of me, think
only of her. It is she you are called upon to avenge; your sister,
Evelyn."

Thomas yielded to him as he had to his father. He sank down beneath that
insistent hand, and his brother took up the tale.

"Evelyn had a voice like a bird. In those days before father's return,
she used to fill old John Poindexter's house with melody. I, who, as a
boy, was studious, rather than artistic, thought she sang too much for a
girl whose father was rotting away in a Southern prison. But when about
to rebuke her, I remembered Edward Kissam, and was silent. For it was
his love which made her glad, and to him I wished every happiness, for
he was good, and honest, and kind to me. She was eighteen then, and
beautiful, or so I was bound to believe, since every man looked at her,
even old John Poindexter, though he never looked at any other woman, not
even his own wife. And she was good, too, and pure, I swear, for her
blue eyes never faltered in looking into mine until one day when--my
God! how well I remember it!--they not only faltered, but shrank before
me in such terror, that, boy though I was, I knew that something
terrible, something unprecedented had happened, and thinking my one
thought, I asked if she had received bad news from father. Her answer
was a horrified moan, but it might have been a shriek. 'Our father! Pray
God we may never see him or hear from him again. If you love him, if you
love me, pray he may die in prison rather than return here to see me as
I am now.'

"I thought she had gone mad, and perhaps she had for a moment; for at my
look of startled distress a change took place in her. She remembered my
youth, and laughing, or trying to laugh away her frenzy, uttered some
hurried words I failed to understand, and then, sinking at my knee, laid
her head against my side, crying that she was not well; that she had
experienced for a long time secret pains and great inward distress, and
that she sometimes feared she was not going to live long, for all her
songs and merry ways and seeming health and spirits.

"'Not live, Evelyn?' It was an inconceivable thought to me, a boy. I
looked at her, and seeing how pale, how incomprehensibly pale she was,
my heart failed me, for nothing but mortal sickness could make such a
change in any one in a week, in a day. Yet how could death reach her,
loved as she was by Edward, by her father, and by me. Thinking to rouse
her, I spoke the former's name. But it was the last word I should have
uttered. Crouching as if I had given her a blow, she put her two hands
out, shrieking faintly: 'Not that! Never that! Do not speak his name.
Let me never hear of him or see him again. I am dead--do you not
understand me?--dead to all the world from this day--except to you!' she
suddenly sobbed, 'except to you!' And still I did not comprehend her.
But when I understood, as I soon did, that no mention was to be made of
her illness; that her door was to be shut and no one allowed to enter,
not even Mrs. Poindexter or her guardian--least of all, her guardian--I
began to catch the first intimation of that horror which was to end my
youth and fill my whole after life with but one thought--revenge. But I
said nothing, only watched and waited. Seeing that she was really ill, I
constituted myself her nurse, and sat by her night and day till her
symptoms became so alarming that the whole household was aroused and we
could no longer keep the doctor from her. Then I sat at her door, and
with one ear turned to catch her lightest moan, listened for the step
she most dreaded, but which, though it sometimes approached, never
passed the opening of the hall leading to her chamber. For one whole
week I sat there, watching her life go slowly out like a flame, with
nothing to feed it; then as the great shadow fell, and life seemed
breaking up within me, I dashed from the place, and confronting him
where I found him walking, pale and disturbed, in his own hall, told him
that my father was coming; that I had had a dream, and in that dream I
had seen my father with his face turned toward this place. Was he
prepared to meet him? Had he an answer ready when Amos Cadwalader should
ask him what had become of his child?

"I had meant to shock the truth from this man, and I did so. As I
mentioned my father's name, Poindexter blanched, and my fears became
certainty. Dropping my youthful manner, for I was a boy no longer, I
flung his crime in his face, and begged him to deny it if he could. He
could not, but he did what neither he nor any other man could do in my
presence now and live--he smiled. Then when he saw me crouching for a
spring--for, young as I was, I knew but one impulse, and that was to fly
at his throat--he put out his powerful hand, and pinning me to the
ground, uttered a few short sentences in my ear.

"They were terrible ones. They made me see that nothing I might then do
could obliterate the fact that she was lost if the world knew what I
knew, or even so much as suspected it; that any betrayal on my part or
act of contrition on his would only pile the earth on her innocent
breast and sink her deeper and deeper into the grave she was then
digging for herself; that all dreams were falsities; that Southern
prisons seldom gave up their victims alive; and that if my father should
escape the jaws of Libby and return, it was for me to be glad if he
found a quiet grave instead of a dishonored daughter. Further, that if I
crossed him, who was power itself, by any boyish exhibition of hate, I
would find that any odium I might invoke would fall on her and not on
him, making me an abhorrence, not only to the world at large, but to the
very father in whose interest I might pretend to act.

"I was young and without worldly experience. I yielded to these
arguments, but I cursed him where he stood. With his hand pressing
heavily upon me, I cursed him to his face; then I went back to my
sister.

"Had she, by some supernatural power, listened to our talk, or had she
really been visited by some dream, that she looked so changed? There was
a feverish light in her eye, and something like the shadow of a smile on
her lips. Mrs. Poindexter was with her; Mrs. Poindexter, whose face was
a mask we never tried to penetrate. But when she had left us alone
again, then Evelyn spoke, and I saw what her dream had been.

"'Felix,' she cried as I approached her trembling with my own emotions
and half afraid of hers, 'there is still one hope for me. It has come to
me while you have been away. Edward--he loves me--did--perhaps he would
forgive. If he would take me into his protection (I see you know it all,
Felix) then I might grow happy again--well--strong--good. Do you
think--oh, you are a child, what do you know?--but--but before I turn my
face forever to the wall try if he will see me--try, try--with your
boy's wit--your clever schemes, to get him here unknown to--to--the one
I fear, I hate--and then, then, if he bids me live, I will live, and if
he bids me die, I will die; and all will be ended.'

"I was an ignorant boy. I knew men no more than I knew women, and
yielding to her importunities, I promised to see Edward and plan for an
interview without her guardian's knowledge. I was, as Evelyn had said,
keen in those days and full of resources, and I easily managed it.
Edward, who had watched from the garden as I had from the door, was
easily persuaded to climb her lattice in search of what he had every
reason to believe would be his last earthly interview with his darling.
As his eager form bounded into the room I tottered forth, carrying with
me a vision of her face as she rose to meet--what? I dared not think or
attempt to foresee. Falling on my knees I waited the issue. Alas! It was
a speedy one. A stifled moan from her, the sound of a hoarse farewell
from him, told me that his love had failed her, and that her doom was
sealed. Creeping back to her side as quickly as my failing courage
admitted, I found her face turned to the wall, from which it never again
looked back; while presently, before the hour was passed, shouts ringing
through the town proclaimed that young Kissam had shot himself. She
heard, and died that night. In her last hour she had fancies. She
thought she saw her father, and her prayers for mercy were
heart-rending. Then she thought she saw him, that demon, her
executioner, and cringed and moaned against the wall.

"But enough of this. Two days after, I walked between him and her silent
figure outstretched for burial. I had promised that no eye but mine
should look upon her, no other hand touch her, and I kept my word, even
when the impossible happened and her father rose up in the street before
us. Quietly, and in honor, she was carried to her grave, and then--then,
in the solitude of the retreat I had found for him, I told our father
all, and why I had denied him the only comfort which seemed left to
him--a last look at his darling daughter's face."




CHAPTER II.

THE OATH.


A sigh from the panting breast of Amos Cadwalader followed these words.
Plainer than speech it told of a grief still fresh and an agony still
unappeased, though thirty years had passed away since the unhappy hour
of which Felix spoke.

Felix, echoing it, went quickly on:

"It was dusk when I told my story, and from dark to dawn we sat with
eyes fixed on each other's face, without sleep and without rest. Then we
sought John Poindexter.

"Had he shunned us we might have had mercy, but he met us openly,
quietly, and with all the indifference of one who cannot measure
feeling, because he is incapable of experiencing it himself. His first
sentence evinced this. 'Spare yourselves, spare me all useless
recriminations. The girl is dead; I cannot call her back again. Enjoy
your life, your eating and your drinking, your getting and your
spending; it is but for a few more years at best. Why harp on old
'griefs?' His last word was a triumph. 'When a man cares for nothing or
nobody, it is useless to curse him.'

"Ah, that was it! That was the secret of his power. He cared for nothing
and for no one, not even for himself. We felt the blow, and bent under
it. But before leaving him and the town, we swore, your father and I,
that we would yet make that cold heart feel; that some day, in some way,
we would cause that impassive nature to suffer as he had made us suffer,
however happy he might seem or however closely his prosperity might
cling to him. That was thirty years ago, and that oath has not yet been
fulfilled."

Felix paused. Thomas lifted his head, but the old man would not let him
speak. "There are men who forget in a month, others who forget in a
year. I have never forgotten, nor has Felix here. When you were born (I
had married again, in the hope of renewed joy) I felt, I know not why,
that Evelyn's avenger was come. And when, a year or so after this event,
we heard that God had forgotten John Poindexter's sins, or, perhaps,
remembered them, and that a child was given him also, after eighteen
years of married life, I looked upon your bonny face and saw--or thought
I saw--a possible means of bringing about the vengeance to which Felix
and I had dedicated our lives.

"You grew; your ardent nature, generous temper, and facile mind promised
an abundant manhood, and when your mother died, leaving me for a second
time a widower, I no longer hesitated to devote you to the purpose for
which you seemed born. Thomas, do you remember the beginning of that
journey which finally led you far from me? How I bore you on my shoulder
along a dusty road, till arrived within sight of his home, I raised you
from among the tombs and, showing you those distant gables looming black
against the twilight's gold, dedicated you to the destruction of
whatever happiness might hereafter develop under his infant's smile? You
do? I did not think you could forget; and now that the time has come for
the promise of that hour to be fulfilled, I call on you again, Thomas.
Avenge our griefs, avenge your sister. _Poindexter's girl has grown to
womanhood._"

At the suggestion conveyed in these words Thomas recoiled in horror. But
the old man failed to read his emotion rightly. Clutching his arm, he
proceeded passionately:

"Woo her! Win her! They do not know you. You will be Thomas Adams to
them, not Thomas Cadwalader. Gather this budding flower into your bosom,
and then--Oh, he must love his child! Through her we have our hand on
his heart. Make her suffer--she's but a country girl, and you have lived
in Paris--make her suffer, and if, in doing so, you cause him to blench,
then believe I am looking upon you from the grave I go to, and be happy;
for you will not have lived, nor will I have died, in vain."

He paused to catch his failing breath, but his indomitable will
triumphed over death and held Thomas under a spell that confounded his
instincts and made him the puppet of feelings which had accumulated
their force to fill him, in one hour, with a hate which it had taken his
father and brother a quarter of a century to bring to the point of
active vengeance.

"I shall die; I am dying now," the old man panted on. "I shall never
live to see your triumph; I shall never behold John Poindexter's eye
glaze with those sufferings which rend the entrails and make a man
question if there is a God in heaven. But I shall know it where I am. No
mounded earth can keep my spirit down when John Poindexter feels his
doom. I shall be conscious of his anguish and shall rejoice; and when in
the depths of darkness to which I go he comes faltering along my way----

"Boy, boy, you have been reared for this. God made you handsome; man has
made you strong; you have made yourself intelligent and accomplished.
You have only to show yourself to this country girl to become the master
of her will and affection, and these once yours, remember _me_!
_Remember Evelyn!_"

Never had Thomas been witness to such passion. It swept him along in a
burning stream against which he sought to contend and could not. Raising
his hand in what he meant as a response to that appeal, he endeavored to
speak, but failed. His father misinterpreted his silence, and bitterly
cried:

"You are dumb! You do not like the task; are virtuous, perhaps--you who
have lived for years alone and unhampered in Paris. Or you have
instincts of honor, habits of generosity that blind you to wrongs that
for a longer space than your lifetime have cried aloud to heaven for
vengeance. Thomas, Thomas, if you should fail me now----"

"He will not fail you," broke in the voice of Felix, calm, suave, and
insinuating. "I have watched him; I know him; he will not fail you."

Thomas shuddered; he had forgotten Felix, but as he heard these words he
could no longer delay looking at the man who had offered to stand his
surety for the performance of the unholy deed his father exacted from
him. Turning, he saw a man who in any place and under any roof would
attract attention, awake admiration and--yes, fear. He was not a large
man, not so large as himself, but the will that expressed itself in
frenzy on his father's lips showed quiet and inflexible in the gray eye
resting upon his own with a power he could never hope to evade. As he
looked and comprehended, a steel band seemed to compress his heart; yet
he was conscious at the same time that the personality before which he
thus succumbed was as elegant as his own and as perfectly trained in all
the ways of men and of life. Even the air of poverty which had shocked
him in his father's person and surroundings was not visible here. Felix
was both well and handsomely clad, and could hold his own as the elder
brother in every respect most insisted upon by the Parisian gentleman.
The long and, to Thomas, mysterious curtain of dark-green serge which
stretched behind him from floor to ceiling threw out his pale features
with a remarkable distinctness, and for an instant Thomas wondered if it
had been hung there for the purpose of producing this effect. But the
demand in his brother's face drew his attention, and, bowing his head,
he stammered:

"I am at your command, Felix. I am at your command, father. I cannot say
more. Only remember that I never saw Evelyn, that she died before I was
born, and that I----"

But here Felix's voice broke in, kind, but measured:

"Perhaps there is some obstacle we have not reckoned upon. You may
already love some woman and desire to marry her. If so, it need be no
impediment----"

But here Thomas's indignation found voice.

"No," said he; "I am heart-whole save for a few lingering fancies which
are fast becoming vanishing dreams."

He seemed to have lived years since entering this room.

"Your heart will not be disturbed now," commented Felix. "I have seen
the girl. I went there on purpose a year ago. She's as pale as a
snow-drop and as listless. You will not be obliged to recall to mind the
gay smiles of Parisian ladies to be proof against her charms."

Thomas shrugged his shoulders.

"She must be made to know the full intoxication of hope," Felix
proceeded in his clear and cutting voice. "To realize despair she must
first experience every delight that comes with satisfied love. Have you
the skill as well as heart to play to the end a rôle which will take
patience as well as dissimulation, courage as well as subtlety, and that
union of will and implacability which finds its food in tears and is
strengthened, rather than lessened, by the suffering of its victim?"

"I have the skill," murmured Thomas, "but----"

"You lack the incentive," finished Felix. "Well, well, we must have
patience with your doubts and hesitations. Our hate has been fostered by
memories of her whom, as you say, you have never seen. Look, then,
Thomas. Look at your sister as she was, as she is for us. Look at her,
and think of her as despoiled, killed, forgotten by Poindexter. Have you
ever gazed upon a more moving countenance, or one in which beauty
contends with a keener prophecy of woe?"

Not knowing what to expect, anticipating almost to be met by her shade,
Thomas followed the direction of his brother's lifted hand, and beheld,
where but a minute before that dismal curtain had hung, a blaze of
light, in the midst of which he saw a charming, but tragic, figure, such
as no gallery in all Europe had ever shown him, possibly because no
other limned face or form had ever appealed to his heart. It did not
seem a picture, it seemed her very self, a gentle, loving self that
breathed forth all the tenderness he had vainly sought for in his living
relatives; and falling at her feet, he cried out:

"Do not look at me so reproachfully, sweet Evelyn. I was born to avenge
you, and I will. John Poindexter shall never go down in peace to his
tomb."

A sigh of utter contentment came from the direction of the bed.

"Swear it!" cried his father, holding out his arms before him in the
form of a cross.

"Yes, swear it!" repeated Felix, laying his own hand on those crossed
arms.

Thomas drew near, and laid his hand beside that of Felix.

"I swear," he began, raising his voice above the tempest, which poured
gust after gust against the house. "I swear to win the affections of Eva
Poindexter, and then, when her heart is all mine, to cast her back in
anguish and contumely on the breast of John Poindexter."

"Good!" came from what seemed to him an immeasurable distance. Then the
darkness, which since the taking of this oath had settled over his
senses, fell, and he sank insensible at the feet of his dying father.

       *       *       *       *       *

Amos Cadwalader died that night; but not without one awful scene more.
About midnight he roused from the sleep which had followed the exciting
incidents I have just related, and glancing from Thomas to Felix,
sitting on either side of the bed, fixed his eyes with a strange gleam
upon the door.

"Ah!" he ejaculated, "a visitor! John Poindexter! He comes to ask my
forgiveness before I set out on my dismal journey."

The sarcasm of his tone, the courtesy of his manner, caused the hair to
stir on the heads of his two sons. That he saw his enemy as plainly as
he saw them, neither could doubt.

"Does he dread my meeting with Evelyn? Does he wish to placate me before
I am joined to that pathetic shade? He shall not be disappointed. I
forgive you, John Poindexter! I forgive you my daughter's shame, my
blighted life. I am dying; but I leave one behind who will not forgive
you. I have a son, an avenger of the dead, who yet lives to--to----"

He fell back. With these words, which seemed to seal Thomas to his task,
Amos Cadwalader died.




CHAPTER III.

EVA.


Felix had not inherited his father's incapacity for making money. In the
twenty years that had passed since Thomas had been abroad he had built
up a fortune, which he could not induce his father to share, but which
that father was perfectly willing to see devoted to their mutual
revenge. There was meaning, therefore, in the injunction Felix gave his
brother on his departure for Montgomery:

"I have money; spend it; spend what you will, and when your task is
completed, there will still be some left for your amusement."

Thomas bowed. "The laborer is worthy of his hire," was his thought. "And
you?" he asked, looking about the scanty walls, which seemed to have
lost their very excuse for being now that his father had died. "Will you
remain here?"

Felix's answer was abrupt, but positive. "No; I go to New York
to-morrow. I have rented a house there, which you may one day wish to
share. The name under which I have leased it is Adams, Felix Adams. As
such you will address me. Cadwalader is a name that must not leave your
lips in Montgomery, nor must you forget that my person is known there,
otherwise we might not have been dependent on you for the success of our
revenge." And he smiled, fully conscious of being the handsomer man of
the two. "And now how about those introductions we enjoined you to bring
from Paris?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The history of the next few weeks can best be understood by reading
certain letters sent by Thomas to Felix, by examining a diary drawn up
by the same writer for his own relief and satisfaction. The letters will
be found on the left, and the diary on the right, of the double columns
hereby submitted. The former are a summary of facts; the latter is a
summary of feelings. Both are necessary to a right comprehension of the
situation.

       *       *       *       *       *


FIRST LETTER.

DEAR FELIX:

I am here; I have seen her. She is, as you have said, a pale blonde.
To-morrow I present my credentials to John Poindexter. From what I have
already experienced I anticipate a favorable reception.

Yours aff., THOMAS.


FIRST ENTRY.

I could not write Felix the true story of this day. Why? And why must I
write it here? To turn my mind from dwelling on it? Perhaps. I do not
seem to understand my own feelings, or why I begin to dread my task,
while ardently pressing forward to accomplish it.

I have seen her. This much I wrote to Felix, but I did not say where our
meeting took place or how. How could I? Would he understand how one of
Poindexter's blood could be employed in a gracious act, or how I, filled
with a purpose that has made my heart dark as hell ever since I embraced
it, could find that heart swell and that purpose sink at my first
glimpse of the face whose beauty I have sworn to devote to agony and
tears? Surely, surely Felix would have been stronger, and yet----

I went from the cars to the cemetery. Before entering the town or seeing
to my own comfort, I sought Evelyn's grave, there to renew my oath in
the place where, nineteen years ago, my father held me up, a
four-year-old child, in threat, toward John Poindexter's home. I had
succeeded in finding the old and neglected stone which marked her
resting-place, and was bending in the sunset light to examine it, when
the rustle of a woman's skirts attracted my attention, and I perceived
advancing toward me a young girl in a nimbus of rosy light which seemed
to lift her from the ground and give to her delicate figure and
strangely illumined head an ethereal aspect which her pure features and
tender bearing did not belie. In her arms she carried a huge cluster of
snow-white lilies, and when I observed that her eyes were directed not
on me, but on the grave beside which I stood, I moved aside into the
shadow of some bushes and watched her while she strewed these
flowers--emblems of innocence--over the grave I had just left.

What did it mean, and who was this young girl who honored with such
gracious memorials the grave of my long-buried sister? As she rose from
her task I could no longer restrain either my emotion or the curiosity
with which her act had inspired me. Advancing, I greeted her with all
the respect her appearance called for, and noting that her face was even
more beautiful when lifted in speech than when bent in gravity over her
flowers, I asked her, in the indifferent tone of a stranger, who was
buried in this spot, and why she, a mere girl, dropped flowers upon a
grave the mosses of whose stone proved it to have been dug long before
she was born.

Her answer caused me a shock, full as my life has lately been of
startling experiences. "I strew flowers here," said she, "because the
girl who lies buried under this stone had the same birthday as myself. I
never saw her, it's true, but she died in my father's house when she was
no older than I am to-day, and since I have become a woman and realize
what loss there is in dying young, I have made it a custom to share with
her my birthday flowers. She was a lily, they say, in appearance and
character, and so I bring her lilies."

It was Eva Poindexter, the girl I--And she was strewing flowers on
Evelyn's grave.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER II.

DEAR FELIX:

I have touched the hand of John Poindexter. In order to win a place in
the good graces of the daughter I must please the father, or at least
attract his favorable notice. I have reason to think I have done this.

Very truly, THOMAS.


ENTRY II.

I no longer feel myself a true man. John Poindexter is cold in
appearance, hard in manner, and inflexible in opinion, but he does not
inspire the abhorrence I anticipated nor awaken in me the one thought
due to the memory of my sister. Is it because he is Eva's father? Has
the loveliness of the daughter cast a halo about the parent? If so,
Felix has a right to execrate me and my father to----

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER III.

DEAR FELIX:

The introductions furnished me have made me received everywhere. There
is considerable wealth here and many fine houses. Consequently I find
myself in a congenial society, of which she is the star. Did I say that
he was, as of old, the chief man of the town?

Yours truly, THOMAS.


ENTRY III.

She is beautiful. She has the daintiness of the lily and the flush of
the rose. But it is not her beauty that moves me; it is the strange
sweetness of her nature, which, nevertheless, has no weakness in it; on
the contrary, it possesses peculiar strength, which becomes instantly
apparent at the call of duty. Could Felix have imagined such a
Poindexter? I cannot contemplate such loveliness and associate it with
the execrable sin which calls down vengeance upon this house. I cannot
even dwell upon my past life. All that is dark, threatening, secret, and
revengeful slips from me under her eye, and I dream of what is pure,
true, satisfying, and ennobling. And this by the influence of her smile,
rather than of her words. Have I been given an angel to degrade? Or am I
so blind as to behold a saint where others (Felix, let us say) would see
only a pretty woman with unexpected attractions?

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER IV.

DEAR FELIX:

Rides, dances, games, nonsense generally. My interest in this young girl
is beginning to be publicly recognized. She alone seems ignorant of it.
Sometimes I wonder if our scheme will fail through her impassibility and
more than conventional innocence. I am sometimes afraid she will never
love me. Yet I have exerted myself to please her. Indeed, I could not
have exerted myself more. To-day I went twenty-five miles on horseback
to procure her a trifle she fancied.

Yours aff., THOMAS.


ENTRY IV.

All will not go as easily as Felix imagines. Eva Poindexter may be a
country girl, but she has her standards, too, and mere grace and
attainment are not sufficient to win her. Have I the other qualities she
demands? That remains to be seen. I have one she never dreams of. Will
its shadow so overwhelm the rest that her naturally pure spirit will
shrink from me just at the moment when I think her mine? I cannot tell,
and the doubt creates a hell within me. Something deeper, stronger, more
imperious than my revenge makes the winning of this girl's heart a
necessity to me. I have forgotten my purpose in this desire. I have
forgotten everything except that she is the one woman of my life, and
that I can never rest till her heart is wholly mine. Good God! Have I
become a slave where I hoped to be master? Have I, Thomas Cadwalader,
given my soul into the keeping of this innocent girl? I do not even stop
to inquire. To win her--that is all for which I now live.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER V.

DEAR FELIX:

She may not care for me, but she is interested in no one else. Of this I
am assured by John Poindexter, who seems very desirous of aiding me in
my attempt to win his daughter's heart. Hard won, close bound. If she
ever comes to love me it will be with the force of a very strong nature.
The pale blonde has a heart.

Yours aff., THOMAS.


ENTRY V.

If it were passion only that I feel, I might have some hope of
restraining it. But it is something more, something deeper, something
which constrains me to look with her eyes, hear with her ears, and throb
with her heart. My soul, rather than my senses, is enthralled. I want to
win her, not for my own satisfaction, but to make her happy. I want to
prove to her that goodness exists in this world--I, who came here to
corrode and destroy; I, who am still pledged to do so. Ah, Felix, Felix,
you should have chosen an older man for your purpose, or remembered that
he who could be influenced as I was by family affections possesses a
heart too soft for such infamy.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENTRY VI.

The name of Evelyn is never mentioned in this house. Sometimes I think
that he has forgotten her, and find in this thought the one remaining
spur to my revenge. Forgotten her! Strange, that his child, born long
after his victim's death, should remember this poor girl, and he forget!
Yet on the daughter the blow is planned to fall--if it does fall. Should
I not pray that it never may? That she should loathe instead of love me?
Distrust, instead of confide in my honor and affection? But who can pray
against himself? Eva Poindexter must love me, even if I am driven to
self-destruction by my own remorse, after she has confided her heart to
my keeping.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER VI.

DEAR FELIX:

Will you send me a few exquisite articles from Tiffany's? I see that her
father expects me to give her presents. I think she will accept them. If
she does, we may both rest easy as to the state of her affections.

Very truly, THOMAS.


ENTRY VII.

I cannot bring myself to pass a whole day away from her side. If Felix
were here and could witness my assiduity, he would commend me in his
cold and inflexible heart for the singleness with which I pursue my
purpose. He would say to me, in the language of one of his letters: "You
are not disappointing us." Us! As if our father still hovered near,
sharing our purposes and hope. Alas! if he does, he must penetrate more
deeply than Felix into the heart of this matter; must see that with
every day's advantage--and I now think each day brings its advantage--I
shrink further and further from the end they planned for me; the end
which can alone justify my advance in her affections. I am a traitor to
my oath, for I now know I shall never disappoint Eva's faith in me. I
could not. Rather would I meet my father's accusing eyes on the verge of
that strange world to which he has gone, or Felix's recriminations here,
or my own contempt for the weakness which has made it possible for me to
draw back from the brink of this wicked revenge to which I have devoted
myself.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER VII.

DEAR FELIX:

This morning I passed under the window you have described to me as
Evelyn's. I did it with a purpose. I wanted to test my own emotions and
to see how much feeling it would arouse in me. Enough.

Eva accepted the brooch. It was the simplest thing you sent.

Aff., THOMAS.


ENTRY VIII.

I hate John Poindexter, yes, I hate him, but I can never hate his
daughter. Only Felix could so confound the father with the child as to
visit his anger upon this gentle embodiment of all that is gracious, all
that is trustworthy, all that is fascinating in woman. But am I called
upon to hate her? Am I not in a way required to love her? I will ask
Felix. No, I cannot ask Felix. He would never comprehend her charm or
its influence over me. He would have doubts and come at once to
Montgomery. Good God! Am I proving such a traitor to my own flesh and
blood that I cannot bear to think of Felix contemplating even in secret
the unsuspicious form of his enemy's daughter?

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER VIII.

DEAR FELIX:

A picnic on the mountains. It fell to me to escort Miss Poindexter down
a dangerous slope. Though no words of affection passed between us (she
is not yet ready for them), I feel that I have made a decided advance in
her good graces.

Yours, THOMAS.


ENTRY IX.

I have touched her hand! I have felt her sweet form thrilling against
mine as we descended the mountain ledges together! No man was near, no
eye--there were moments in which we were as much alone in the wide
paradise of these wooded slopes as if the world held no other breathing
soul. Yet I no more dared to press her hand, or pour forth the mad
worship of my heart into her innocent ears, than if the eyes of all
Paris had been upon us. How I love her! How far off and faint seem the
years of that dead crime my brother would invoke for the punishment of
this sweet soul! Yes, and how remote that awful hour in which I knelt
beneath the hand of my dying father and swore--Ah, that oath! That oath!

       *       *       *       *       *

ENTRY X.

The thing I dreaded, the thing I might have foreseen, has occurred.
Felix has made his appearance in Montgomery. I received a communication
to that effect from him to-day; a communication in which he commands me
to meet him to-night, at Evelyn's grave, at the witching hour of twelve.
I do not enjoy the summons. I have a dread of Felix, and begin to think
he calculates upon stage devices to control me. But the day has passed
for that. I will show him that I can be no more influenced in that place
and at that hour than I could be in this hotel room, with the sight of
her little glove--is there sin in such thefts?--lying on the table
before us. Evelyn! She is a sacred memory. But the dead must not
interfere with the living. Eva shall never be sacrificed to Evelyn's
manes, not if John Poindexter lives out his life to his last hour in
peace; not if Felix--well; I need to play the man; Felix is a formidable
antagonist to meet, alone, in a spot of such rancorous memories, at an
hour when spirits--if there be spirits--haunt the precincts of the tomb.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENTRY XI.

I should not have known Felix had I met him in the street. How much of a
stranger he appeared, then, in the faint moonlight which poured upon
that shaded spot! His very voice seemed altered, and in his manner I
remarked a hesitation I had not supposed him capable of showing under
any circumstances. Nor were his words such as I expected. The questions
I dreaded most he did not ask. The recriminations I looked for he did
not utter. He only told me coldly that my courtship must be shortened;
that the end for which we were both prepared must be hastened, and gave
me two weeks in which to bring matters to a climax. Then he turned to
Evelyn's grave, and bending down, tried to read her name on the mossy
stone. He was so long in doing this that I leaned down beside him and
laid my hand on his shoulder. He was trembling, and his body was as cold
as the stone he threw himself against. Was it the memory of her whom
that stone covered which had aroused this emotion? If so, it was but
natural. To all appearance he has never in all his life loved any one as
he did this unhappy sister; and struck with a respect for the grief
which has outlived many a man's lifetime, I was shrinking back when he
caught my hand, and with a convulsive strain, contrasting strongly with
his tone, which was strangely measured, he cried, "Do not forget the
end! Do not forget John Poindexter! his sin, his indifference to my
father's grief; the accumulated sufferings of years which made Amos
Cadwalader a hermit amongst men. I have seen the girl; she has
changed--women do change at her age--and some men, I do not say you, but
some men might think her beautiful. But beauty, if she has it, must not
blind your eyes, which are fixed upon another goal. Overlook it;
overlook her--you have done so, have you not? Pale beauties cannot move
one who has sat at the feet of the most dazzling of Parisian women. Keep
your eyes on John Poindexter, the debt he owes us, and the suffering we
have promised him. That she is sweet, gentle, different from all we
thought her, only makes the chances of reaching his heart the greater.
The worthier she may be of affections not indigenous to that hard soul,
the surer will be our grip upon his nature and the heavier his
downfall."

The old spell was upon me. I could neither answer nor assert myself.
Letting go my hand, he rose, and with his back to the village--I noticed
he had not turned his face to it since coming to this spot--he said: "I
shall return to New York to-morrow. In two weeks you will telegraph your
readiness to take up your abode with me. I have a home that will satisfy
you; and it will soon be all your own."

Here he gripped his heart; and, dark as it was, I detected a strange
convulsion cross his features as he turned into the moonlight. But it
was gone before we could descend.

"You may hear from me again," he remarked somewhat faintly as he grasped
my hand, and turned away in his own direction. I had not spoken a word
during the whole interview.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER IX.

DEAR FELIX:

I do not hear from you. Are you well, or did your journey affect your
health? I have no especial advance to report. John Poindexter seems
greatly interested in my courtship. Sometimes he gives me very good
advice. How does that strike you, Felix?

Aff., THOMAS.


ENTRY XII.

I shall never understand Felix. He has not left the town, but is staying
here in hiding, watching me, no doubt, to see if the signs of weakening
he doubtless suspects in me have a significance deep enough to overthrow
his planned revenge. I know this, because I have seen him more than once
during the last week, when he thought himself completely invisible. I
have caught sight of him in Mr. Poindexter's grounds when Eva and I
stood talking together in the window. I even saw him once in church, in
a dark corner, to be sure, but where he could keep his eye upon us,
sitting together in Mr. Poindexter's pew. He seemed to me thin that day.
The suspense he is under is wearing upon him. Is it my duty to cut it
short by proclaiming my infidelity to my oath and my determination to
marry the girl who has made me forget it?

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER X.

DEAR FELIX:

Miss Poindexter has told me unreservedly that she cares for me. Are you
satisfied with me now?

In haste, THOMAS.


ENTRY XIII.

She loves me. Oh, ecstasy of life! Eva Poindexter loves me. I forced it
from her lips to-day. With my arms around her and her head on my
shoulder, I urged her to confession, and it came. Now let Felix do what
he will! What is old John Poindexter to me? Her father. What are Amos
Cadwalader's hatred and the mortal wrong that called so loudly for
revenge? Dead issues, long buried sorrows, which God may remember, but
which men are bound to forget. Life, life with her! That is the future
toward which I look; that is the only vengeance I will take, the only
vengeance Evelyn can demand if she is the angel we believe her. I will
write to Felix to-morrow.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENTRY XIV.

I have not written Felix. I had not the courage.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENTRY XV.

I have had a dream. I thought I saw the meeting of my father with the
white shade of Evelyn in the unimaginable recesses of that world to
which both have gone. Strange horrors, stranger glories met as their
separate paths crossed, and when the two forms had greeted and parted, a
line of light followed the footsteps of the one and a trail of gloom
those of the other. As their ways divided, I heard my father cry:

"There is no spot on your garments, Evelyn. Can it be that the wrongs of
earth are forgotten here? That mortals remember what the angels forget,
and that our revenge is late for one so blessed?"

I did not hear the answer, for I woke; but the echo of those words has
rung in my ears all day. "Is our revenge late for one so blessed?"

       *       *       *       *       *

ENTRY XVI.

I have summoned up courage. Felix has been here again, and the truth has
at last been spoken between us. I had been pressing Eva to name our
wedding day, and we were all standing--that is, John Poindexter, my dear
girl, and myself--in the glare of the drawing-room lights, when I heard
a groan, too faint for other ears to catch, followed by a light fall
from the window overlooking the garden. It was Felix. He had been
watching us, had seen my love, heard me talk of marriage, and must now
be in the grounds in open frenzy, or secret satisfaction, it was hard to
tell which. Determined to know, determined to speak, I excused myself on
some hurried plea, and searched the paths he knew as well as I. At last
I came upon him. He was standing near an old dial, where he had more
than once seen Eva and me together. He was very pale, deathly pale, it
seemed to me, in the faint starlight shining upon that open place; but
he greeted me as usual very quietly and with no surprise, almost, in
fact, as if he knew I would recognize his presence and follow him.

"You are playing your rôle well," said he; "too well. What was that I
heard about your marrying?"

The time had come. I was determined to meet it with a man's courage. But
I found it hard. Felix is no easy man to cross, even in small things,
and this thing is his life, nay, more--his past, present, and future
existence.

I do not know who spoke first. There was some stammering, a few broken
words; then I heard myself saying distinctly, and with a certain hard
emphasis born of the restraint I put upon myself:

"I love her! I want to marry her. You must allow this. Then----"

I could not proceed. I felt the shock he had received almost as if it
had been communicated to me by contact. Something that was not of the
earth seemed to pass between us, and I remember raising my hand as if to
shield my face. And then, whether it was the blowing aside of some
branches which kept the moonlight from us, or because my eyesight was
made clearer by my emotion, I caught one glimpse of his face and became
conscious of a great suffering, which at first seemed the wrenching of
my own heart, but in another moment impressed itself upon me as that of
his, Felix's.

I stood appalled.

My weakness had uprooted the one hope of his life, or so I thought; and
that he expressed this by silence made my heart yearn toward him for the
first time since I recognized him as my brother. I tried to stammer some
excuse. I was glad when the darkness fell again, for the sight of his
bowed head and set features was insupportable to me. It seemed to make
it easier for me to talk; for me to dilate upon the purity, the goodness
which had robbed me of my heart in spite of myself. My heart! It seemed
a strange word to pass between us two in reference to a Poindexter, but
it was the only one capable of expressing the feeling I had for this
young girl. At last, driven to frenzy by his continued silence, which
had something strangely moving in it, I cried:

"You have never loved a woman, Felix. You do not know what the passion
is when it seizes upon a man jaded with the hollow pleasures of an
irresponsible life. You cannot judge; therefore you cannot excuse. You
are made of iron----"

"Hush!" It was the first word he had spoken since I had opened my heart
to him. "You do not know what you are saying, Thomas. Like all egotists,
you think yourself alone in experience and suffering. Will you think so
when I tell you that there was a time in my life when I did not sleep
for weeks; when the earth, the air, yes, and the heavens were full of
nothing but her name, her face, her voice? When to have held her in my
arms, to have breathed into her ear one word of love, to have felt her
cheek fall against mine in confidence, in passion, in hope, would have
been to me the heaven which would have driven the devils from my soul
forever? Thomas, will you believe I do not know the uttermost of all you
are experiencing, when I here declare to you that there has been an hour
in my life when, if I had felt she could have been brought to love me, I
would have sacrificed Evelyn, my own soul, our father's hope, John
Poindexter's punishment, and become the weak thing you are to-day, and
gloried in it, I, Felix Cadwalader, the man of iron, who has never been
known to falter? But, Thomas, I overcame that feeling. I crushed down
that love, and I call upon you to do the same. You may marry her,
but----"

What stopped him? His own heart or my own impetuosity? Both, perhaps,
for at that moment I fell at his feet, and seizing his hand, kissed it
as I might a woman's. He seemed to grow cold and stiff under this
embrace, which showed both the delirium I was laboring under and the
relief I had gotten from his words. When he withdrew his hand, I feel
that my doom was about to be spoken, and I was not wrong. It came in
these words:

"Thomas, I have yielded to your importunity and granted you the
satisfaction which under the same circumstances I would have denied
myself. But it has not made me less hard toward you; indeed, the steel
with which you say my heart is bound seems tightening about it, as if
the momentary weakness in which I have indulged called for revenge.
Thomas, go on your way; make the girl your wife--I had rather you would,
since she is--what she is--but after she has taken your name, after she
believes herself secure in her honorable position and your love, then
you are to remember our compact and your oath--back upon John
Poindexter's care she is to be thrown, shortly, curtly, without
explanation or excuse; and if it costs you your life, you are to stand
firm in this attitude, using but one weapon in the struggle which may
open between you and her father, and that is, your name of Cadwalader.
You will not need any other. Thomas, do you swear to this? Or must I
direct my own power against Eva Poindexter, and, by telling her your
motive in courting her, make her hate you forever?"

"I will swear," I cried, overpowered by the alternative with which he
threatened me. "Give me the bliss of calling her mine, and I will follow
your wishes in all that concerns us thereafter."

"You will?" There was a sinister tone in this ejaculation that gave a
shock to my momentary complacency. But we are so made that an
anticipated evil affects us less than an immediate one; and remembering
that weeks must yet elapse, during which he or John Poindexter or even
myself might die, I said nothing, and he went icily on:

"I give you two months, alone and untrammelled. Then you are to bring
your bride to my house, there to hear my final decision. There is to be
no departure from this course. I shall expect you, Thomas; you and her.
You can say that you are going to make her acquainted with your
brother."

"I will be there," I murmured, feeling a greater oppression than when I
took the oath at my father's death-bed. "I will be there."

There was no answer. While I was repeating those four words, Felix
vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER XI.

DEAR FELIX:

Have a fresh draft made. I need cigars, clothes, and--a wedding ring.
But no, let me stop short there. We will be married without one, unless
you force it upon us. Eva's color is blue.

Very truly, Thomas.


ENTRY XVII.

To-day I wrote again to Felix. He is at home, must be, for I have
neither seen nor felt his presence since that fateful night. What did I
write? I don't remember. I seem to be living in a dream. Everything is
confused about me but Eva's face, Eva's smile. They are blissfully
clear. Sometimes I wish they were not. Were they confused amid these
shadows, I might have stronger hope of keeping my word to Felix. Now, I
shall never keep it. Eva once my wife, separation between us will become
impossible. John Poindexter is ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER XII.

DEAR FELIX:

Congratulations: visits from my neighbors; all the éclat we could wish
or a true lover hate. The ring you sent fits as if made for her. I am
called in all directions by a thousand duties. I am on exhibition, and
every one's curiosity must be satisfied.

In haste, THOMAS.


ENTRY XVIII.

The wedding is postponed. John Poindexter is very ill. Pray God, Felix
hears nothing of this. He would come here; he would confront his enemy
on his bed of sickness. He would denounce him, and Eva would be lost to
me.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER XIII.

DEAR FELIX:

Eva is not pleased with the arrangements which have been made for our
wedding. John Poindexter likes show; she does not. Which will carry the
day?

Yours aff., THOMAS.


ENTRY XIX.

Mr. Poindexter is better, but our plans will have to be altered. We now
think we will be married quietly, possibly in New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER XIV.

DEAR FELIX:

A compromise has been effected. The wedding will be a quiet one, but not
celebrated here. As you cannot wish to attend it, I will not mention the
place or hour of my marriage, only say that on September 27th at 4
P. M. you may expect my wife and myself at your house.

Aff., THOMAS.


ENTRY XX.

We have decided to be married in New York. Mr. Poindexter needs the
change, and Eva and I are delighted at the prospect of a private
wedding. Then we will be near Felix, but not to subject ourselves to his
will. Oh, no!

       *       *       *       *       *

ENTRY XXI.

Married! She is mine. And now to confront Felix with my determination to
hold on to my happiness. How I love her, and how I pity him! John
Poindexter's wickedness is forgotten, Evelyn but a fading memory. The
whole world seems to hold but three persons--Eva, Felix, and myself. How
will it end? We meet at his home to-morrow.




CHAPTER IV.

FELIX.


Meanwhile there was another secret struggle going on in the depth of a
nature from which all sympathy was excluded both by the temperament of
the person concerned and the circumstances surrounding him.

I can but hint at it. Some tragedies lie beyond the ken of man, and this
one we can but gather from stray scraps of torn-up letters addressed to
no one and betraying their authorship only through the writer's hand.
They were found long after the mystery of Felix Cadwalader's death had
been fully accounted for, tucked away under the flooring of Bartow's
room. Where or how procured by him, who can tell?

       *       *       *       *       *

"Madness!

"I have seen Eva Poindexter again, and heaven and hell have contended
for me ever since. Eva! Eva! the girl I thought of only as our prey. The
girl I have given to my brother. She is too lovely for him: she is too
lovely for any man unless it be one who has never before thrilled to any
woman's voice, or seen a face that could move his passions or awaken his
affection. Is it love I feel? Can I, Felix, who have had but one
thought, known but one enthusiasm, retain in this breast of iron a spot
however secret, however small, which any woman, least of all his
daughter, could reach? Never! I am the prey of frenzy or the butt of
devils. Yet only the inhabitants of a more celestial sphere brighten
around me when I think of those half-raised eyes, those delicately
parted lips, so devoid of guile, that innocent bearing, and the divine
tenderness, mingled with strength, by which she commands admiration and
awakens love. I must fly. I must never see her again. Thomas's purpose
is steady. He must never see that mine rocks like an idol smitten by a
thunderbolt.

"If Thomas had not been reared in Paris, he too--But I am the only weak
one. Curses on my----

"Did I say I would fly? I cannot, not yet. One more glimpse of her face,
if only to satisfy myself that I have reason for this madness. Perhaps I
was but startled yesterday to find a celestial loveliness where I
expected to encounter pallid inanity. If my emotion is due to my own
weakness rather than to her superiority, I had better recognize my folly
before it proves my destruction.

I will stay and----

Thomas will not, shall not----

dexter's daughter----

hate, hate for Thom----

"My self-esteem is restored. I have seen her again--him--they were
together--there was true love in his eye--how could I expect him not to
love her--and I was able to hide my anguish and impose his duty on him.
She loves him--or he thinks so--and the work goes on. But I will not
stay to watch its accomplishment. No, no.

"I told him my story to-night, under the guise of a past experience. Oh,
the devils must laugh at us men! They have reason to. Sometimes I wonder
if my father in the clearness of his new vision does not join them in
their mirth.

"Home with my unhappy secret! Home, where nothing comes to distract me
from my gnawing griefs and almost intolerable thoughts. I walk the
floors. I cry aloud her name. I cry it even under the portrait of
Evelyn. There are moments when I am tempted to write to Thomas--to
forbid him----

"Eva! Eva! Eva! Every fibre in my miserable body utters the one word.
But no man shall ever know. Thomas shall never know how the thought of
her fills my days and nights, making my life a torment and the
future----

"I wait for his letters (scanty they are and cold) as the doomed
criminal awaits his executioner. Does she really love him? Or will that
exquisite, that soulful nature call for a stronger mate, a more
concentrated temperament, a--a----

"I thought I saw in one of my dark hours my father rising up from his
grave to curse me. Oh! he might curse on if----

"What have I said about no man knowing? Bartow knows. In his dumbness,
his deafness, he has surprised my secret, and shows that he has done so
by his peering looks, his dissatisfied ways, and a jealousy at which I
could shout aloud in mirth, if I were not more tempted to shriek aloud
in torment. A dumb serving-man, picked up I have almost forgotten where,
jealous of my weakness for John Poindexter's daughter! He was never
jealous of my feeling for Evelyn. Yet till the day I dared fate by
seeking out and looking for the second time upon the woman whose charms
I had scorned, her name often resounded through these rooms, and my eyes
dwelt upon but one spot, and that was where her picture hangs in the
woeful beauty which has become my reproach.

"I have had a great surprise. The starling, which has been taught to
murmur Evelyn's name, to-day shrieked out, 'Eva! Eva!' My first impulse
was to wring its neck, my next to take it from its cage and hide it in
my bosom. But I did neither. I am still a man.

"Bartow will wring that bird's neck if I do not. This morning I caught
him with his hand on the cage and a murderous light in his eye, which I
had no difficulty in understanding. Yet he cannot hear the word the
wretched starling murmurs. He only knows it is a word, a name, and he is
determined to suppress it. Shall I string the cage up out of this old
fellow's reach? His deafness, his inability to communicate with others,
the exactness with which he obeys my commands as given him by my colored
slides, his attention to my every wish, consequent upon his almost
animal love for my person, are necessary to me now, while the bird--Ah!
there it goes again, 'Eva! Eva!'

"Is it hate or love I feel, abhorrence or passion? Love would seek to
save, but I have no thought of saving her, since she has acknowledged
her love for Thomas, and since he--Oh, it is not now for Evelyn's sake I
plan revenge, but for my own! These nights and days of torture--the
revelation I have had of my own nature--the consent I was forced to give
to a marriage which means bliss to them and anguish beyond measure to
me--all this calls for vengeance, and they will not escape, these two. I
have laid my plans deep. I have provided for every contingency. It has
taken time, thought, money. But the result is good. If they cross the
threshold of my circular study, they must consent to my will or perish
here, and I with them. Oh, they shall never live and be happy! Thomas
need not think it. John Poindexter need not think it! I might have
forgotten the oath made on my father's crossed arms, but I will never
forget the immeasurable griefs of these past months or the humiliation
they have brought me. My own weakness is to be avenged--my unheard-of,
my intolerable weakness. Remember Evelyn? Remember Felix! Ah, again!
Eva! Eva! Eva!"




CHAPTER V.

WHY THE IRON SLIDE REMAINED STATIONARY.


The rest must be told in Thomas's own words, as it forms the chief part
of the confession he made before the detectives:

According to my promise, I took my young wife to Felix's house on the
day and at the hour proposed. We went on foot, for it was not far from
the hotel where we were then staying, and were received at the door by
an old servant who I had been warned could neither speak nor hear. At
sight of him and the dim, old-fashioned hall stretching out in
aristocratic gloom before us, Eva turned pale and cast me an inquiring
look. But I reassured her with a smile that most certainly contradicted
my own secret dread of the interview before us, and taking her on my
arm, followed the old man down the hall, past the open drawing-room door
(where I certainly thought we should pause), into a room whose plain
appearance made me frown, till Bartow, as I have since heard him called,
threw aside the portière at one end and introduced us into my brother's
study, which at that moment looked like fairyland, or would have, if
Felix, who was its sole occupant, had not immediately drawn our
attention to himself by the remarkable force of his personality, never
so impressive as at that moment.

Eva, to whom I had said little of this brother, certainly nothing which
would lead her to anticipate seeing either so handsome a man or one of
such mental poise and imposing character, looked frightened and a trifle
awe-struck. But she advanced quite bravely toward him, and at my
introduction smiled with such an inviting grace that I secretly expected
to see him more or less disarmed by it.

And perhaps he was, for his already pale features turned waxy in the
yellow glare cast by the odd lantern over our heads, and the hand he had
raised in mechanical greeting fell heavily, and he could barely stammer
out some words of welcome. These would have seemed quite inadequate to
the occasion if his eyes which were fixed on her face, had not betrayed
the fact that he was not without feeling, though she little realized the
nature of that feeling or how her very life (for happiness is life) was
trembling in the balance under that indomitable will.

I who did know--or thought I did--cast him an imploring glance, and,
saying that I had some explanations to make, asked if Mrs. Adams might
not rest here while we had a few words apart.

He answered me with a strange look. Did he feel the revolt in my tone
and understand then as well as afterward what the nature of my
compliance had been? I shall never know. I only know that he stopped
fumbling with some small object on the table before him, and, bowing
with a sarcastic grace that made me for the first time in my intercourse
with him feel myself his inferior, even in size, led the way to a small
door I had failed to notice up to this moment.

"Your wife will find it more comfortable here," he observed, with slow
pauses in his speech that showed great, but repressed, excitement. And
he opened the door into what had the appearance of a small but elegant
sleeping-apartment. "What we have to say cannot take long. Mrs. Adams
will not find the wait tedious."

"No," she smiled, with a natural laugh, born, as I dare hope, of her
perfect happiness. Yet she could not but have considered the proceeding
strange, and my manner, as well as his, scarcely what might be expected
from a bridegroom introducing his bride to his only relative.

"I will call you--" I began, but the vision of her dimpled face above
the great cluster of roses she carried made me forget to complete my
sentence, and the door closed, and I found myself face to face with
Felix.

He was breathing easier, and his manner seemed more natural now that we
were alone, yet he did not speak, but cast a strange, if not inquiring,
glance about the room (the weirdest of apartments, as you all well
know), and seeming satisfied with what he saw, why I could not tell, led
the way up to the large table which from the first had appeared to exert
a sort of uncanny magnetism upon him, saying:

"Come further away. I need air, breathing place in this close room, and
so must you. Besides, why should she hear what we have to say? She will
know the worst soon enough. She seems a gentle-hearted woman."

"An angel!" I began, but he stopped me with an imperious gesture.

"We will not discuss your wi--Mrs. Adams," he protested. "Where is John
Poindexter?"

"At the hotel," I rejoined. "Or possibly he has returned home. I no
longer take account of his existence. Felix, I shall never leave my
wife. I had rather prove recreant to the oath I took before I realized
the worth of the woman whose happiness I vowed to destroy. This is what
I have come to tell you. Make it easy for me, Felix. You are a man who
has loved and suffered. Let us bury the past; let us----"

Had I hoped I could move him? Perhaps some such child's notion had
influenced me up to this moment. But as these words left my lips, nay,
before I had stumbled through them, I perceived by the set look of his
features, which were as if cast in bronze, that I might falter, but that
he was firm as ever, firmer, it seemed to me, and less easy to be
entreated.

Yet what of that? At the worst, what had I to fear? A struggle which
might involve Eva in bitter unpleasantness and me in the loss of a
fortune I had come to regard almost as my own. But these were petty
considerations. Eva must know sooner or later my real name and the story
of her father's guilt. Why not now? And if we must start life poor, it
was yet life, while a separation from her----

Meanwhile Felix had spoken, and in language I was least prepared to
hear.

"I anticipated this. From the moment you pleaded with me for the
privilege of marrying her, I have looked forward to this outcome and
provided against it. Weakness on the part of her bridegroom was to be
expected; I have, therefore, steeled myself to meet the emergency; for
your oath must be kept!"

Crushed by the tone in which these words were uttered, a tone that
evinced power against which any ordinary struggle would end in failure,
I cast my eyes about the room in imitation of what I had seen him do a
few minutes before. There was nothing within sight calculated to awaken
distrust, and yet a feeling of distrust (the first I had really felt)
had come with the look he had thrown above and around the mosque-like
interior of the room he called his study. Was it the calm confidence he
showed, or the weirdness of finding myself amid Oriental splendors and
under the influence of night effects in high day and within sound of the
clanging street cars and all the accompanying bustle of every-day
traffic? It is hard to say; but from this moment on I found myself
affected by a vague affright, not on my own account, but on hers whose
voice we could plainly hear humming a gay tune in the adjoining
apartment. But I was resolved to suppress all betrayal of uneasiness. I
even smiled, though I felt the eyes of Evelyn's pictured countenance
upon me; Evelyn's, whose portrait I had never lost sight of from the
moment of entering the room, though I had not given it a direct look and
now stood with my back to it. Felix, who faced it, but who did not raise
his eyes to it, waited a moment for my response, and finding that my
words halted, said again:

"That oath must be kept!"

This time I found words with which to answer. "Impossible!" I burst out,
flinging doubt, fear, hesitancy, everything I had hitherto trembled at
to the winds. "It was in my nature to take it, worked upon as I was by
family affection, the awfulness of our father's approaching death, and a
thousand uncanny influences all carefully measured and prepared for this
end. But it is not in my nature to keep it after four months of natural
living in the companionship of a man thirty years removed from his
guilt, and of his guileless and wholly innocent daughter. And you cannot
drive me to it, Felix. No man can force another to abandon his own wife
because of a wicked oath taken long before he knew her. If you think
your money----"

"Money?" he cried, with a contempt that did justice to my
disinterestedness as well as his own. "I had forgotten I had it. No,
Thomas, I should never weigh money against the happiness of living with
such a woman as your wife appears to be. But her life I might. Carry out
your threat; forget to pay John Poindexter the debt we owe him, and the
matter will assume a seriousness for which you are doubtless poorly
prepared. A daughter dead in her honeymoon will be almost as great a
grief to him as a dishonored one. And either dead or dishonored he must
find her, when he comes here in search of the child he cannot long
forget. Which shall it be? Speak!"

Was I dreaming? Was this Felix? Was this myself? And was it in my ears
these words were poured?

With a spring I reached his side where he stood close against the table,
and groaned rather than shrieked the words:

"You would not kill her! You do not meditate a crime of blood--here--on
her--the innocent--the good----"

"No," he said; "it will be you who will do that. You who will not wish
to see her languish--suffer--go mad--Thomas, I am not the raving being
you take me for. I am merely a keeper of oaths. Nay, I am more. I have
talents, skill. The house in which you find yourself is proof of this.
This room--see, it has no outlet save those windows, scarcely if at all
perceptible to you, above our heads, and that opening shielded now by a
simple curtain, but which in an instant, without my moving from this
place, I can so hermetically seal that no man, save he be armed with
crowbar and pickaxe, could enter here, even if man could know of our
imprisonment, in a house soon to be closed from top to bottom by my
departing servant."

"May God protect us!" fell from my lips, as, stiff with horror, I let my
eyes travel from his determined face, first to the windows high over my
head and then to the opening of the door, which, though but a few steps
from where I stood, was as far as possible from the room into which my
darling had been induced to enter.

Felix, watching me, uttered his explanations as calmly as if the matter
were one of every-day significance. "You are looking for the windows,"
he remarked. "They are behind those goblin faces you see outlined on the
tapestries under the ceiling. As for the door, if you had looked to the
left when you entered, you would have detected the edge of a huge steel
plate hanging flush with the casing. This plate can be made to slide
across that opening in an instant just by the touch of my hand on this
button. This done, no power save such as I have mentioned can move it
back again, not even my own. I have forces at my command for sending it
forward, but none for returning it to its place. Do you doubt my
mechanical skill or the perfection of the electrical apparatus I have
caused to be placed here? You need not, Thomas; nor need you doubt the
will that has only to exert itself for an instant to--Shall I press the
button, brother?"

"No, no!" I shouted in a frenzy, caused rather by my knowledge of the
nature of this man than any especial threat apparent in his voice or
gesture. "Let me think; let me know more fully what your requirements
are--what she must suffer if I consent--and what I."

He let his hand slip back, that smooth white hand which I had more than
once surveyed in admiration. Then he smiled.

"I knew you would not be foolish," he said. "Life has its charms even
for hermits like me; and for a _beau garçon_ such as you are----"

"Hush!" I interposed, maddened into daring his full anger. "It is not my
life I am buying, but hers, possibly yours; for it seems you have
planned to perish with us. Is it not so?"

"Certainly," was his cold reply. "Am I an assassin? Would you expect me
to live, knowing you to be perishing?"

I stared aghast. Such resolve, such sacrifice of self to an idea was
beyond my comprehension.

"Why--what?" I stammered. "Why kill us, why kill yourself----"

The answer overwhelmed me.

"Remember Evelyn!" shrilled a voice, and I paused, struck dumb with a
superstitious horror I had never believed myself capable of
experiencing. For it was not Felix who spoke, neither was it any
utterance of my own aroused conscience. Muffled, strange, and startling
it came from above, from the hollow spaces of that high vault lit with
the golden glow that henceforth can have but one meaning for me--death.

"What is it?" I asked. "Another of your mechanical contrivances?"

He smiled; I had rather he had frowned.

"Not exactly. A favorite bird, a starling. Alas! he but repeats what he
has heard echoed through the solitude of these rooms. I thought I had
smothered him up sufficiently to insure his silence during this
interview. But he is a self-willed bird, and seems disposed to defy the
wrappings I have bound around him; which fact warns me to be speedy and
hasten our explanations. Thomas, this is what I require: John
Poindexter--you do not know where he is at this hour, but I do--received
a telegram but now, which, if he is a man at all, will bring him to this
house in a half-hour or so from the present moment. It was sent in your
name, and in it you informed him that matters had arisen which demanded
his immediate attention; that you were on your way to your brother's
(giving him this address), where, if you found entrance, you would await
his presence in a room called the study; but that--and here you will see
how his coming will not aid us if that steel plate is once started on
its course--if the possible should occur and your brother should be
absent from home, then he was to await a message from you at the Plaza.
The appearance of the house would inform him whether he would find you
and Eva within; or so I telegraphed him in your name.

"Thomas, if Bartow fulfils my instructions--and I have never know him to
fail me--he will pass down these stairs and out of this house in just
five minutes. As he is bound on a long-promised journey, and as he
expects me to leave the house immediately after him, he has drawn every
shade and fastened every lock. Consequently, on his exit, the house will
become a tomb, to which, just two weeks from to-day, John Poindexter
will be called again, and in words which will lead to a demolition which
will disclose--what? Let us not forestall the future, our horrible
future, by inquiring. But Thomas, shall Bartow go? Shall I not by signs
he comprehends more readily than other men comprehend speech indicate to
him on his downward passage to the street that I wish him to wait and
open the door to the man whom we have promised to overwhelm in his hour
of satisfaction and pride? You have only to write a line--see! I have
made a copy of the words you must use, lest your self-command should be
too severely taxed. These words left on this table for his
inspection--for you must go and Eva remain--will tell him all he needs
to know from you. The rest can come from my lips after he has read the
signature, which in itself will confound him and prepare the way for
what I have to add. Have you anything to say against this plan?
Anything, I mean, beyond what you have hitherto urged? Anything that I
will consider or which will prevent my finger from pressing the button
on which it rests?"

I took up the paper. It was lying on the table, where it had evidently
been inscribed simultaneously with or just before our entrance into the
house, and slowly read the few lines I saw written upon it. You know
them, but they will acquire a new significance from your present
understanding of their purpose and intent:

     I return you back your daughter. Neither she nor you will ever see
     me again. Remember Evelyn!

     AMOS'S SON.

"You wish me to sign these words, to put them into my own handwriting,
and so to make them mine? Mine!" I repeated.

"Yes, and to leave them here on this table for him to see when he
enters. He might not believe any mere statement from me in regard to
your intentions."

I was filled with horror. Love, life, human hopes, the world's
friendships--all the possibilities of existence, swept in one
concentrated flood of thought and feeling through my outraged
consciousness, and I knew I could never put my name to such a blasphemy
of all that was sacred to man's soul. Tossing the paper in his face, I
cried:

"You have gone too far! Better her death, better mine, better the
destruction of us all, than such dishonor to the purest thing heaven
ever made. I refuse, Felix--I refuse. And may God have mercy on us all!"

The moment was ghastly. I saw his face change, his finger tremble where
it hovered above the fatal button; saw--though only in imagination as
yet--the steely edge of that deadly plate of steel advancing beyond the
lintel, and was about to dare all in a sudden grapple with this man,
when a sound from another direction caught my ear, and looking around in
terror of the only intrusion we could fear, beheld Eva advancing from
the room in which we had placed her.

That moment a blood-red glow took the place of the sickly yellow which
had hitherto filled every recess of this weird apartment. But I scarcely
noticed the change, save as it affected her pallor and gave to her
cheeks the color that was lacking in the roses at her belt.

Fearless and sweet as in the hour when she first told me that she loved
me, she approached and stood before us.

"What is this?" she cried. "I have heard words that sound more like the
utterances of some horrid dream than the talk of men and brothers. What
does it mean, Thomas? What does it mean, Mr. ----"

"Cadwalader," announced Felix, dropping his eyes from her face, but
changing not a whit his features or posture.

"Cadwalader?" The name was not to her what it was to her father.
"Cadwalader? I have heard that name in my father's house; it was
Evelyn's name, the Evelyn who----"

"Whom you see painted there over your head," finished Felix, "my sister,
Thomas's sister--the girl whom your father--but I spare you, child
though you be of a man who spared nothing. From your husband you may
learn why a Cadwalader can never find his happiness with a Poindexter.
Why thirty or more years after that young girl's death, you who were not
then born are given at this hour the choice between death and dishonor.
I allow you just five minutes in which to listen. After that you will
let me know your joint decision. Only you must make your talk where you
stand. A step taken by either of you to right or left, and Thomas knows
what will follow."

Five minutes, with such a justification to make, and such a decision to
arrive at! I felt my head swim, my tongue refuse its office, and stood
dumb and helpless before her till the sight of her dear eyes raised in
speechless trust to mine flooded me with a sense of triumph amid all the
ghastly terrors of the moment, and I broke out in a tumult of speech, in
excuses, explanations, all that comes to one in a more than mortal
crisis.

She listened, catching my meaning rather from my looks than my words.
Then as the minutes fled and my brother raised a warning hand, she
turned toward him, and said:

"You are in earnest? We must separate in shame or perish in this
prison-house with you?"

His answer was mere repetition, mechanical, but firm:

"You have said it. You have but one minute more, madam."

She shrank, and all her powers seemed leaving her, then a reaction came,
and a flaming angel stood where but a moment before the most delicate of
women weakly faltered; and giving me a look to see if I had the courage
or the will to lift my hand against my own flesh and blood (alas for us
both! I did not understand her) caught up an old Turkish dagger lying
only too ready to her hand, and plunged it with one sideways thrust into
his side, crying:

"We cannot part, we cannot die, we are too young, too happy!"

It was sudden; the birth of purpose in her so unexpected and so rapid
that Felix, the ready, who was prepared for all contingencies, for the
least movement or suggestion of escape, faltered and pressed, not the
fatal button, but his heart.

One impulsive act on the part of a woman had overthrown all the
fine-spun plans of the subtlest spirit that ever attempted to work its
will in the face of God and man.

But I did not think of this then; I did not even bestow a thought upon
the narrowness of our escape, or the price which the darling of my heart
might be called upon to pay for this supreme act of self-defence. My
mind, my heart, my interest were with Felix, in whom the nearness of
death had called up all that was strongest and most commanding in his
strong and commanding spirit.

Though struck to the heart, he had not fallen. It was as if the will
which had sustained him through thirty years of mental torture held him
erect still, that he might give her, Eva, one look, the like of which I
had never seen on mortal face, and which will never leave my heart or
hers until we die. Then as he saw her sink shudderingly down and the
delicate woman reappear in her pallid and shrunken figure, he turned his
eyes on me and I saw,--good God!--a tear well up from those orbs of
stone and fall slowly down his cheek, fast growing hollow under the
stroke of death.

"Eva! Eva! I love Eva!" shrilled the voice which once before had
startled me from the hollow vault above.

Felix heard, and a smile faint as the failing rush of blood through his
veins moved his lips and brought a revelation to my soul. He, too, loved
Eva!

When he saw I knew, the will which had kept him on his feet gave way,
and he sank to the floor murmuring:

"Take her away! I forgive. Save! Save! She did not know I loved her."

Eva, aghast, staring with set eyes at her work, had not moved from her
crouching posture. But when she saw that speaking head fall back, the
fine limbs settle into the repose of death, a shock went through her
which I thought would never leave her reason unimpaired.

"I've killed him!" she murmured. "I've killed him!" and looking wildly
about, her eyes fell on the cross that hung behind us on the wall. It
seemed to remind her that Felix was a Catholic. "Bring it!" she gasped.
"Let him feel it on his breast. It may bring him peace--hope."

As I rushed to do her bidding, she fell in a heap on the floor.

"Save!" came again from the lips we thought closed forever in death. And
realizing at the words both her danger and the necessity of her not
opening her eyes again upon this scene, I laid the cross in his arms,
and catching her up from the floor, ran with her out of the house. But
no sooner had I caught sight of the busy street and the stream of
humanity passing before us, than I awoke to an instant recognition of
our peril. Setting my wife down, I commanded life back into her limbs by
the force of my own energy, and then dragging her down the steps,
mingled with the crowd, encouraging her, breathing for her, living in
her till I got her into a carriage and we drove away.

For the silence we have maintained from that time to this you must not
blame Mrs. Adams. When she came to herself--which was not for days--she
manifested the greatest desire to proclaim her act and assume its
responsibility. But I would not have it. I loved her too dearly to see
her name bandied about in the papers; and when her father was taken into
our confidence, he was equally peremptory in enjoining silence, and
shared with me the watch I now felt bound to keep over her movements.

But alas! His was the peremptoriness of pride rather than love. John
Poindexter has no more heart for his daughter than he had for his wife
or that long-forgotten child from whose grave this tragedy has sprung.
Had Felix triumphed he would never have wrung the heart of this man. As
he once said, when a man cares for nothing and nobody, not even for
himself, it is useless to curse him.

As for Felix himself, judge him not, when you realize, as you now must,
that his last conscious act was to reach for and put in his mouth the
paper which connected Eva with his death. At the moment of death his
thought was to save, not to avenge. And this after her hand had struck
him.




CHAPTER VI.

ANSWERED.


A silence more or less surcharged with emotion followed this final
appeal. Then, while the various auditors of this remarkable history
whispered together and Thomas Adams turned in love and anxiety toward
his wife, the inspector handed back to Mr. Gryce the memorandum he had
received from him.

It presented the following appearance:

[Sidenote: Answered]

1. Why a woman who was calm enough to stop and arrange her hair during
the beginning of an interview should be wrought up to such a pitch of
frenzy and exasperation before it was over as to kill with her own hand
a man she had evidently had no previous grudge against. (Remember the
comb found on the floor of Mr. Adams's bedroom.)

[Sidenote: Answered]

2. What was the meaning of the following words, written just previous to
this interview by the man thus killed: "I return you your daughter.
Neither you nor she will ever see me again. Remember Evelyn!"

[Sidenote: Answered]

3. Why was the pronoun "I" used in this communication? What position did
Mr. Felix Adams hold toward this young girl qualifying him to make use
of such language after her marriage to his brother?

[Sidenote: Answered]

4. And having used it, why did he, upon being attacked by her, attempt
to swallow the paper upon which he had written these words, actually
dying with it clinched between his teeth?

[Sidenote: Answered]

5. If he was killed in anger and died as monsters do (her own word), why
did his face show sorrow rather than hate, and a determination as far as
possible removed from the rush of over-whelming emotions likely to
follow the reception of a mortal blow from the hand of an unexpected
antagonist?

[Sidenote: Answered]

6. Why, if he had strength to seize the above-mentioned paper and convey
it to his lips, did he not use that strength in turning on a light
calculated to bring him assistance, instead of leaving blazing the
crimson glow which, according to the code of signals as now understood
by us, means: "Nothing more required just now. Keep away?"

[Sidenote: Answered]

7. What was the meaning of the huge steel plate found between the
casings of the doorway, and why did it remain at rest within its socket
at this, the culminating, moment of his life?

[Sidenote: Answered]

8. An explanation of how old Poindexter came to appear on the scene so
soon after the event. His words as overheard were: "It is Amos' son, not
Amos!" Did he not know whom he was to meet in this house? Was the
condition of the man lying before him with a cross on his bosom and a
dagger in his heart less of a surprise to him than the personality of
the victim?

[Sidenote: Not Answered]

9. Remember the conclusions we have drawn from Bartow's pantomime. Mr.
Adams was killed by a left-handed thrust. Watch for an acknowledgment
that the young woman is left-handed, and do not forget that an
explanation is due why for so long a time she held her other arm
stretched out behind her.

[Sidenote: Answered]

10. Why did the bird whose chief cry is "Remember Evelyn!" sometimes
vary it with "Poor Eva! Lovely Eva! Who would strike Eva?" The story of
this tragedy, to be true, must show that Mr. Adams knew his brother's
bride both long and well.

[Sidenote: Answered]

11. If Bartow is, as we think, innocent of all connection with this
crime save as witness, why does he show such joy at its result? This may
not reasonably be expected to fall within the scope of Thomas Adams's
confession, but it should not be ignored by us. This deaf-and-dumb
servitor was driven mad by the fact which caused him joy. Why?[2]

[Footnote 2: It must be remembered that the scraps of writing in Felix's
hand had not yet been found by the police. The allusions in them to
Bartow show him to have been possessed by a jealousy which probably
turned to delight when he saw his master smitten down by the object of
that master's love and his own hatred. How he came to recognize in the
bride of another man the owner of the name he so often saw hovering on
the lips of his master, is a question to be answered by more astute
students of the laws of perception than myself. Probably he spent much
of his time at the loophole on the stairway, studying his master till he
understood his every gesture and expression.]

[Sidenote: Answered]

12. Notice the following schedule. It has been drawn up after repeated
experiments with Bartow and the various slides of the strange lamp which
cause so many different lights to shine out in Mr. Adams's study:

    White light--Water wanted.
    Green light--Overcoat and hat to be brought.
    Blue light--Put back books on shelves.
    Violet light--Arrange study for the night.
    Yellow light--Watch for next light.
    Red light--Nothing wanted; stay away.

The last was on at the final scene. Note if this fact can be explained
by Mr. Adams's account of the same.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two paragraphs alone lacked complete explanation. The first, No. 9, was
important. The description of the stroke dealt by Mr. Adams's wife did
not account for this peculiar feature in Bartow's pantomime. Consulting
with the inspector, Mr. Gryce finally approached Mr. Adams and inquired
if he had strength to enact before them the blow as he had seen it dealt
by his wife.

The startled young man looked the question he dared not ask. In common
with others, he knew that Bartow had made some characteristic gestures
in endeavoring to describe this crime, but he did not know what they
were, as this especial bit of information had been carefully held back
by the police. He, therefore, did not respond hastily to the suggestion
made him, but thought intently for a moment before he thrust out his
left hand and caught up some article or other from the inspector's table
and made a lunge with it across his body into an imaginary victim at his
right. Then he consulted the faces about him with inexpressible anxiety.
He found little encouragement in their aspect.

"You would make your wife out left-handed," suggested Mr. Gryce. "Now I
have been watching her ever since she came into this place, and I have
seen no evidence of this."

"She is not left-handed, but she thrust with her left hand, because her
right was fast held in mine. I had seized her instinctively as she
bounded forward for the weapon, and the convulsive clutch of our two
hands was not loosed till the horror of her act made her faint, and she
fell away from me to the floor crying: 'Tear down the cross and lay it
on your brother's breast. I would at least see him die the death of a
Christian.'"

Mr. Gryce glanced at the inspector with an air of great relief. The
mystery of the constrained attitude of the right hand which made
Bartow's pantomime so remarkable was now naturally explained, and taking
up the blue pencil which the inspector had laid down, he wrote, with a
smile, a very decided "answered" across paragraph No. 9.




CHAPTER VII.

LAST WORDS.


A few minutes later Mr. Gryce was to be seen in the outer room, gazing
curiously at the various persons there collected. He was seeking an
answer to a question that was still disturbing his mind, and hoped to
find it there. He was not disappointed. For in a quiet corner he
encountered the amiable form of Miss Butterworth, calmly awaiting the
result of an interference which she in all probability had been an
active agent in bringing about.

He approached and smilingly accused her of this. But she disclaimed the
fact with some heat.

"I was simply there," she explained. "When the crisis came, when this
young creature learned that her husband had left suddenly for New York
in the company of two men, then--why then, it became apparent to every
one that a woman should be at her side who understood her case and the
extremity in which she found herself. And I was that woman."

"You are always that woman," he gallantly replied, "if by the phrase you
mean being in the right place at the right time. So you are already
acquainted with Mrs. Adams's story?"

"Yes; the ravings of a moment told me she was the one who had handled
the dagger that slew Mr. Adams. Afterward, she was able to explain the
cause of what has seemed to us such a horrible crime. When I heard her
story, Mr. Gryce, I no longer hesitated either as to her duty or mine.
Do you think she will be called upon to answer for this blow? Will she
be tried, convicted?"

"Madam, there are not twelve men in the city so devoid of intelligence
as to apply the name of crime to an act which was so evidently one of
self-defence. No true bill will be found against young Mrs. Adams. Rest
easy."

The look of gloom disappeared from Miss Butterworth's eyes.

"Then I may return home in peace," she cried. "It has been a desperate
five hours for me, and I feel well shaken up. Will you escort me to my
carriage?"

Miss Butterworth did not look shaken up. Indeed, in Mr. Gryce's
judgment, she had never appeared more serene or more comfortable. But
she was certainly the best judge of her own condition; and after
satisfying herself that the object of her care was reviving under the
solicitous ministrations of her husband, she took the arm which Mr.
Gryce held out to her and proceeded to her carriage.

As he assisted her in, he asked a few questions about Mr. Poindexter.

"Why is not Mrs. Adams's father here? Did he allow his daughter to leave
him on such an errand as this without offering to accompany her?"

The answer was curtness itself:

"Mr. Poindexter is a man without heart. He came with us to New York, but
refused to follow us to Police Headquarters. Sir, you will find that the
united passions of three burning souls, and a revenge the most deeply
cherished of any I ever knew or heard of, have been thrown away on a man
who is positively unable to suffer. Do not mention old John Poindexter
to me. And now, if you will be so good, tell the coachman to drive me to
my home in Gramercy Park. I have put my finger in the police pie for the
last time, Mr. Gryce--positively for the last time." And she sank back
on the carriage cushions with an inexorable look, which, nevertheless,
did not quite conceal a quiet complacency which argued that she was not
altogether dissatisfied with herself or the result of her interference
in matters usually considered at variance with a refined woman's natural
instincts.

Mr. Gryce, in repressing a smile, bowed lower even than his wont, and,
under the shadow of this bow, the carriage drove off. As he walked
slowly back, he sighed. Was he wondering if a case of similar interest
would ever bring them together again in consultation?


THE END.



I. “A GREAT CASE”


    “A deed of dreadful note.”
        --Macbeth.

I had been a junior partner in the firm of Veeley, Carr & Raymond,
attorneys and counsellors at law, for about a year, when one morning, in
the temporary absence of both Mr. Veeley and Mr. Carr, there came into
our office a young man whose whole appearance was so indicative of haste
and agitation that I involuntarily rose at his approach and impetuously
inquired:

“What is the matter? You have no bad news to tell, I hope.”

“I have come to see Mr. Veeley; is he in?”

“No,” I replied; “he was unexpectedly called away this morning to
Washington; cannot be home before to-morrow; but if you will make your
business known to me----”

“To you, sir?” he repeated, turning a very cold but steady eye on mine;
then, seeming to be satisfied with his scrutiny, continued, “There is no
reason why I shouldn’t; my business is no secret. I came to inform him
that Mr. Leavenworth is dead.”

“Mr. Leavenworth!” I exclaimed, falling back a step. Mr. Leavenworth was
an old client of our firm, to say nothing of his being the particular
friend of Mr. Veeley.

“Yes, murdered; shot through the head by some unknown person while
sitting at his library table.”

“Shot! murdered!” I could scarcely believe my ears.

“How? when?” I gasped.

“Last night. At least, so we suppose. He was not found till this
morning. I am Mr. Leavenworth’s private secretary,” he explained, “and
live in the family. It was a dreadful shock,” he went on, “especially to
the ladies.”

“Dreadful!” I repeated. “Mr. Veeley will be overwhelmed by it.”

“They are all alone,” he continued in a low businesslike way
I afterwards found to be inseparable from the man; “the Misses
Leavenworth, I mean--Mr. Leavenworth’s nieces; and as an inquest is
to be held there to-day it is deemed proper for them to have some one
present capable of advising them. As Mr. Veeley was their uncle’s best
friend, they naturally sent me for him; but he being absent I am at a
loss what to do or where to go.”

“I am a stranger to the ladies,” was my hesitating reply, “but if I can
be of any assistance to them, my respect for their uncle is such----”

The expression of the secretary’s eye stopped me. Without seeming to
wander from my face, its pupil had suddenly dilated till it appeared to
embrace my whole person with its scope.

“I don’t know,” he finally remarked, a slight frown, testifying to
the fact that he was not altogether pleased with the turn affairs
were taking. “Perhaps it would be best. The ladies must not be left
alone----”

“Say no more; I will go.” And, sitting down, I despatched a hurried
message to Mr. Veeley, after which, and the few other preparations
necessary, I accompanied the secretary to the street.

“Now,” said I, “tell me all you know of this frightful affair.”

“All I know? A few words will do that. I left him last night sitting as
usual at his library table, and found him this morning, seated in the
same place, almost in the same position, but with a bullet-hole in his
head as large as the end of my little finger.”

“Dead?”

“Stone-dead.”

“Horrible!” I exclaimed. Then, after a moment, “Could it have been a
suicide?”

“No. The pistol with which the deed was committed is not to be found.”

“But if it was a murder, there must have been some motive. Mr.
Leavenworth was too benevolent a man to have enemies, and if robbery was
intended----”

“There was no robbery. There is nothing missing,” he again interrupted.
“The whole affair is a mystery.”

“A mystery?”

“An utter mystery.”

Turning, I looked at my informant curiously. The inmate of a house in
which a mysterious murder had occurred was rather an interesting object.
But the good-featured and yet totally unimpressive countenance of the
man beside me offered but little basis for even the wildest imagination
to work upon, and, glancing almost immediately away, I asked:

“Are the ladies very much overcome?”

He took at least a half-dozen steps before replying.

“It would be unnatural if they were not.” And whether it was the
expression of his face at the time, or the nature of the reply itself,
I felt that in speaking of these ladies to this uninteresting,
self-possessed secretary of the late Mr. Leavenworth, I was somehow
treading upon dangerous ground. As I had heard they were very
accomplished women, I was not altogether pleased at this discovery. It
was, therefore, with a certain consciousness of relief I saw a Fifth
Avenue stage approach.

“We will defer our conversation,” said I. “Here’s the stage.”

But, once seated within it, we soon discovered that all intercourse upon
such a subject was impossible. Employing the time, therefore, in
running over in my mind what I knew of Mr. Leavenworth, I found that my
knowledge was limited to the bare fact of his being a retired merchant
of great wealth and fine social position who, in default of possessing
children of his own, had taken into his home two nieces, one of whom had
already been declared his heiress. To be sure, I had heard Mr. Veeley
speak of his eccentricities, giving as an instance this very fact of his
making a will in favor of one niece to the utter exclusion of the other;
but of his habits of life and connection with the world at large, I knew
little or nothing.

There was a great crowd in front of the house when we arrived there, and
I had barely time to observe that it was a corner dwelling of unusual
depth when I was seized by the throng and carried quite to the foot of
the broad stone steps. Extricating myself, though with some difficulty,
owing to the importunities of a bootblack and butcher-boy, who seemed
to think that by clinging to my arms they might succeed in smuggling
themselves into the house, I mounted the steps and, finding the
secretary, by some unaccountable good fortune, close to my side,
hurriedly rang the bell. Immediately the door opened, and a face I
recognized as that of one of our city detectives appeared in the gap.

“Mr. Gryce!” I exclaimed.

“The same,” he replied. “Come in, Mr. Raymond.” And drawing us quietly
into the house, he shut the door with a grim smile on the disappointed
crowd without. “I trust you are not surprised to see me here,” said he,
holding out his hand, with a side glance at my companion.

“No,” I returned. Then, with a vague idea that I ought to introduce the
young man at my side, continued: “This is Mr. ----, Mr. ----, --excuse
me, but I do not know your name,” I said inquiringly to my companion.
“The private secretary of the late Mr. Leavenworth,” I hastened to add.

“Oh,” he returned, “the secretary! The coroner has been asking for you,
sir.”

“The coroner is here, then?”

“Yes; the jury have just gone up-stairs to view the body; would you like
to follow them?”

“No, it is not necessary. I have merely come in the hope of being of
some assistance to the young ladies. Mr. Veeley is away.”

“And you thought the opportunity too good to be lost,” he went on;
“just so. Still, now that you are here, and as the case promises to be
a marked one, I should think that, as a rising young lawyer, you would
wish to make yourself acquainted with it in all its details. But follow
your own judgment.”

I made an effort and overcame my repugnance. “I will go,” said I.

“Very well, then, follow me.”

But just as I set foot on the stairs I heard the jury descending, so,
drawing back with Mr. Gryce into a recess between the reception room and
the parlor, I had time to remark:

“The young man says it could not have been the work of a burglar.”

“Indeed!” fixing his eye on a door-knob near by.

“That nothing has been found missing--”

“And that the fastenings to the house were all found secure this
morning; just so.”

“He did not tell me that. In that case”--and I shuddered--“the murderer
must have been in the house all night.”

Mr. Gryce smiled darkly at the door-knob.

“It has a dreadful look!” I exclaimed.

Mr. Gryce immediately frowned at the door-knob.

And here let me say that Mr. Gryce, the detective, was not the thin,
wiry individual with the piercing eye you are doubtless expecting to
see. On the contrary, Mr. Gryce was a portly, comfortable personage with
an eye that never pierced, that did not even rest on _you._ If it rested
anywhere, it was always on some insignificant object in the vicinity,
some vase, inkstand, book, or button. These things he would seem to take
into his confidence, make the repositories of his conclusions; but as
for you--you might as well be the steeple on Trinity Church, for all
connection you ever appeared to have with him or his thoughts. At
present, then, Mr. Gryce was, as I have already suggested, on intimate
terms with the door-knob.

“A dreadful look,” I repeated.

His eye shifted to the button on my sleeve.

“Come,” he said, “the coast is clear at last.”

Leading the way, he mounted the stairs, but stopped on the upper
landing. “Mr. Raymond,” said he, “I am not in the habit of talking much
about the secrets of my profession, but in this case everything depends
upon getting the right clue at the start. We have no common villainy
to deal with here; genius has been at work. Now sometimes an absolutely
uninitiated mind will intuitively catch at something which the most
highly trained intellect will miss. If such a thing should occur,
remember that I am your man. Don’t go round talking, but come to me. For
this is going to be a great case, mind you, a great case. Now, come on.”

“But the ladies?”

“They are in the rooms above; in grief, of course, but tolerably
composed for all that, I hear.” And advancing to a door, he pushed it
open and beckoned me in.

All was dark for a moment, but presently, my eyes becoming accustomed to
the place, I saw that we were in the library.

“It was here he was found,” said he; “in this room and upon this
very spot.” And advancing, he laid his hand on the end of a large
baize-covered table that, together with its attendant chairs, occupied
the centre of the room. “You see for yourself that it is directly
opposite this door,” and, crossing the floor, he paused in front of the
threshold of a narrow passageway, opening into a room beyond. “As the
murdered man was discovered sitting in this chair, and consequently with
his back towards the passageway, the assassin must have advanced through
the doorway to deliver his shot, pausing, let us say, about here.” And
Mr. Gryce planted his feet firmly upon a certain spot in the carpet,
about a foot from the threshold before mentioned.

“But--” I hastened to interpose.

“There is no room for ‘but,’” he cried. “We have studied the situation.”
 And without deigning to dilate upon the subject, he turned immediately
about and, stepping swiftly before me, led the way into the passage
named. “Wine closet, clothes closet, washing apparatus, towel-rack,”
 he explained, waving his hand from side to side as we hurried through,
finishing with “Mr. Leavenworth’s private apartment,” as that room of
comfortable aspect opened upon us.

Mr. Leavenworth’s private apartment! It was here then that _it_ ought
to be, the horrible, blood-curdling _it_ that yesterday was a living,
breathing man. Advancing to the bed that was hung with heavy curtains,
I raised my hand to put them back, when Mr. Gryce, drawing them from
my clasp, disclosed lying upon the pillow a cold, calm face looking so
natural I involuntarily started.

“His death was too sudden to distort the features,” he remarked, turning
the head to one side in a way to make visible a ghastly wound in the
back of the cranium. “Such a hole as that sends a man out of the world
without much notice. The surgeon will convince you it could never have
been inflicted by himself. It is a case of deliberate murder.”

Horrified, I drew hastily back, when my glance fell upon a door situated
directly opposite me in the side of the wall towards the hall. It
appeared to be the only outlet from the room, with the exception of the
passage through which we had entered, and I could not help wondering
if it was through this door the assassin had entered on his roundabout
course to the library. But Mr. Gryce, seemingly observant of my glance,
though his own was fixed upon the chandelier, made haste to remark, as
if in reply to the inquiry in my face:

“Found locked on the inside; may have come that way and may not; we
don’t pretend to say.”

Observing now that the bed was undisturbed in its arrangement, I
remarked, “He had not retired, then?”

“No; the tragedy must be ten hours old. Time for the murderer to have
studied the situation and provided for all contingencies.”

“The murderer? Whom do you suspect?” I whispered.

He looked impassively at the ring on my finger.

“Every one and nobody. It is not for me to suspect, but to detect.” And
dropping the curtain into its former position he led me from the room.

The coroner’s inquest being now in session, I felt a strong desire to be
present, so, requesting Mr. Gryce to inform the ladies that Mr. Veeley
was absent from town, and that I had come as his substitute, to render
them any assistance they might require on so melancholy an occasion, I
proceeded to the large parlor below, and took my seat among the various
persons there assembled.



II. THE CORONER’S INQUEST


    “The baby figure of the giant mass
     Of things to come.”
         --Troilus and Cressida.

FOR a few minutes I sat dazed by the sudden flood of light greeting me
from the many open windows; then, as the strongly contrasting
features of the scene before me began to impress themselves upon
my consciousness, I found myself experiencing something of the same
sensation of double personality which years before had followed an
enforced use of ether. As at that time, I appeared to be living two
lives at once: in two distinct places, with two separate sets
of incidents going on; so now I seemed to be divided between two
irreconcilable trains of thought; the gorgeous house, its elaborate
furnishing, the little glimpses of yesterday’s life, as seen in the open
piano, with its sheet of music held in place by a lady’s fan, occupying
my attention fully as much as the aspect of the throng of incongruous
and impatient people huddled about me.

Perhaps one reason of this lay in the extraordinary splendor of the room
I was in; the glow of satin, glitter of bronze, and glimmer of marble
meeting the eye at every turn. But I am rather inclined to think it
was mainly due to the force and eloquence of a certain picture which
confronted me from the opposite wall. A sweet picture--sweet enough and
poetic enough to have been conceived by the most idealistic of artists:
simple, too--the vision of a young flaxen-haired, blue-eyed coquette,
dressed in the costume of the First Empire, standing in a wood-path,
looking back over her shoulder at some one following--yet with such a
dash of something not altogether saint-like in the corners of her meek
eyes and baby-like lips, that it impressed me with the individuality of
life. Had it not been for the open dress, with its waist almost beneath
the armpits, the hair cut short on the forehead, and the perfection of
the neck and shoulders, I should have taken it for a literal portrait of
one of the ladies of the house. As it was, I could not rid myself of the
idea that one, if not both, of Mr. Leavenworth’s nieces looked down upon
me from the eyes of this entrancing blonde with the beckoning glance
and forbidding hand. So vividly did this fancy impress me that I half
shuddered as I looked, wondering if this sweet creature did not know
what had occurred in this house since the happy yesterday; and if so,
how she could stand there smiling so invitingly,--when suddenly I became
aware that I had been watching the little crowd of men about me with as
complete an absorption as if nothing else in the room had attracted
my attention; that the face of the coroner, sternly intelligent and
attentive, was as distinctly imprinted upon my mind as that of this
lovely picture, or the clearer-cut and more noble features of the
sculptured Psyche, shining in mellow beauty from the crimson-hung window
at his right; yes, even that the various countenances of the jurymen
clustered before me, commonplace and insignificant as most of them were;
the trembling forms of the excited servants crowded into a far corner;
and the still more disagreeable aspect of the pale-faced, seedy
reporter, seated at a small table and writing with a ghoul-like avidity
that made my flesh creep, were each and all as fixed an element in the
remarkable scene before me as the splendor of the surroundings which
made their presence such a nightmare of discord and unreality.

I have spoken of the coroner. As fortune would have it, he was no
stranger to me. I had not only seen him before, but had held frequent
conversation with him; in fact, knew him. His name was Hammond, and he
was universally regarded as a man of more than ordinary acuteness, fully
capable of conducting an important examination, with the necessary skill
and address. Interested as I was, or rather was likely to be, in this
particular inquiry, I could not but congratulate myself upon our good
fortune in having so intelligent a coroner.

As for his jurymen, they were, as I have intimated, very much like
all other bodies of a similar character. Picked up at random from the
streets, but from such streets as the Fifth and Sixth Avenues,
they presented much the same appearance of average intelligence and
refinement as might be seen in the chance occupants of one of our city
stages. Indeed, I marked but one amongst them all who seemed to take
any interest in the inquiry as an inquiry; all the rest appearing to be
actuated in the fulfilment of their duty by the commoner instincts of
pity and indignation.

Dr. Maynard, the well-known surgeon of Thirty-sixth Street, was the
first witness called. His testimony concerned the nature of the wound
found in the murdered man’s head. As some of the facts presented by him
are likely to prove of importance to us in our narrative, I will proceed
to give a synopsis of what he said.

Prefacing his remarks with some account of himself, and the manner in
which he had been summoned to the house by one of the servants, he went
on to state that, upon his arrival, he found the deceased lying on a
bed in the second-story front room, with the blood clotted about a
pistol-wound in the back of the head; having evidently been carried
there from the adjoining apartment some hours after death. It was the
only wound discovered on the body, and having probed it, he had found
and extracted the bullet which he now handed to the jury. It was lying
in the brain, having entered at the base of the skull, passed obliquely
upward, and at once struck the _medulla oblongata,_ causing instant
death. The fact of the ball having entered the brain in this peculiar
manner he deemed worthy of note, since it would produce not only
instantaneous death, but an utterly motionless one. Further, from the
position of the bullet-hole and the direction taken by the bullet, it
was manifestly impossible that the shot should have been fired by the
man himself, even if the condition of the hair about the wound did not
completely demonstrate the fact that the shot was fired from a point
some three or four feet distant. Still further, considering the angle at
which the bullet had entered the skull, it was evident that the deceased
must not only have been seated at the time, a fact about which there
could be no dispute, but he must also have been engaged in some
occupation which drew his head forward. For, in order that a ball should
enter the head of a man sitting erect at the angle seen here, of 45
degrees, it would be necessary, not only for the pistol to be held very
low down, but in a peculiar position; while if the head had been bent
forward, as in the act of writing, a man holding a pistol naturally
with the elbow bent, might very easily fire a ball into the brain at the
angle observed.

Upon being questioned in regard to the bodily health of Mr. Leavenworth,
he replied that the deceased appeared to have been in good condition at
the time of his death, but that, not being his attendant physician,
he could not speak conclusively upon the subject without further
examination; and, to the remark of a juryman, observed that he had not
seen pistol or weapon lying upon the floor, or, indeed, anywhere else in
either of the above-mentioned rooms.

I might as well add here what he afterwards stated, that from the
position of the table, the chair, and the door behind it, the murderer,
in order to satisfy all the conditions imposed by the situation, must
have stood upon, or just within, the threshold of the passageway leading
into the room beyond. Also, that as the ball was small, and from a
rifled barrel, and thus especially liable to deflections while passing
through bones and integuments, it seemed to him evident that the victim
had made no effort to raise or turn his head when advanced upon by
his destroyer; the fearful conclusion being that the footstep was an
accustomed one, and the presence of its possessor in the room either
known or expected.

The physician’s testimony being ended, the coroner picked up the bullet
which had been laid on the table before him, and for a moment rolled
it contemplatively between his fingers; then, drawing a pencil from his
pocket, hastily scrawled a line or two on a piece of paper and, calling
an officer to his side, delivered some command in a low tone. The
officer, taking up the slip, looked at it for an instant knowingly, then
catching up his hat left the room. Another moment, and the front door
closed on him, and a wild halloo from the crowd of urchins without told
of his appearance in the street. Sitting where I did, I had a full view
of the corner. Looking out, I saw the officer stop there, hail a cab,
hastily enter it, and disappear in the direction of Broadway.



III. FACTS AND DEDUCTIONS


    “Confusion now hath made his master-piece;
    Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
    The Lord’s anointed temple, and stolen thence
    The life of the building.”
         --Macbeth.

TURNING my attention back into the room where I was, I found the
coroner consulting a memorandum through a very impressive pair of gold
eye-glasses.

“Is the butler here?” he asked.

Immediately there was a stir among the group of servants in the corner,
and an intelligent-looking, though somewhat pompous, Irishman stepped
out from their midst and confronted the jury. “Ah,” thought I to
myself, as my glance encountered his precise whiskers, steady eye, and
respectfully attentive, though by no means humble, expression, “here is
a model servant, who is likely to prove a model witness.” And I was not
mistaken; Thomas, the butler, was in all respects one in a thousand--and
he knew it.

The coroner, upon whom, as upon all others in the room, he seemed to
have made the like favorable impression, proceeded without hesitation to
interrogate him.

“Your name, I am told, is Thomas Dougherty?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Well, Thomas, how long have you been employed in your present
situation?”

“It must be a matter of two years now, sir.”

“You are the person who first discovered the body of Mr. Leavenworth?”

“Yes, sir; I and Mr. Harwell.”

“And who is Mr. Harwell?”

“Mr. Harwell is Mr. Leavenworth’s private secretary, sir; the one who
did his writing.”

“Very good. Now at what time of the day or night did you make this
discovery?”

“It was early, sir; early this morning, about eight.”

“And where?”

“In the library, sir, off Mr. Leavenworth’s bedroom. We had forced our
way in, feeling anxious about his not coming to breakfast.”

“You forced your way in; the door was locked, then?”

“Yes, sir.”

“On the inside?”

“That I cannot tell; there was no key in the door.”

“Where was Mr. Leavenworth lying when you first found him?”

“He was not lying, sir. He was seated at the large table in the centre
of his room, his back to the bedroom door, leaning forward, his head on
his hands.”

“How was he dressed?”

“In his dinner suit, sir, just as he came from the table last night.”

“Were there any evidences in the room that a struggle had taken place?”

“No, sir.”

“Any pistol on the floor or table?”

“No, sir?”

“Any reason to suppose that robbery had been attempted?”

“No, sir. Mr. Leavenworth’s watch and purse were both in his pockets.”

Being asked to mention who were in the house at the time of the
discovery, he replied, “The young ladies, Miss Mary Leavenworth and
Miss Eleanore, Mr. Harwell, Kate the cook, Molly the upstairs girl, and
myself.”

“The usual members of the household?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Now tell me whose duty it is to close up the house at night.”

“Mine, sir.”

“Did you secure it as usual, last night?”

“I did, sir.”

“Who unfastened it this morning?”

“I, sir.”

“How did you find it?”

“Just as I left it.”

“What, not a window open nor a door unlocked?”

“No, sir.”

By this time you could have heard a pin drop. The certainty that the
murderer, whoever he was, had not left the house, at least till after it
was opened in the morning, seemed to weigh upon all minds. Forewarned as
I had been of the fact, I could not but feel a certain degree of emotion
at having it thus brought before me; and, moving so as to bring the
butler’s face within view, searched it for some secret token that he had
spoken thus emphatically in order to cover up some failure of duty
on his own part. But it was unmoved in its candor, and sustained the
concentrated gaze of all in the room like a rock.

Being now asked when he had last seen Mr. Leavenworth alive, he replied,
“At dinner last night.”

“He was, however, seen later by some of you?”

“Yes, sir; Mr. Harwell says he saw him as late as half-past ten in the
evening.”

“What room do you occupy in this house?”

“A little one on the basement floor.”

“And where do the other members of the household sleep?”

“Mostly on the third floor, sir; the ladies in the large back rooms, and
Mr. Harwell in the little one in front. The girls sleep above.”

“There was no one on the same floor with Mr. Leavenworth?”

“No, sir.”

“At what hour did you go to bed?”

“Well, I should say about eleven.”

“Did you hear any noise in the house either before or after that time,
that you remember?”

“No, sir.”

“So that the discovery you made this morning was a surprise to you?”

“Yes, sir.”

Requested now to give a more detailed account of that discovery, he
went on to say it was not till Mr. Leavenworth failed to come to his
breakfast at the call of the bell that any suspicion arose in the house
that all was not right. Even then they waited some little time before
doing anything, but as minute after minute went by and he did not come,
Miss Eleanore grew anxious, and finally left the room saying she would
go and see what was the matter, but soon returned looking very much
frightened, saying she had knocked at her uncle’s door, and had even
called to him, but could get no answer. At which Mr. Harwell and himself
had gone up and together tried both doors, and, finding them locked,
burst open that of the library, when they came upon Mr. Leavenworth, as
he had already said, sitting at the table, dead.

“And the ladies?”

“Oh, they followed us up and came into the room and Miss Eleanore
fainted away.”

“And the other one,--Miss Mary, I believe they call her?”

“I don’t remember anything about her; I was so busy fetching water to
restore Miss Eleanore, I didn’t notice.”

“Well, how long was it before Mr. Leavenworth was carried into the next
room?”

“Almost immediate, as soon as Miss Eleanore recovered, and that was as
soon as ever the water touched her lips.”

“Who proposed that the body should be carried from the spot?”

“She, sir. As soon as ever she stood up she went over to it and looked
at it and shuddered, and then calling Mr. Harwell and me, bade us carry
him in and lay him on the bed and go for the doctor, which we did.”

“Wait a moment; did she go with you when you went into the other room?”

“No, sir.”

“What did she do?”

“She stayed by the library table.”

“What doing?”

“I couldn’t see; her back was to me.”

“How long did she stay there?”

“She was gone when we came back.”

“Gone from the table?”

“Gone from the room.”

“Humph! when did you see her again?”

“In a minute. She came in at the library door as we went out.”

“Anything in her hand?”

“Not as I see.”

“Did you miss anything from the table?”

“I never thought to look, sir. The table was nothing to me. I was only
thinking of going for the doctor, though I knew it was of no use.”

“Whom did you leave in the room when you went out?”

“The cook, sir, and Molly, sir, and Miss Eleanore.”

“Not Miss Mary?”

“No, sir.”

“Very well. Have the jury any questions to put to this man?”

A movement at once took place in that profound body.

“I should like to ask a few,” exclaimed a weazen-faced, excitable little
man whom I had before noticed shifting in his seat in a restless manner
strongly suggestive of an intense but hitherto repressed desire to
interrupt the proceedings.

“Very well, sir,” returned Thomas.

But the juryman stopping to draw a deep breath, a large and decidedly
pompous man who sat at his right hand seized the opportunity to inquire
in a round, listen-to-me sort of voice:

“You say you have been in the family for two years. Was it what you
might call a united family?”

“United?”

“Affectionate, you know,--on good terms with each other.” And the
juryman lifted the very long and heavy watch-chain that hung across
his vest as if that as well as himself had a right to a suitable and
well-considered reply.

The butler, impressed perhaps by his manner, glanced uneasily around.
“Yes, sir, so far as I know.”

“The young ladies were attached to their uncle?”

“O yes, sir.”

“And to each other?”

“Well, yes, I suppose so; it’s not for me to say.”

“You suppose so. Have you any reason to think otherwise?” And he doubled
the watch-chain about his fingers as if he would double its attention as
well as his own.

Thomas hesitated a moment. But just as his interlocutor was about to
repeat his question, he drew himself up into a rather stiff and formal
attitude and replied:

“Well, sir, no.”

The juryman, for all his self-assertion, seemed to respect the reticence
of a servant who declined to give his opinion in regard to such a
matter, and drawing complacently back, signified with a wave of his hand
that he had no more to say.

Immediately the excitable little man, before mentioned, slipped forward
to the edge of his chair and asked, this time without hesitation: “At
what time did you unfasten the house this morning?”

“About six, sir.”

“Now, could any one leave the house after that time without your
knowledge?”

Thomas glanced a trifle uneasily at his fellow-servants, but answered up
promptly and as if without reserve;

“I don’t think it would be possible for anybody to leave this house
after six in the morning without either myself or the cook’s knowing of
it. Folks don’t jump from second-story windows in broad daylight, and as
to leaving by the doors, the front door closes with such a slam all the
house can hear it from top to bottom, and as for the back-door, no one
that goes out of that can get clear of the yard without going by the
kitchen window, and no one can go by our kitchen window without the
cook’s a-seeing of them, that I can just swear to.” And he cast a
half-quizzing, half-malicious look at the round, red-faced individual
in question, strongly suggestive of late and unforgotten bickerings over
the kitchen coffee-urn and castor.

This reply, which was of a nature calculated to deepen the forebodings
which had already settled upon the minds of those present, produced a
visible effect. The house found locked, and no one seen to leave it!
Evidently, then, we had not far to look for the assassin.

Shifting on his chair with increased fervor, if I may so speak, the
juryman glanced sharply around. But perceiving the renewed interest
in the faces about him, declined to weaken the effect of the last
admission, by any further questions. Settling, therefore, comfortably
back, he left the field open for any other juror who might choose to
press the inquiry. But no one seeming to be ready to do this, Thomas in
his turn evinced impatience, and at last, looking respectfully around,
inquired:

“Would any other gentleman like to ask me anything?”

No one replying, he threw a hurried glance of relief towards the
servants at his side, then, while each one marvelled at the sudden
change that had taken place in his countenance, withdrew with an eager
alacrity and evident satisfaction for which I could not at the moment
account.

But the next witness proving to be none other than my acquaintance of
the morning, Mr. Harwell, I soon forgot both Thomas and the doubts his
last movement had awakened, in the interest which the examination of
so important a person as the secretary and right-hand man of Mr.
Leavenworth was likely to create.

Advancing with the calm and determined air of one who realized that life
and death itself might hang upon his words, Mr. Harwell took his stand
before the jury with a degree of dignity not only highly prepossessing
in itself, but to me, who had not been over and above pleased with him
in our first interview, admirable and surprising. Lacking, as I
have said, any distinctive quality of face or form agreeable or
otherwise--being what you might call in appearance a negative sort of
person, his pale, regular features, dark, well-smoothed hair and simple
whiskers, all belonging to a recognized type and very commonplace--there
was still visible, on this occasion at least, a certain self-possession
in his carriage, which went far towards making up for the want of
impressiveness in his countenance and expression. Not that even this was
in any way remarkable. Indeed, there was nothing remarkable about the
man, any more than there is about a thousand others you meet every day
on Broadway, unless you except the look of concentration and solemnity
which pervaded his whole person; a solemnity which at this time would
not have been noticeable, perhaps, if it had not appeared to be the
habitual expression of one who in his short life had seen more of sorrow
than joy, less of pleasure than care and anxiety.

The coroner, to whom his appearance one way or the other seemed to be a
matter of no moment, addressed him immediately and without reserve:

“Your name?”

“James Trueman Harwell.”

“Your business?”

“I have occupied the position of private secretary and amanuensis to Mr.
Leavenworth for the past eight months.”

“You are the person who last saw Mr. Leavenworth alive, are you not?”

The young man raised his head with a haughty gesture which well-nigh
transfigured it.

“Certainly not, as I am not the man who killed him.”

This answer, which seemed to introduce something akin to levity or
badinage into an examination the seriousness of which we were all
beginning to realize, produced an immediate revulsion of feeling toward
the man who, in face of facts revealed and to be revealed, could so
lightly make use of it. A hum of disapproval swept through the room, and
in that one remark, James Harwell lost all that he had previously won
by the self-possession of his bearing and the unflinching regard of his
eye. He seemed himself to realize this, for he lifted his head still
higher, though his general aspect remained unchanged.

“I mean,” the coroner exclaimed, evidently nettled that the young man
had been able to draw such a conclusion from his words, “that you were
the last one to see him previous to his assassination by some unknown
individual?”

The secretary folded his arms, whether to hide a certain tremble which
had seized him, or by that simple action to gain time for a moment’s
further thought, I could not then determine. “Sir,” he replied at
length, “I cannot answer yes or no to that question. In all probability
I was the last to see him in good health and spirits, but in a house as
large as this I cannot be sure of even so simple a fact as that.” Then,
observing the unsatisfied look on the faces around, added slowly, “It is
my business to see him late.”

“Your business? Oh, as his secretary, I suppose?”

He gravely nodded.

“Mr. Harwell,” the coroner went on, “the office of private secretary
in this country is not a common one. Will you explain to us what your
duties were in that capacity; in short, what use Mr. Leavenworth had for
such an assistant and how he employed you?”

“Certainly. Mr. Leavenworth was, as you perhaps know, a man of great
wealth. Connected with various societies, clubs, institutions, etc.,
besides being known far and near as a giving man, he was accustomed
every day of his life to receive numerous letters, begging and
otherwise, which it was my business to open and answer, his private
correspondence always bearing a mark upon it which distinguished it from
the rest. But this was not all I was expected to do. Having in his early
life been engaged in the tea-trade, he had made more than one voyage
to China, and was consequently much interested in the question of
international communication between that country and our own. Thinking
that in his various visits there, he had learned much which, if known
to the American people, would conduce to our better understanding of the
nation, its peculiarities, and the best manner of dealing with it, he
has been engaged for some time in writing a book on the subject, which
same it has been my business for the last eight months to assist him
in preparing, by writing at his dictation three hours out of the
twenty-four, the last hour being commonly taken from the evening, say
from half-past nine to half-past ten, Mr. Leavenworth being a very
methodical man and accustomed to regulate his own life and that of those
about him with almost mathematical precision.”

“You say you were accustomed to write at his dictation evenings? Did you
do this as usual last evening?”

“I did, sir.”

“What can you tell us of his manner and appearance at the time? Were
they in any way unusual?”

A frown crossed the secretary’s brow.

“As he probably had no premonition of his doom, why should there have
been any change in his manner?”

This giving the coroner an opportunity to revenge himself for his
discomfiture of a moment before, he said somewhat severely:

“It is the business of a witness to answer questions, not to put them.”

The secretary flushed and the account stood even.

“Very well, then, sir; if Mr. Leavenworth felt any forebodings of his
end, he did not reveal them to me. On the contrary, he seemed to be more
absorbed in his work than usual. One of the last words he said to
me was, ‘In a month we will have this book in press, eh, Trueman?’ I
remember this particularly, as he was filling his wine-glass at the
time. He always drank one glass of wine before retiring, it being my
duty to bring the decanter of sherry from the closet the last thing
before leaving him. I was standing with my hand on the knob of the
hall-door, but advanced as he said this and replied, ‘I hope so, indeed,
Mr. Leavenworth.’ ‘Then join me in drinking a glass of sherry,’ said he,
motioning me to procure another glass from the closet. I did so, and he
poured me out the wine with his own hand. I am not especially fond of
sherry, but the occasion was a pleasant one and I drained my glass. I
remember being slightly ashamed of doing so, for Mr. Leavenworth set his
down half full. It was half full when we found him this morning.”

Do what he would, and being a reserved man he appeared anxious to
control his emotion, the horror of his first shock seemed to overwhelm
him here. Pulling his handkerchief from his pocket, he wiped his
forehead. “Gentlemen, that is the last action of Mr. Leavenworth I ever
saw. As he set the glass down on the table, I said good-night to him and
left the room.”

The coroner, with a characteristic imperviousness to all expressions
of emotion, leaned back and surveyed the young man with a scrutinizing
glance. “And where did you go then?” he asked.

“To my own room.”

“Did you meet anybody on the way?”

“No, sir.”

“Hear any thing or see anything unusual?”

The secretary’s voice fell a trifle. “No, sir.”

“Mr. Harwell, think again. Are you ready to swear that you neither
met anybody, heard anybody, nor saw anything which lingers yet in your
memory as unusual?”

His face grew quite distressed. Twice he opened his lips to speak,
and as often closed them without doing so. At last, with an effort, he
replied:

“I saw one thing, a little thing, too slight to mention, but it was
unusual, and I could not help thinking of it when you spoke.”

“What was it?”

“Only a door half open.”

“Whose door?”

“Miss Eleanore Leavenworth’s.” His voice was almost a whisper now.

“Where were you when you observed this fact?”

“I cannot say exactly. Probably at my own door, as I did not stop on
the way. If this frightful occurrence had not taken place I should never
have thought of it again.”

“When you went into your room did you close your door?”

“I did, sir.”

“How soon did you retire?”

“Immediately.”

“Did you hear nothing before you fell asleep?”

Again that indefinable hesitation.

“Barely nothing.”

“Not a footstep in the hall?”

“I might have heard a footstep.”

“Did you?”

“I cannot swear I did.”

“Do you think you did?”

“Yes, I think I did. To tell the whole: I remember hearing, just as I
was falling into a doze, a rustle and a footstep in the hall; but it
made no impression upon me, and I dropped asleep.”

“Well?”

“Some time later I woke, woke suddenly, as if something had startled me,
but what, a noise or move, I cannot say. I remember rising up in my bed
and looking around, but hearing nothing further, soon yielded to the
drowsiness which possessed me and fell into a deep sleep. I did not wake
again till morning.”

Here requested to relate how and when he became acquainted with the fact
of the murder, he substantiated, in all particulars, the account of the
matter already given by the butler; which subject being exhausted, the
coroner went on to ask if he had noted the condition of the library
table after the body had been removed.

“Somewhat; yes, sir.”

“What was on it?”

“The usual properties, sir, books, paper, a pen with the ink dried on
it, besides the decanter and the wineglass from which he drank the night
before.”

“Nothing more?”

“I remember nothing more.”

“In regard to that decanter and glass,” broke in the juryman of the
watch and chain, “did you not say that the latter was found in the
same condition in which you saw it at the time you left Mr. Leavenworth
sitting in his library?”

“Yes, sir, very much.”

“Yet he was in the habit of drinking a full glass?”

“Yes, sir.”

“An interruption must then have ensued very close upon your departure,
Mr. Harwell.”

A cold bluish pallor suddenly broke out upon the young man’s face. He
started, and for a moment looked as if struck by some horrible thought.
“That does not follow, sir,” he articulated with some difficulty. “Mr.
Leavenworth might--” but suddenly stopped, as if too much distressed to
proceed.

“Go on, Mr. Harwell, let us hear what you have to say.”

“There is nothing,” he returned faintly, as if battling with some strong
emotion.

As he had not been answering a question, only volunteering an
explanation, the coroner let it pass; but I saw more than one pair of
eyes roll suspiciously from side to side, as if many there felt that
some sort of clue had been offered them in this man’s emotion. The
coroner, ignoring in his easy way both the emotion and the universal
excitement it had produced, now proceeded to ask: “Do you know whether
the key to the library was in its place when you left the room last
night?”

“No, sir; I did not notice.”

“The presumption is, it was?”

“I suppose so.”

“At all events, the door was locked in the morning, and the key gone?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Then whoever committed this murder locked the door on passing out, and
took away the key?”

“It would seem so.”

The coroner turning, faced the jury with an earnest look. “Gentlemen,”
 said he, “there seems to be a mystery in regard to this key which must
be looked into.”

Immediately a universal murmur swept through the room, testifying to the
acquiescence of all present. The little juryman hastily rising proposed
that an instant search should be made for it; but the coroner, turning
upon him with what I should denominate as a quelling look, decided
that the inquest should proceed in the usual manner, till the verbal
testimony was all in.

“Then allow me to ask a question,” again volunteered the irrepressible.
“Mr. Harwell, we are told that upon the breaking in of the library door
this morning, Mr. Leavenworth’s two nieces followed you into the room.”

“One of them, sir, Miss Eleanore.”

“Is Miss Eleanore the one who is said to be Mr. Leavenworth’s sole
heiress?” the coroner here interposed.

“No, sir, that is Miss Mary.”

“That she gave orders,” pursued the juryman, “for the removal of the
body into the further room?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And that you obeyed her by helping to carry it in?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Now, in thus passing through the rooms, did you observe anything to
lead you to form a suspicion of the murderer?”

The secretary shook his head. “I have no suspicion,” he emphatically
said.

Somehow, I did not believe him. Whether it was the tone of his voice,
the clutch of his hand on his sleeve--and the hand will often reveal
more than the countenance--I felt that this man was not to be relied
upon in making this assertion.

“I should like to ask Mr. Harwell a question,” said a juryman who had
not yet spoken. “We have had a detailed account of what looks like the
discovery of a murdered man. Now, murder is never committed without some
motive. Does the secretary know whether Mr. Leavenworth had any secret
enemy?”

“I do not.”

“Every one in the house seemed to be on good terms with him?”

“Yes, sir,” with a little quaver of dissent in the assertion, however.

“Not a shadow lay between him and any other member of his household, so
far as you know?”

“I am not ready to say that,” he returned, quite distressed. “A shadow
is a very slight thing. There might have been a shadow----”

“Between him and whom?”

A long hesitation. “One of his nieces, sir.”

“Which one?”

Again that defiant lift of the head. “Miss Eleanore.”

“How long has this shadow been observable?”

“I cannot say.”

“You do not know the cause?”

“I do not.”

“Nor the extent of the feeling?”

“No, sir.”

“You open Mr. Leavenworth’s letters?”

“I do.”

“Has there been anything in his correspondence of late calculated to
throw any light upon this deed?”

It actually seemed as if he never would answer. Was he simply pondering
over his reply, or was the man turned to stone?

“Mr. Harwell, did you hear the juryman?” inquired the coroner.

“Yes, sir; I was thinking.”

“Very well, now answer.”

“Sir,” he replied, turning and looking the juryman full in the face, and
in that way revealing his unguarded left hand to my gaze, “I have opened
Mr. Leavenworth’s letters as usual for the last two weeks, and I can
think of nothing in them bearing in the least upon this tragedy.”

The man lied; I knew it instantly. The clenched hand pausing irresolute,
then making up its mind to go through with the lie firmly, was enough
for me.

“Mr. Harwell, this is undoubtedly true according to your judgment,”
 said the coroner; “but Mr. Leavenworth’s correspondence will have to be
searched for all that.”

“Of course,” he replied carelessly; “that is only right.”

This remark ended Mr. Harwell’s examination for the time. As he sat down
I made note of four things.

That Mr. Harwell himself, for some reason not given, was conscious of a
suspicion which he was anxious to suppress even from his own mind.

That a woman was in some way connected with it, a rustle as well as a
footstep having been heard by him on the stairs.

That a letter had arrived at the house, which if found would be likely
to throw some light upon this subject.

That Eleanore Leavenworth’s name came with difficulty from his lips;
this evidently unimpressible man, manifesting more or less emotion
whenever he was called upon to utter it.



IV. A CLUE.


    “Something is rotten in the State of Denmark.”
         Hamlet.

THE cook of the establishment being now called, that portly, ruddy-faced
individual stepped forward with alacrity, displaying upon her
good-humored countenance such an expression of mingled eagerness and
anxiety that more than one person present found it difficult to restrain
a smile at her appearance. Observing this and taking it as a compliment,
being a woman as well as a cook, she immediately dropped a curtsey,
and opening her lips was about to speak, when the coroner, rising
impatiently in his seat, took the word from her mouth by saying sternly:

“Your name?”

“Katherine Malone, sir.”

“Well, Katherine, how long have you been in Mr. Leavenworth’s service?”

“Shure, it is a good twelvemonth now, sir, since I came, on Mrs.
Wilson’s ricommindation, to that very front door, and----”

“Never mind the front door, but tell us why you left this Mrs. Wilson?”

“Shure, and it was she as left me, being as she went sailing to the
ould country the same day when on her recommendation I came to this very
front door--”

“Well, well; no matter about that. You have been in Mr. Leavenworth’s
family a year?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And liked it? found him a good master?”

“Och, sir, niver have I found a better, worse luck to the villain as
killed him. He was that free and ginerous, sir, that many’s the time I
killed him. He was that free and ginerous, sir, that many’s the time
I have said to Hannah--” She stopped, with a sudden comical gasp of
terror, looking at her fellow-servants like one who had incautiously
made a slip. The coroner, observing this, inquired hastily,

“Hannah? Who is Hannah?”

The cook, drawing her roly-poly figure up into some sort of shape in
her efforts to appear unconcerned, exclaimed boldly: “She? Oh, only the
ladies’ maid, sir.”

“But I don’t see any one here answering to that description. You didn’t
speak of any one by the name of Hannah, as belonging to the house,” said
he, turning to Thomas.

“No, sir,” the latter replied, with a bow and a sidelong look at the
red-cheeked girl at his side. “You asked me who were in the house at the
time the murder was discovered, and I told you.”

“Oh,” cried the coroner, satirically; “used to police courts, I see.”
 Then, turning back to the cook, who had all this while been rolling
her eyes in a vague fright about the room, inquired, “And where is this
Hannah?”

“Shure, sir, she’s gone.”

“How long since?”

The cook caught her breath hysterically. “Since last night.”

“What time last night?”

“Troth, sir, and I don’t know. I don’t know anything about it.”

“Was she dismissed?”

“Not as I knows on; her clothes is here.”

“Oh, her clothes are here. At what hour did you miss her?”

“I didn’t miss her. She was here last night, and she isn’t here this
morning, and so I says she ‘s gone.”

“Humph!” cried the coroner, casting a slow glance down the room, while
every one present looked as if a door had suddenly opened in a closed
wall.

“Where did this girl sleep?”

The cook, who had been fumbling uneasily with her apron, looked up.

“Shure, we all sleeps at the top of the house, sir.”

“In one room?”

Slowly. “Yes, sir.”

“Did she come up to the room last night?”

“Yes, sir.”

“At what hour?”

“Shure, it was ten when we all came up. I heard the clock a-striking.”

“Did you observe anything unusual in her appearance?”

“She had a toothache, sir.”

“Oh, a toothache; what, then? Tell me all she did.”

But at this the cook broke into tears and wails.

“Shure, she didn’t do nothing, sir. It wasn’t her, sir, as did anything;
don’t you believe it. Hannah is a good girl, and honest, sir, as ever
you see. I am ready to swear on the Book as how she never put her hand
to the lock of his door. What should she for? She only went down to Miss
Eleanore for some toothache-drops, her face was paining her that awful;
and oh, sir----”

“There, there,” interrupted the coroner, “I am not accusing Hannah of
anything. I only asked you what she did after she reached your room. She
went downstairs, you say. How long after you went up?”

“Troth, sir, I couldn’t tell; but Molly says----”

“Never mind what Molly says. _You_ didn’t see her go down?”

“No, sir.”

“Nor see her come back?”

“No, sir.”

“Nor see her this morning?”

“No, sir; how could I when she ‘s gone?”

“But you did see, last night, that she seemed to be suffering with
toothache?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Very well; now tell me how and when you first became acquainted with
the fact of Mr. Leavenworth’s death.”

But her replies to this question, while over-garrulous, contained but
little information; and seeing this, the coroner was on the point of
dismissing her, when the little juror, remembering an admission she had
made, of having seen Miss Eleanore Leavenworth coming out of the library
door a few minutes after Mr. Leavenworth’s body had been carried into
the next room, asked if her mistress had anything in her hand at the
time.

“I don’t know, sir. Faith!” she suddenly exclaimed, “I believe she
did have a piece of paper. I recollect, now, seeing her put it in her
pocket.”

The next witness was Molly, the upstairs girl.

Molly O’Flanagan, as she called herself, was a rosy-cheeked,
black-haired, pert girl of about eighteen, who under ordinary
circumstances would have found herself able to answer, with a due degree
of smartness, any question which might have been addressed to her. But
fright will sometimes cower the stoutest heart, and Molly, standing
before the coroner at this juncture, presented anything but a reckless
appearance, her naturally rosy cheeks blanching at the first word
addressed to her, and her head falling forward on her breast in a
confusion too genuine to be dissembled and too transparent to be
misunderstood.

As her testimony related mostly to Hannah, and what she knew of her, and
her remarkable disappearance, I shall confine myself to a mere synopsis
of it.

As far as she, Molly, knew, Hannah was what she had given herself out
to be, an uneducated girl of Irish extraction, who had come from
the country to act as lady’s-maid and seamstress to the two Misses
Leavenworth. She had been in the family for some time; before Molly
herself, in fact; and though by nature remarkably reticent, refusing to
tell anything about herself or her past life, she had managed to become
a great favorite with all in the house. But she was of a melancholy
nature and fond of brooding, often getting up nights to sit and think in
the dark: “as if she was a lady!” exclaimed Molly.

This habit being a singular one for a girl in her station, an attempt
was made to win from the witness further particulars in regard to
it. But Molly, with a toss of her head, confined herself to the one
statement. She used to get up nights and sit in the window, and that was
all she knew about it.

Drawn away from this topic, during the consideration of which, a little
of the sharpness of Molly’s disposition had asserted itself, she went on
to state, in connection with the events of the past night, that Hannah
had been ill for two days or more with a swelled face; that it grew so
bad after they had gone upstairs, the night before, that she got out
of bed, and dressing herself--Molly was closely questioned here, but
insisted upon the fact that Hannah had fully dressed herself, even to
arranging her collar and ribbon--lighted a candle, and made known her
intention of going down to Miss Eleanore for aid.

“Why Miss Eleanore?” a juryman here asked.

“Oh, she is the one who always gives out medicines and such like to the
servants.”

Urged to proceed, she went on to state that she had already told all she
knew about it. Hannah did not come back, nor was she to be found in the
house at breakfast time.

“You say she took a candle with her,” said the coroner. “Was it in a
candlestick?”

“No, sir; loose like.”

“Why did she take a candle? Does not Mr. Leavenworth burn gas in his
halls?”

“Yes, sir; but we put the gas out as we go up, and Hannah is afraid of
the dark.”

“If she took a candle, it must be lying somewhere about the house. Now,
has anybody seen a stray candle?”

“Not as I knows on, sir.”

“Is _this_ it?” exclaimed a voice over my shoulder.

It was Mr. Gryce, and he was holding up into view a half-burned
paraffine candle.

“Yes, sir; lor’, where did you find it?”

“In the grass of the carriage yard, half-way from the kitchen door to
the street,” he quietly returned.

Sensation. A clue, then, at last! Something had been found which seemed
to connect this mysterious murder with the outside world. Instantly the
backdoor assumed the chief position of interest. The candle found lying
in the yard seemed to prove, not only that Hannah had left the house
shortly after descending from her room, but had left it by the backdoor,
which we now remembered was only a few steps from the iron gate opening
into the side street. But Thomas, being recalled, repeated his assertion
that not only the back-door, but all the lower windows of the house,
had been found by him securely locked and bolted at six o’clock that
morning. Inevitable conclusion--some one had locked and bolted them
after the girl. Who? Alas, that had now become the very serious and
momentous question.



V. EXPERT TESTIMONY


     “And often-times, to win us to our harm,
      The instruments of darkness tell us truths;
      Win us with honest trifles, to betray us
      In deepest consequence.”

     Macbeth.

IN the midst of the universal gloom thus awakened there came a sharp
ring at the bell. Instantly all eyes turned toward the parlor door,
just as it slowly opened, and the officer who had been sent off so
mysteriously by the coroner an hour before entered, in company with a
young man, whose sleek appearance, intelligent eye, and general air of
trustworthiness, seemed to proclaim him to be, what in fact he was, the
confidential clerk of a responsible mercantile house.

Advancing without apparent embarrassment, though each and every eye in
the room was fixed upon him with lively curiosity, he made a slight bow
to the coroner.

“You have sent for a man from Bohn & Co.,” he said.

Strong and immediate excitement. Bohn & Co. was the well-known pistol
and ammunition store of ---- Broadway.

“Yes, sir,” returned the coroner. “We have here a bullet, which we must
ask you to examine, You are fully acquainted with all matters connected
with your business?”

The young man, merely elevating an expressive eyebrow, took the bullet
carelessly in his hand.

“Can you tell us from what make of pistol that was delivered?”

The young man rolled it slowly round between his thumb and forefinger,
and then laid it down. “It is a No. 32 ball, usually sold with the small
pistol made by Smith & Wesson.”

“A small pistol!” exclaimed the butler, jumping up from his seat.
“Master used to keep a little pistol in his stand drawer. I have often
seen it. We all knew about it.”

Great and irrepressible excitement, especially among the servants.
“That’s so!” I heard a heavy voice exclaim. “I saw it once
myself--master was cleaning it.” It was the cook who spoke.

“In his stand drawer?” the coroner inquired.

“Yes, sir; at the head of his bed.”

An officer was sent to examine the stand drawer. In a few moments he
returned, bringing a small pistol which he laid down on the coroner’s
table, saying, “Here it is.”

Immediately, every one sprang to his feet, but the coroner, handing
it over to the clerk from Bonn’s, inquired if that was the make before
mentioned. Without hesitation he replied, “Yes, Smith & Wesson; you can
see for yourself,” and he proceeded to examine it.

“Where did you find this pistol?” asked the coroner of the officer.

“In the top drawer of a shaving table standing near the head of Mr.
Leavenworth’s bed. It was lying in a velvet case together with a box
of cartridges, one of which I bring as a sample,” and he laid it down
beside the bullet.

“Was the drawer locked?”

“Yes, sir; but the key was not taken out.”

Interest had now reached its climax. A universal cry swept through the
room, “Is it loaded?”

The coroner, frowning on the assembly, with a look of great dignity,
remarked:

“I was about to ask that question myself, but first I must request
order.”

An immediate calm followed. Every one was too much interested to
interpose any obstacle in the way of gratifying his curiosity.

“Now, sir!” exclaimed the coroner.

The clerk from Bonn’s, taking out the cylinder, held it up. “There are
seven chambers here, and they are all loaded.”

A murmur of disappointment followed this assertion.

“But,” he quietly added after a momentary examination of the face of
the cylinder, “they have not all been loaded long. A bullet has been
recently shot from one of these chambers.”

“How do you know?” cried one of the jury.

“How do I know? Sir,” said he, turning to the coroner, “will you be kind
enough to examine the condition of this pistol?” and he handed it over
to that gentleman. “Look first at the barrel; it is clean and bright,
and shows no evidence of a bullet having passed out of it very lately;
that is because it has been cleaned. But now, observe the face of the
cylinder: what do you see there?”

“I see a faint line of smut near one of the chambers.”

“Just so; show it to the gentlemen.”

It was immediately handed down.

“That faint line of smut, on the edge of one of the chambers, is the
telltale, sirs. A bullet passing out always leaves smut behind. The man
who fired this, remembering the fact, cleaned the barrel, but forgot the
cylinder.” And stepping aside he folded his arms.

“Jerusalem!” spoke out a rough, hearty voice, “isn’t that wonderful!”
 This exclamation came from a countryman who had stepped in from the
street, and now stood agape in the doorway.

It was a rude but not altogether unwelcome interruption. A smile passed
round the room, and both men and women breathed more easily. Order being
at last restored, the officer was requested to describe the position of
the stand, and its distance from the library table.

“The library table is in one room, and the stand in another. To
reach the former from the latter, one would be obliged to cross
Mr. Leavenworth’s bedroom in a diagonal direction, pass through the
passageway separating that one apartment from the other, and----”

“Wait a moment; how does this table stand in regard to the door which
leads from the bedroom into the hall?”

“One might enter that door, pass directly round the foot of the bed
to the stand, procure the pistol, and cross half-way over to the
passage-way, without being seen by any one sitting or standing in the
library beyond.”

“Holy Virgin!” exclaimed the horrified cook, throwing her apron over her
head as if to shut out some dreadful vision. “Hannah niver would have
the pluck for that; niver, niver!” But Mr. Gryce, laying a heavy hand on
the woman, forced her back into her seat, reproving and calming her
at the same time, with a dexterity marvellous to behold. “I beg your
pardons,” she cried deprecatingly to those around; “but it niver was
Hannah, niver!”

The clerk from Bohn’s here being dismissed, those assembled took the
opportunity of making some change in their position, after which, the
name of Mr. Harwell was again called. That person rose with manifest
reluctance. Evidently the preceding testimony had either upset some
theory of his, or indubitably strengthened some unwelcome suspicion.

“Mr. Harwell,” the coroner began, “we are told of the existence of a
pistol belonging to Mr. Leavenworth, and upon searching, we discover it
in his room. Did you know of his possessing such an instrument?”

“I did.”

“Was it a fact generally known in the house?”

“So it would seem.”

“How was that? Was he in the habit of leaving it around where any one
could see it?”

“I cannot say; I can only acquaint you with the manner in which I myself
became aware of its existence.”

“Very well, do so.”

“We were once talking about firearms. I have some taste that way, and
have always been anxious to possess a pocket-pistol. Saying something
of the kind to him one day, he rose from his seat and, fetching me this,
showed it to me.”

“How long ago was this?”

“Some few months since.”

“He has owned this pistol, then, for some time?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Is that the only occasion upon which you have ever seen it?”

“No, sir,”--the secretary blushed--“I have seen it once since.”

“When?”

“About three weeks ago.”

“Under what circumstances?”

The secretary dropped his head, a certain drawn look making itself
suddenly visible on his countenance.

“Will you not excuse me, gentlemen?” he asked, after a moment’s
hesitation.

“It is impossible,” returned the coroner.

His face grew even more pallid and deprecatory. “I am obliged to
introduce the name of a lady,” he hesitatingly declared.

“We are very sorry,” remarked the coroner.

The young man turned fiercely upon him, and I could not help wondering
that I had ever thought him commonplace. “Of Miss Eleanore Leavenworth!”
 he cried.

At that name, so uttered, every one started but Mr. Gryce; he was
engaged in holding a close and confidential confab with his finger-tips,
and did not appear to notice.

“Surely it is contrary to the rules of decorum and the respect we all
feel for the lady herself to introduce her name into this discussion,”
 continued Mr. Harwell. But the coroner still insisting upon an answer,
he refolded his arms (a movement indicative of resolution with him), and
began in a low, forced tone to say:

“It is only this, gentlemen. One afternoon, about three weeks since, I
had occasion to go to the library at an unusual hour. Crossing over to
the mantel-piece for the purpose of procuring a penknife which I had
carelessly left there in the morning, I heard a noise in the adjoining
room. Knowing that Mr. Leavenworth was out, and supposing the ladies to
be out also, I took the liberty of ascertaining who the intruder was;
when what was my astonishment to come upon Miss Eleanore Leavenworth,
standing at the side of her uncle’s bed, with his pistol in her hand.
Confused at my indiscretion, I attempted to escape without being
observed; but in vain, for just as I was crossing the threshold, she
turned and, calling me by name, requested me to explain the pistol to
her. Gentlemen, in order to do so, I was obliged to take it in my hand;
and that, sirs, is the only other occasion upon which I ever saw or
handled the pistol of Mr. Leavenworth.” Drooping his head, he waited in
indescribable agitation for the next question.

“She asked you to explain the pistol to her; what do you mean by that?”

“I mean,” he faintly continued, catching his breath in a vain effort to
appear calm, “how to load, aim, and fire it.”

A flash of awakened feeling shot across the faces of all present. Even
the coroner showed sudden signs of emotion, and sat staring at the bowed
form and pale countenance of the man before him, with a peculiar look of
surprised compassion, which could not fail of producing its effect, not
only upon the young man himself, but upon all who saw him.

“Mr. Harwell,” he at length inquired, “have you anything to add to the
statement you have just made?”

The secretary sadly shook his head.

“Mr. Gryce,” I here whispered, clutching that person by the arm and
dragging him down to my side; “assure me, I entreat you--” but he would
not let me finish.

“The coroner is about to ask for the young ladies,” he quickly
interposed. “If you desire to fulfil your duty towards them, be ready,
that’s all.”

Fulfil my duty! The simple words recalled me to myself. What had I been
thinking of; was I mad? With nothing more terrible in mind than a tender
picture of the lovely cousins bowed in anguish over the remains of one
who had been as dear as a father to them, I slowly rose, and upon demand
being made for Miss Mary and Miss Eleanore Leavenworth, advanced and
said that, as a friend of the family--a petty lie, which I hope will not
be laid up against me--I begged the privilege of going for the ladies
and escorting them down.

Instantly a dozen eyes flashed upon me, and I experienced the
embarrassment of one who, by some unexpected word or action, has drawn
upon himself the concentrated attention of a whole room.

But the permission sought being almost immediately accorded, I was
speedily enabled to withdraw from my rather trying position, finding
myself, almost before I knew it, in the hall, my face aflame, my heart
beating with excitement, and these words of Mr. Gryce ringing in my
ears: “Third floor, rear room, first door at the head of the stairs. You
will find the young ladies expecting you.”



VI. SIDE-LIGHTS


    “Oh! she has beauty might ensnare
    A conqueror’s soul, and make him leave his crown
    At random, to be scuffled for by slaves.”

        OTWAY.

THIRD floor, rear room, first door at the head of the stairs! What was I
about to encounter there?

Mounting the lower flight, and shuddering by the library wall, which to
my troubled fancy seemed written all over with horrible suggestions, I
took my way slowly up-stairs, revolving in my mind many things, among
which an admonition uttered long ago by my mother occupied a prominent
place.

“My son, remember that a woman with a secret may be a fascinating study,
but she can never be a safe, nor even satisfactory, companion.”

A wise saw, no doubt, but totally inapplicable to the present situation;
yet it continued to haunt me till the sight of the door to which I had
been directed put every other thought to flight save that I was about to
meet the stricken nieces of a brutally murdered man.

Pausing only long enough on the threshold to compose myself for the
interview, I lifted my hand to knock, when a rich, clear voice rose from
within, and I heard distinctly uttered these astounding words: “I do not
accuse your hand, though I know of none other which would or could have
done this deed; but your heart, your head, your will, these I do and
must accuse, in my secret mind at least; and it is well that you should
know it!”

Struck with horror, I staggered back, my hands to my ears, when a touch
fell on my arm, and turning, I saw Mr. Gryce standing close beside me,
with his finger on his lip, and the last flickering shadow of a flying
emotion fading from his steady, almost compassionate countenance.

“Come, come,” he exclaimed; “I see you don’t begin to know what kind
of a world you are living in. Rouse yourself; remember they are waiting
down below.”

“But who is it? Who was it that spoke?”

“That we shall soon see.” And without waiting to meet, much less answer,
my appealing look, he struck his hand against the door, and flung it
wide open.

Instantly a flush of lovely color burst upon us. Blue curtains, blue
carpets, blue walls. It was like a glimpse of heavenly azure in a spot
where only darkness and gloom were to be expected. Fascinated by the
sight, I stepped impetuously forward, but instantly paused again,
overcome and impressed by the exquisite picture I saw before me.

Seated in an easy chair of embroidered satin, but rousing from her
half-recumbent position, like one who was in the act of launching a
powerful invective, I beheld a glorious woman. Fair, frail, proud,
delicate; looking like a lily in the thick creamy-tinted wrapper that
alternately clung to and swayed from her finely moulded figure; with her
forehead, crowned with the palest of pale tresses, lifted and flashing
with power; one quivering hand clasping the arm of her chair, the other
outstretched and pointing toward some distant object in the room,--her
whole appearance was so startling, so extraordinary, that I held my
breath in surprise, actually for the moment doubting if it were a living
woman I beheld, or some famous pythoness conjured up from ancient story,
to express in one tremendous gesture the supreme indignation of outraged
womanhood.

“Miss Mary Leavenworth,” whispered that ever present voice over my
shoulder.

Ah! Mary Leavenworth! What a relief came with this name. This beautiful
creature, then, was not the Eleanore who could load, aim, and fire a
pistol. Turning my head, I followed the guiding of that uplifted
hand, now frozen into its place by a new emotion: the emotion of being
interrupted in the midst of a direful and pregnant revelation, and
saw--but, no, here description fails me! Eleanore Leavenworth must be
painted by other hands than mine. I could sit half the day and dilate
upon the subtle grace, the pale magnificence, the perfection of form and
feature which make Mary Leavenworth the wonder of all who behold her;
but Eleanore--I could as soon paint the beatings of my own heart.
Beguiling, terrible, grand, pathetic, that face of faces flashed upon my
gaze, and instantly the moonlight loveliness of her cousin faded from
my memory, and I saw only Eleanore--only Eleanore from that moment on
forever.

When my glance first fell upon her, she was standing by the side of a
small table, with her face turned toward her cousin, and her two hands
resting, the one upon her breast, the other on the table, in an attitude
of antagonism. But before the sudden pang which shot through me at the
sight of her beauty had subsided, her head had turned, her gaze had
encountered mine; all the horror of the situation had burst upon her,
and, instead of a haughty woman, drawn up to receive and trample upon
the insinuations of another, I beheld, alas! a trembling, panting human
creature, conscious that a sword hung above her head, and without a word
to say why it should not fall and slay her.

It was a pitiable change; a heart-rending revelation! I turned from
it as from a confession. But just then, her cousin, who had apparently
regained her self-possession at the first betrayal of emotion on the
part of the other, stepped forward and, holding out her hand, inquired:

“Is not this Mr. Raymond? How kind of you, sir. And you?” turning to Mr.
Gryce; “you have come to tell us we are wanted below, is it not so?”

It was the voice I had heard through the door, but modulated to a sweet,
winning, almost caressing tone.

Glancing hastily at Mr. Gryce, I looked to see how he was affected by
it. Evidently much, for the bow with which he greeted her words was
lower than ordinary, and the smile with which he met her earnest look
both deprecatory and reassuring. His glance did not embrace her cousin,
though her eyes were fixed upon his face with an inquiry in their depths
more agonizing than the utterance of any cry would have been. Knowing
Mr. Gryce as I did, I felt that nothing could promise worse, or be more
significant, than this transparent disregard of one who seemed to fill
the room with her terror. And, struck with pity, I forgot that Mary
Leavenworth had spoken, forgot her very presence in fact, and, turning
hastily away, took one step toward her cousin, when Mr. Gryce’s hand
falling on my arm stopped me.

“Miss Leavenworth speaks,” said he.

Recalled to myself, I turned my back upon what had so interested me even
while it repelled, and forcing myself to make some sort of reply to the
fair creature before me, offered my arm and led her toward the door.

Immediately the pale, proud countenance of Mary Leavenworth softened
almost to the point of smiling;--and here let me say, there never was a
woman who could smile and not smile like Mary Leavenworth. Looking in my
face, with a frank and sweet appeal in her eyes, she murmured:

“You are very good. I do feel the need of support; the occasion is so
horrible, and my cousin there,”--here a little gleam of alarm nickered
into her eyes--“is so very strange to-day.”

“Humph!” thought I to myself; “where is the grand indignant pythoness,
with the unspeakable wrath and menace in her countenance, whom I saw
when I first entered the room?” Could it be that she was trying
to beguile us from our conjectures, by making light of her former
expressions? Or was it possible she deceived herself so far as to
believe us unimpressed by the weighty accusation overheard by us at a
moment so critical?

But Eleanore Leavenworth, leaning on the arm of the detective,
soon absorbed all my attention. She had regained by this time her
self-possession, also, but not so entirely as her cousin. Her step
faltered as she endeavored to walk, and the hand which rested on his
arm trembled like a leaf. “Would to God I had never entered this house,”
 said I to myself. And yet, before the exclamation was half uttered, I
became conscious of a secret rebellion against the thought; an emotion,
shall I say, of thankfulness that it had been myself rather than another
who had been allowed to break in upon their privacy, overhear that
significant remark, and, shall I acknowledge it, follow Mr. Gryce and
the trembling, swaying figure of Eleanore Leavenworth down-stairs. Not
that I felt the least relenting in my soul towards guilt. Crime had
never looked so black; revenge, selfishness, hatred, cupidity, never
seemed more loathsome; and yet--but why enter into the consideration of
my feelings at that time. They cannot be of interest; besides, who can
fathom the depths of his own soul, or untangle for others the secret
cords of revulsion and attraction which are, and ever have been, a
mystery and wonder to himself? Enough that, supporting upon my arm the
half-fainting form of one woman, but with my attention, and interest
devoted to another, I descended the stairs of the Leavenworth mansion,
and re-entered the dreaded presence of those inquisitors of the law who
had been so impatiently awaiting us.

As I once more crossed that threshold, and faced the eager countenances
of those I had left so short a time before, I felt as if ages had
elapsed in the interval; so much can be experienced by the human soul in
the short space of a few over-weighted moments.



VII. MARY LEAVENWORTH


    “For this relief much thanks.”
         Hamlet.

HAVE you ever observed the effect of the sunlight bursting suddenly upon
the earth from behind a mass of heavily surcharged clouds? If so,
you can have some idea of the sensation produced in that room by the
entrance of these two beautiful ladies. Possessed of a loveliness which
would have been conspicuous in all places and under all circumstances,
Mary, at least, if not her less striking, though by no means less
interesting cousin, could never have entered any assemblage without
drawing to herself the wondering attention of all present. But, heralded
as here, by the most fearful of tragedies, what could you expect from
a collection of men such as I have already described, but overmastering
wonder and incredulous admiration? Nothing, perhaps, and yet at the
first murmuring sound of amazement and satisfaction, I felt my soul
recoil in disgust.

Making haste to seat my now trembling companion in the most retired spot
I could find, I looked around for her cousin. But Eleanore Leavenworth,
weak as she had appeared in the interview above, showed at this moment
neither hesitation nor embarrassment. Advancing upon the arm of the
detective, whose suddenly assumed air of persuasion in the presence of
the jury was anything but reassuring, she stood for an instant gazing
calmly upon the scene before her. Then bowing to the coroner with a
grace and condescension which seemed at once to place him on the footing
of a politely endured intruder in this home of elegance, she took the
seat which her own servants hastened to procure for her, with an ease
and dignity that rather recalled the triumphs of the drawing-room
than the self-consciousness of a scene such as that in which we found
ourselves. Palpable acting, though this was, it was not without its
effect. Instantly the murmurs ceased, the obtrusive glances fell,
and something like a forced respect made itself visible upon the
countenances of all present. Even I, impressed as I had been by her very
different demeanor in the room above, experienced a sensation of relief;
and was more than startled when, upon turning to the lady at my side, I
beheld her eyes riveted upon her cousin with an inquiry in their depths
that was anything but encouraging. Fearful of the effect this look might
have upon those about us, I hastily seized her hand which, clenched and
unconscious, hung over the edge of her chair, and was about to beseech
her to have care, when her name, called in a slow, impressive way by the
coroner, roused her from her abstraction. Hurriedly withdrawing her gaze
from her cousin, she lifted her face to the jury, and I saw a gleam
pass over it which brought back my early fancy of the pythoness. But
it passed, and it was with an expression of great modesty she settled
herself to respond to the demand of the coroner and answer the first few
opening inquiries.

But what can express the anxiety of that moment to me? Gentle as she now
appeared, she was capable of great wrath, as I knew. Was she going to
reiterate her suspicions here? Did she hate as well as mistrust her
cousin? Would she dare assert in this presence, and before the world,
what she found it so easy to utter in the privacy of her own room
and the hearing of the one person concerned? Did she wish to? Her own
countenance gave me no clue to her intentions, and, in my anxiety,
I turned once more to look at Eleanore. But she, in a dread and
apprehension I could easily understand, had recoiled at the first
intimation that her cousin was to speak, and now sat with her face
covered from sight, by hands blanched to an almost deathly whiteness.

The testimony of Mary Leavenworth was short. After some few questions,
mostly referring to her position in the house and her connection with
its deceased master, she was asked to relate what she knew of the murder
itself, and of its discovery by her cousin and the servants.

Lifting up a brow that seemed never to have known till now the shadow of
care or trouble, and a voice that, whilst low and womanly, rang like a
bell through the room, she replied:

“You ask me, gentlemen, a question which I cannot answer of my own
personal knowledge. I know nothing of this murder, nor of its discovery,
save what has come to me through the lips of others.”

My heart gave a bound of relief, and I saw Eleanore Leavenworth’s hands
drop from her brow like stone, while a flickering gleam as of hope fled
over her face, and then died away like sunlight leaving marble.

“For, strange as it may seem to you,” Mary earnestly continued, the
shadow of a past horror revisiting her countenance, “I did not enter
the room where my uncle lay. I did not even think of doing so; my only
impulse was to fly from what was so horrible and heartrending. But
Eleanore went in, and she can tell you----”

“We will question Miss Eleanore Leavenworth later,” interrupted the
coroner, but very gently for him. Evidently the grace and elegance of
this beautiful woman were making their impression. “What we want to know
is what _you_ saw. You say you cannot tell us of anything that passed in
the room at the time of the discovery?”

“No, sir.”

“Only what occurred in the hall?”

“Nothing occurred in the hall,” she innocently remarked.

“Did not the servants pass in from the hall, and your cousin come out
there after her revival from her fainting fit?”

Mary Leavenworth’s violet eyes opened wonderingly.

“Yes, sir; but that was nothing.”

“You remember, however, her coming into the hall?”

“Yes, sir.”

“With a paper in her hand?”

“Paper?” and she wheeled suddenly and looked at her cousin. “Did you
have a paper, Eleanore?”

The moment was intense. Eleanore Leavenworth, who at the first mention
of the word paper had started perceptibly, rose to her feet at this
naive appeal, and opening her lips, seemed about to speak, when the
coroner, with a strict sense of what was regular, lifted his hand with
decision, and said:

“You need not ask your cousin, Miss; but let us hear what you have to
say yourself.”

Immediately, Eleanore Leavenworth sank back, a pink spot breaking out on
either cheek; while a slight murmur testified to the disappointment
of those in the room, who were more anxious to have their curiosity
gratified than the forms of law adhered to.

Satisfied with having done his duty, and disposed to be easy with so
charming a witness, the coroner repeated his question. “Tell us, if you
please, if you saw any such thing in her hand?”

“I? Oh, no, no; I saw nothing.”

Being now questioned in relation to the events of the previous night,
she had no new light to throw upon the subject. She acknowledged her
uncle to have been a little reserved at dinner, but no more so than at
previous times when annoyed by some business anxiety.

Asked if she had seen her uncle again that evening, she said no, that
she had been detained in her room. That the sight of him, sitting in his
seat at the head of the table, was the very last remembrance she had of
him.

There was something so touching, so forlorn, and yet so unobtrusive, in
this simple recollection of hers, that a look of sympathy passed slowly
around the room.

I even detected Mr. Gryce softening towards the inkstand. But Eleanore
Leavenworth sat unmoved.

“Was your uncle on ill terms with any one?” was now asked. “Had he
valuable papers or secret sums of money in his possession?”

To all these inquiries she returned an equal negative.

“Has your uncle met any stranger lately, or received any important
letter during the last few weeks, which might seem in any way to throw
light upon this mystery?”

There was the slightest perceptible hesitation in her voice, as she
replied: “No, not to my knowledge; I don’t know of any such.” But here,
stealing a side glance at Eleanore, she evidently saw something that
reassured her, for she hastened to add:

“I believe I may go further than that, and meet your question with a
positive no. My uncle was in the habit of confiding in me, and I should
have known if anything of importance to him had occurred.”

Questioned in regard to Hannah, she gave that person the best of
characters; knew of nothing which could have led either to her strange
disappearance, or to her connection with crime. Could not say whether
she kept any company, or had any visitors; only knew that no one with
any such pretensions came to the house. Finally, when asked when she
had last seen the pistol which Mr. Leavenworth always kept in his stand
drawer, she returned, not since the day he bought it; Eleanore, and not
herself, having the charge of her uncle’s apartments.

It was the only thing she had said which, even to a mind freighted like
mine, would seem to point to any private doubt or secret suspicion; and
this, uttered in the careless manner in which it was, would have passed
without comment if Eleanore herself had not directed at that moment a
very much aroused and inquiring look upon the speaker.

But it was time for the inquisitive juror to make himself heard again.
Edging to the brink of the chair, he drew in his breath, with a vague
awe of Mary’s beauty, almost ludicrous to see, and asked if she had
properly considered what she had just said.

“I hope, sir, I consider all I am called upon to say at such a time as
this,” was her earnest reply.

The little juror drew back, and I looked to see her examination
terminate, when suddenly his ponderous colleague of the watch-chain,
catching the young lady’s eye, inquired:

“Miss Leavenworth, did your uncle ever make a will?”

Instantly every man in the room was in arms, and even she could not
prevent the slow blush of injured pride from springing to her cheek. But
her answer was given firmly, and without any show of resentment.

“Yes, sir,” she returned simply.

“More than one?”

“I never heard of but one.”

“Are you acquainted with the contents of that will?”

“I am. He made no secret of his intentions to any one.”

The juryman lifted his eye-glass and looked at her. Her grace was little
to him, or her beauty or her elegance. “Perhaps, then, you can tell me
who is the one most likely to be benefited by his death?”

The brutality of this question was too marked to pass unchallenged.
Not a man in that room, myself included, but frowned with sudden
disapprobation. But Mary Leavenworth, drawing herself up, looked her
interlocutor calmly in the face, and restrained herself to say:

“I know who would be the greatest losers by it. The children he took to
his bosom in their helplessness and sorrow; the young girls he enshrined
with the halo of his love and protection, when love and protection were
what their immaturity most demanded; the women who looked to him for
guidance when childhood and youth were passed--these, sir, these are
the ones to whom his death is a loss, in comparison to which all others
which may hereafter befall them must ever seem trivial and unimportant.”

It was a noble reply to the basest of insinuations, and the juryman drew
back rebuked; but here another of them, one who had not spoken before,
but whose appearance was not only superior to the rest, but also almost
imposing in its gravity, leaned from his seat and in a solemn voice
said:

“Miss Leavenworth, the human mind cannot help forming impressions.
Now have you, with or without reason, felt at any time conscious of
a suspicion pointing towards any one person as the murderer of your
uncle?”

It was a frightful moment. To me and to one other, I am sure it was
not only frightful, but agonizing. Would her courage fail? would her
determination to shield her cousin remain firm in the face of duty and
at the call of probity? I dared not hope it.

But Mary Leavenworth, rising to her feet, looked judge and jury calmly
in the face, and, without raising her voice, giving it an indescribably
clear and sharp intonation, replied:

“No; I have neither suspicion nor reason for any. The assassin of my
uncle is not only entirely unknown to, but completely unsuspected by,
me.”

It was like the removal of a stifling pressure. Amid a universal
outgoing of the breath, Mary Leavenworth stood aside and Eleanore was
called in her place.



VIII. CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE


    “O dark, dark, dark!”

AND now that the interest was at its height, that the veil which
shrouded this horrible tragedy seemed about to be lifted, if not
entirely withdrawn, I felt a desire to fly the scene, to leave the spot,
to know no more. Not that I was conscious of any particular fear of
this woman betraying herself. The cold steadiness of her now fixed and
impassive countenance was sufficient warranty in itself against the
possibility of any such catastrophe. But if, indeed, the suspicions of
her cousin were the offspring, not only of hatred, but of knowledge; if
that face of beauty was in truth only a mask, and Eleanore Leavenworth
was what the words of her cousin, and her own after behavior would seem
to imply, how could I bear to sit there and see the frightful serpent of
deceit and sin evolve itself from the bosom of this white rose! And yet,
such is the fascination of uncertainty that, although I saw something
of my own feelings reflected in the countenances of many about me, not a
man in all that assemblage showed any disposition to depart, I least of
all.

The coroner, upon whom the blonde loveliness of Mary had impressed
itself to Eleanor’s apparent detriment, was the only one in the room
who showed himself unaffected at this moment. Turning toward the witness
with a look which, while respectful, had a touch of austerity in it, he
began:

“You have been an intimate of Mr. Leavenworth’s family from childhood,
they tell me, Miss Leavenworth?”

“From my tenth year,” was her quiet reply.

It was the first time I had heard her voice, and it surprised me; it
was so like, and yet so unlike, that of her cousin. Similar in tone, it
lacked its expressiveness, if I may so speak; sounding without vibration
on the ear, and ceasing without an echo.

“Since that time you have been treated like a daughter, they tell me?”

“Yes, sir, like a daughter, indeed; he was more than a father to both of
us.”

“You and Miss Mary Leavenworth are cousins, I believe. When did she
enter the family?”

“At the same time I did. Our respective parents were victims of the same
disaster. If it had not been for our uncle, we should have been thrown,
children as we were, upon the world. But he”--here she paused, her
firm lips breaking into a half tremble--“but he, in the goodness of his
heart, adopted us into his family, and gave us what we had both lost, a
father and a home.”

“You say he was a father to you as well as to your cousin--that he
adopted you. Do you mean by that, that he not only surrounded you with
present luxury, but gave you to understand that the same should be
secured to you after his death; in short, that he intended to leave any
portion of his property to you?”

“No, sir; I was given to understand, from the first, that his property
would be bequeathed by will to my cousin.”

“Your cousin was no more nearly related to him than yourself, Miss
Leavenworth; did he never give you any reason for this evident
partiality?”

“None but his pleasure, sir.”

Her answers up to this point had been so straightforward and
satisfactory that a gradual confidence seemed to be taking the place
of the rather uneasy doubts which had from the first circled about this
woman’s name and person. But at this admission, uttered as it was in
a calm, unimpassioned voice, not only the jury, but myself, who had so
much truer reason for distrusting her, felt that actual suspicion in her
case must be very much shaken before the utter lack of motive which this
reply so clearly betokened.

Meanwhile the coroner continued: “If your uncle was as kind to you as
you say, you must have become very much attached to him?”

“Yes, sir,” her mouth taking a sudden determined curve.

“His death, then, must have been a great shock to you?”

“Very, very great.”

“Enough of itself to make you faint away, as they tell me you did, at
the first glimpse you had of his body?”

“Enough, quite.”

“And yet you seemed to be prepared for it?”

“Prepared?”

“The servants say you were much agitated at finding your uncle did not
make his appearance at the breakfast table.”

“The servants!” her tongue seemed to cleave to the roof of her mouth;
she could hardly speak.

“That when you returned from his room you were very pale.”

Was she beginning to realize that there was some doubt, if not actual
suspicion, in the mind of the man who could assail her with questions
like these? I had not seen her so agitated since that one memorable
instant up in her room. But her mistrust, if she felt any, did not long
betray itself. Calming herself by a great effort, she replied, with a
quiet gesture--

“That is not so strange. My uncle was a very methodical man; the least
change in his habits would be likely to awaken our apprehensions.”

“You were alarmed, then?”

“To a certain extent I was.”

“Miss Leavenworth, who is in the habit of overseeing the regulation of
your uncle’s private apartments?”

“I am, sir.”

“You are doubtless, then, acquainted with a certain stand in his room
containing a drawer?”

“Yes, sir.”

“How long is it since you had occasion to go to this drawer?”

“Yesterday,” visibly trembling at the admission.

“At what time?”

“Near noon, I should judge.”

“Was the pistol he was accustomed to keep there in its place at the
time?”

“I presume so; I did not observe.”

“Did you turn the key upon closing the drawer?”

“I did.”

“Take it out?”

“No, sir.”

“Miss Leavenworth, that pistol, as you have perhaps observed, lies on
the table before you. Will you look at it?” And lifting it up into view,
he held it towards her.

If he had meant to startle her by the sudden action, he amply succeeded.
At the first sight of the murderous weapon she shrank back, and a
horrified, but quickly suppressed shriek, burst from her lips. “Oh, no,
no!” she moaned, flinging out her hands before her.

“I must insist upon your looking at it, Miss Leavenworth,” pursued the
coroner. “When it was found just now, all the chambers were loaded.”

Instantly the agonized look left her countenance. “Oh, then--” She did
not finish, but put out her hand for the weapon.

But the coroner, looking at her steadily, continued: “It has been lately
fired off, for all that. The hand that cleaned the barrel forgot the
cartridge-chamber, Miss Leavenworth.”

She did not shriek again, but a hopeless, helpless look slowly settled
over her face, and she seemed about to sink; but like a flash the
reaction came, and lifting her head with a steady, grand action I have
never seen equalled, she exclaimed, “Very well, what then?”

The coroner laid the pistol down; men and women glanced at each other;
every one seemed to hesitate to proceed. I heard a tremulous sigh at my
side, and, turning, beheld Mary Leavenworth staring at her cousin with
a startled flush on her cheek, as if she began to recognize that the
public, as well as herself, detected something in this woman, calling
for explanation.

At last the coroner summoned up courage to continue.

“You ask me, Miss Leavenworth, upon the evidence given, what then? Your
question obliges me to say that no burglar, no hired assassin, would
have used this pistol for a murderous purpose, and then taken the pains,
not only to clean it, but to reload it, and lock it up again in the
drawer from which he had taken it.”

She did not reply to this; but I saw Mr. Gryce make a note of it with
that peculiar emphatic nod of his.

“Nor,” he went on, even more gravely, “would it be possible for any one
who was not accustomed to pass in and out of Mr. Leavenworth’s room at
all hours, to enter his door so late at night, procure this pistol from
its place of concealment, traverse his apartment, and advance as closely
upon him as the facts show to have been necessary, without causing him
at least to turn his head to one side; which, in consideration of the
doctor’s testimony, we cannot believe he did.”

It was a frightful suggestion, and we looked to see Eleanore Leavenworth
recoil. But that expression of outraged feeling was left for her cousin
to exhibit. Starting indignantly from her seat, Mary cast one hurried
glance around her, and opened her lips to speak; but Eleanore, slightly
turning, motioned her to have patience, and replied in a cold and
calculating voice: “You are not sure, sir, that this _was_ done. If my
uncle, for some purpose of his own, had fired the pistol off yesterday,
let us say--which is surely possible, if not probable--the like results
would be observed, and the same conclusions drawn.”

“Miss Leavenworth,” the coroner went on, “the ball has been extracted
from your uncle’s head!”

“Ah!”

“It corresponds with those in the cartridges found in his stand drawer,
and is of the number used with this pistol.”

Her head fell forward on her hands; her eyes sought the floor; her whole
attitude expressed disheartenment. Seeing it, the coroner grew still
more grave.

“Miss Leavenworth,” said he, “I have now some questions to put you
concerning last night. Where did you spend the evening?”

“Alone, in my own room.”

“You, however, saw your uncle or your cousin during the course of it?”

“No, sir; I saw no one after leaving the dinner table--except Thomas,”
 she added, after a moment’s pause.

“And how came you to see him?”

“He came to bring me the card of a gentleman who called.”

“May I ask the name of the gentleman?”

“The name on the card was Mr. Le Roy Robbins.”

The matter seemed trivial; but the sudden start given by the lady at my
side made me remember it.

“Miss Leavenworth, when seated in your room, are you in the habit of
leaving your door open?”

A startled look at this, quickly suppressed. “Not in the habit; no,
sir.”

“Why did you leave it open last night?”

“I was feeling warm.”

“No other reason?”

“I can give no other.”

“When did you close it?”

“Upon retiring.”

“Was that before or after the servants went up?”

“After.”

“Did you hear Mr. Harwell when he left the library and ascended to his
room?”

“I did, sir.”

“How much longer did you leave your door open after that?”

“I--I--a few minutes--a--I cannot say,” she added, hurriedly.

“Cannot say? Why? Do you forget?”

“I forget just how long after Mr. Harwell came up I closed it.”

“Was it more than ten minutes?”

“Yes.”

“More than twenty?”

“Perhaps.” How pale her face was, and how she trembled!

“Miss Leavenworth, according to evidence, your uncle came to his death
not very long after Mr. Harwell left him. If your door was open, you
ought to have heard if any one went to his room, or any pistol shot was
fired. Now, did you hear anything?”

“I heard no confusion; no, sir.”

“Did you hear anything?”

“Nor any pistol shot.”

“Miss Leavenworth, excuse my persistence, but did you hear anything?”

“I heard a door close.”

“What door?”

“The library door.”

“When?”

“I do not know.” She clasped her hands hysterically. “I cannot say. Why
do you ask me so many questions?”

I leaped to my feet; she was swaying, almost fainting. But before I
could reach her, she had drawn herself up again, and resumed her former
demeanor. “Excuse me,” said she; “I am not myself this morning. I beg
your pardon,” and she turned steadily to the coroner. “What was it you
asked?”

“I asked,” and his voice grew thin and high,--evidently her manner was
beginning to tell against her,--“when it was you heard the library door
shut?”

“I cannot fix the precise time, but it was after Mr. Harwell came up,
and before I closed my own.”

“And you heard no pistol shot?”

“No, sir.”

The coroner cast a quick look at the jury, who almost to a man glanced
aside as he did so.

“Miss Leavenworth, we are told that Hannah, one of the servants, started
for your room late last night after some medicine. Did she come there?”

“No, sir.”

“When did you first learn of her remarkable disappearance from this
house during the night?”

“This morning before breakfast. Molly met me in the hall, and asked
how Hannah was. I thought the inquiry a strange one, and naturally
questioned her. A moment’s talk made the conclusion plain that the girl
was gone.”

“What did you think when you became assured of this fact?”

“I did not know what to think.”

“No suspicion of foul play crossed your mind?”

“No, sir.”

“You did not connect the fact with that of your uncle’s murder?”

“I did not know of this murder then.”

“And afterwards?”

“Oh, some thought of the possibility of her knowing something about it
may have crossed my mind; I cannot say.”

“Can you tell us anything of this girl’s past history?”

“I can tell you no more in regard to it than my cousin has done.”

“Do you not know what made her sad at night?”

Her cheek flushed angrily; was it at his tone, or at the question
itself? “No, sir! she never confided her secrets to my keeping.”

“Then you cannot tell us where she would be likely to go upon leaving
this house?”

“Certainly not.”

“Miss Leavenworth, we are obliged to put another question to you. We are
told it was by your order your uncle’s body was removed from where it
was found, into the next room.”

She bowed her head.

“Didn’t you know it to be improper for you or any one else to disturb
the body of a person found dead, except in the presence and under the
authority of the proper officer?”

“I did not consult my knowledge, sir, in regard to the subject: only my
feelings.”

“Then I suppose it was your feelings which prompted you to remain
standing by the table at which he was murdered, instead of following the
body in and seeing it properly deposited? Or perhaps,” he went on, with
relentless sarcasm, “you were too much interested, just then, in the
piece of paper you took away, to think much of the proprieties of the
occasion?”

“Paper?” lifting her head with determination. “Who says I took a piece
of paper from the table?”

“One witness has sworn to seeing you bend over the table upon which
several papers lay strewn; another, to meeting you a few minutes later
in the hall just as you were putting a piece of paper into your pocket.
The inference follows, Miss Leavenworth.”

This was a home thrust, and we looked to see some show of agitation, but
her haughty lip never quivered.

“You have drawn the inference, and you must prove the fact.”

The answer was stateliness itself, and we were not surprised to see the
coroner look a trifle baffled; but, recovering himself, he said:

“Miss Leavenworth, I must ask you again, whether you did or did not take
anything from that table?”

She folded her arms. “I decline answering the question,” she quietly
said.

“Pardon me,” he rejoined: “it is necessary that you should.”

Her lip took a still more determined curve. “When any suspicious paper
is found in my possession, it will be time enough then for me to explain
how I came by it.”

This defiance seemed to quite stagger the coroner.

“Do you realize to what this refusal is liable to subject you?”

She dropped her head. “I am afraid that I do; yes, sir.”

Mr. Gryce lifted his hand, and softly twirled the tassel of the window
curtain.

“And you still persist?”

She absolutely disdained to reply.

The coroner did not press it further.

It had now become evident to all, that Eleanore Leavenworth not only
stood on her defence, but was perfectly aware of her position, and
prepared to maintain it. Even her cousin, who until now had preserved
some sort of composure, began to show signs of strong and uncontrollable
agitation, as if she found it one thing to utter an accusation herself,
and quite another to see it mirrored in the countenances of the men
about her.

“Miss Leavenworth,” the coroner continued, changing the line of attack,
“you have always had free access to your uncle’s apartments, have you
not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Might even have entered his room late at night, crossed it and stood at
his side, without disturbing him sufficiently to cause him to turn his
head?”

“Yes,” her hands pressing themselves painfully together.

“Miss Leavenworth, the key to the library door is missing.”

She made no answer.

“It has been testified to, that previous to the actual discovery of the
murder, you visited the door of the library alone. Will you tell us if
the key was then in the lock?”

“It was not.”

“Are you certain?”

“I am.”

“Now, was there anything peculiar about this key, either in size or
shape?”

She strove to repress the sudden terror which this question produced,
glanced carelessly around at the group of servants stationed at her
back, and trembled. “It was a little different from the others,” she
finally acknowledged.

“In what respect?”

“The handle was broken.”

“Ah, gentlemen, the handle was broken!” emphasized the coroner, looking
towards the jury.

Mr. Gryce seemed to take this information to himself, for he gave
another of his quick nods.

“You would, then, recognize this key, Miss Leavenworth, if you should
see it?”

She cast a startled look at him, as if she expected to behold it in his
hand; but, seeming to gather courage at not finding it produced, replied
quite easily:

“I think I should, sir.”

The coroner seemed satisfied, and was about to dismiss the witness when
Mr. Gryce quietly advanced and touched him on the arm. “One moment,”
 said that gentleman, and stooping, he whispered a few words in the
coroner’s ear; then, recovering himself, stood with his right hand in
his breast pocket and his eye upon the chandelier.

I scarcely dared to breathe. Had he repeated to the coroner the words
he had inadvertently overheard in the hall above? But a glance at
the latter’s face satisfied me that nothing of such importance had
transpired. He looked not only tired, but a trifle annoyed.

“Miss Leavenworth,” said he, turning again in her direction; “you have
declared that you did not visit your uncle’s room last evening. Do you
repeat the assertion?”

“I do.”

He glanced at Mr. Gryce, who immediately drew from his breast a
handkerchief curiously soiled. “It is strange, then, that your
handkerchief should have been found this morning in that room.”

The girl uttered a cry. Then, while Mary’s face hardened into a sort of
strong despair, Eleanore tightened her lips and coldly replied, “I
do not see as it is so very strange. I was in that room early this
morning.”

“And you dropped it then?”

A distressed blush crossed her face; she did not reply.

“Soiled in this way?” he went on.

“I know nothing about the soil. What is it? let me see.”

“In a moment. What we now wish, is to know how it came to be in your
uncle’s apartment.”

“There are many ways. I might have left it there days ago. I have told
you I was in the habit of visiting his room. But first, let me see if it
is my handkerchief.” And she held out her hand.

“I presume so, as I am told it has your initials embroidered in the
corner,” he remarked, as Mr. Gryce passed it to her.

But she with horrified voice interrupted him. “These dirty spots! What
are they? They look like--”

“--what they are,” said the coroner. “If you have ever cleaned a pistol,
you must know what they are, Miss Leavenworth.”

She let the handkerchief fall convulsively from her hand, and stood
staring at it, lying before her on the floor. “I know nothing about it,
gentlemen,” she said. “It is my handkerchief, but--” for some cause she
did not finish her sentence, but again repeated, “Indeed, gentlemen, I
know nothing about it!”

This closed her testimony.

Kate, the cook, was now recalled, and asked to tell when she last washed
the handkerchief?

“This, sir; this handkerchief? Oh, some time this week, sir,” throwing a
deprecatory glance at her mistress.

“What day?”

“Well, I wish I could forget, Miss Eleanore, but I can’ t. It is the
only one like it in the house. I washed it day before yesterday.”

“When did you iron it?”

“Yesterday morning,” half choking over the words.

“And when did you take it to her room?”

The cook threw her apron over her head. “Yesterday afternoon, with the
rest of the clothes, just before dinner. Indade, I could not help it,
Miss Eleanore!” she whispered; “it was the truth.”

Eleanore Leavenworth frowned. This somewhat contradictory evidence
had very sensibly affected her; and when, a moment later, the coroner,
having dismissed the witness, turned towards her, and inquired if she
had anything further to say in the way of explanation or otherwise,
she threw her hands up almost spasmodically, slowly shook her head and,
without word or warning, fainted quietly away in her chair.

A commotion, of course, followed, during which I noticed that Mary did
not hasten to her cousin, but left it for Molly and Kate to do what
they could toward her resuscitation. In a few moments this was in so far
accomplished that they were enabled to lead her from the room. As they
did so, I observed a tall man rise and follow her out.

A momentary silence ensued, soon broken, however, by an impatient stir
as our little juryman rose and proposed that the jury should now adjourn
for the day. This seeming to fall in with the coroner’s views, he
announced that the inquest would stand adjourned till three o’clock the
next day, when he trusted all the jurors would be present.

A general rush followed, that in a few minutes emptied the room of all
but Miss Leavenworth, Mr. Gryce, and myself.



IX. A DISCOVERY


    “His rolling Eies did never rest in place,
     But walkte each where for feare of hid mischance,
     Holding a lattis still before his Pace,
     Through which he still did peep as forward he did pace.”

        Faerie Queene.

MISS LEAVENWORTH, who appeared to have lingered from a vague terror
of everything and everybody in the house not under her immediate
observation, shrank from my side the moment she found herself left
comparatively alone, and, retiring to a distant corner, gave herself
up to grief. Turning my attention, therefore, in the direction of Mr.
Gryce, I found that person busily engaged in counting his own fingers
with a troubled expression upon his countenance, which may or may not
have been the result of that arduous employment. But, at my approach,
satisfied perhaps that he possessed no more than the requisite number,
he dropped his hands and greeted me with a faint smile which was,
considering all things, too suggestive to be pleasant.

“Well,” said I, taking my stand before him, “I cannot blame you. You had
a right to do as you thought best; but how had you the heart? Was she
not sufficiently compromised without your bringing out that wretched
handkerchief, which she may or may not have dropped in that room,
but whose presence there, soiled though it was with pistol grease, is
certainly no proof that she herself was connected with this murder?”

“Mr. Raymond,” he returned, “I have been detailed as police officer and
detective to look after this case, and I propose to do it.”

“Of course,” I hastened to reply. “I am the last man to wish you to
shirk your duty; but you cannot have the temerity to declare that this
young and tender creature can by any possibility be considered as at all
likely to be implicated in a crime so monstrous and unnatural. The mere
assertion of another woman’s suspicions on the subject ought not----”

But here Mr. Gryce interrupted me. “You talk when your attention should
be directed to more important matters. That other woman, as you are
pleased to designate the fairest ornament of New York society, sits over
there in tears; go and comfort her.”

Looking at him in amazement, I hesitated to comply; but, seeing he was
in earnest, crossed to Mary Leavenworth and sat down by her side.
She was weeping, but in a slow, unconscious way, as if grief had been
mastered by fear. The fear was too undisguised and the grief too natural
for me to doubt the genuineness of either.

“Miss Leavenworth,” said I, “any attempt at consolation on the part of a
stranger must seem at a time like this the most bitter of mockeries; but
do try and consider that circumstantial evidence is not always absolute
proof.”

Starting with surprise, she turned her eyes upon me with a slow,
comprehensive gaze wonderful to see in orbs so tender and womanly.

“No,” she repeated; “circumstantial evidence is not absolute proof, but
Eleanore does not know this. She is so intense; she cannot see but one
thing at a time. She has been running her head into a noose, and oh,--”
 Pausing, she clutched my arm with a passionate grasp: “Do you think
there is any danger? Will they--” She could not go on.

“Miss Leavenworth,” I protested, with a warning look toward the
detective, “what do you mean?”

Like a flash, her glance followed mine, an instant change taking place
in her bearing.

“Your cousin may be intense,” I went on, as if nothing had occurred;
“but I do not know to what you refer when you say she has been running
her head into a noose.”

“I mean this,” she firmly returned: “that, wittingly or unwittingly, she
has so parried and met the questions which have been put to her in this
room that any one listening to her would give her the credit of
knowing more than she ought to of this horrible affair. She acts”--Mary
whispered, but not so low but that every word could be distinctly
heard in all quarters of the room--“as if she were anxious to conceal
something. But she is not; I am sure she is not. Eleanore and I are not
good friends; but all the world can never make me believe she has any
more knowledge of this murder than I have. Won’t somebody tell her,
then--won’t you--that her manner is a mistake; that it is calculated to
arouse suspicion; that it has already done so? And oh, don’t forget to
add”--her voice sinking to a decided whisper now--“what you have just
repeated to me: that circumstantial evidence is not always absolute
proof.”

I surveyed her with great astonishment. What an actress this woman was!

“You request me to tell her this,” said I. “Wouldn’t it be better for
you to speak to her yourself?”

“Eleanore and I hold little or no confidential communication,” she
replied.

I could easily believe this, and yet I was puzzled. Indeed, there was
something incomprehensible in her whole manner. Not knowing what else
to say, I remarked, “That is unfortunate. She ought to be told that the
straightforward course is the best by all means.”

Mary Leavenworth only wept. “Oh, why has this awful trouble come to me,
who have always been so happy before!”

“Perhaps for the very reason that you have always been so happy.”

“It was not enough for dear uncle to die in this horrible manner; but
she, my own cousin, had to----”

I touched her arm, and the action seemed to recall her to herself.
Stopping short, she bit her lip.

“Miss Leavenworth,” I whispered, “you should hope for the best. Besides,
I honestly believe you to be disturbing yourself unnecessarily. If
nothing fresh transpires, a mere prevarication or so of your cousin’s
will not suffice to injure her.”

I said this to see if she had any reason to doubt the future. I was
amply rewarded.

“Anything fresh? How could there be anything fresh, when she is
perfectly innocent?”

Suddenly, a thought seemed to strike her. Wheeling round in her seat
till her lovely, perfumed wrapper brushed my knee, she asked: “Why
didn’t they ask me more questions? I could have told them Eleanore never
left her room last night.”

“You could?” What was I to think of this woman?

“Yes; my room is nearer the head of the stairs than hers; if she had
passed my door, I should have heard her, don’t you see?”

Ah, that was all.

“That does not follow,” I answered sadly. “Can you give no other
reason?”

“I would say whatever was necessary,” she whispered.

I started back. Yes, this woman would lie now to save her cousin; had
lied during the inquest. But then I felt grateful, and now I was simply
horrified.

“Miss Leavenworth,” said I, “nothing can justify one in violating the
dictates of his own conscience, not even the safety of one we do not
altogether love.”

“No?” she returned; and her lip took a tremulous curve, the lovely bosom
heaved, and she softly looked away.

If Eleanore’s beauty had made less of an impression on my fancy, or her
frightful situation awakened less anxiety in my breast, I should have
been a lost man from that moment.

“I did not mean to do anything very wrong,” Miss Leavenworth continued.
“Do not think too badly of me.”

“No, no,” said I; and there is not a man living who would not have said
the same in my place.

What more might have passed between us on this subject I cannot say, for
just then the door opened and a man entered whom I recognized as the one
who had followed Eleanore Leavenworth out, a short time before.

“Mr. Gryce,” said he, pausing just inside the door; “a word if you
please.”

The detective nodded, but did not hasten towards him; instead of that,
he walked deliberately away to the other end of the room, where he
lifted the lid of an inkstand he saw there, muttered some unintelligible
words into it, and speedily shut it again. Immediately the uncanny fancy
seized me that if I should leap to that inkstand, open it and peer in,
I should surprise and capture the bit of confidence he had intrusted
to it. But I restrained my foolish impulse, and contented myself with
noting the subdued look of respect with which the gaunt subordinate
watched the approach of his superior.

“Well?” inquired the latter as he reached him: “what now?”

The man shrugged his shoulders, and drew his principal through the open
door. Once in the hall their voices sank to a whisper, and as their
backs only were visible, I turned to look at my companion. She was pale
but composed.

“Has he come from Eleanore?”

“I do not know; I fear so. Miss Leavenworth,” I proceeded, “can it be
possible that your cousin has anything in her possession she desires to
conceal?”

“Then you think she is trying to conceal something?”

“I do not say so. But there was considerable talk about a paper----”

“They will never find any paper or anything else suspicious in
Eleanore’s possession,” Mary interrupted. “In the first place, there
was no paper of importance enough”--I saw Mr. Gryce’s form suddenly
stiffen--“for any one to attempt its abstraction and concealment.”

“Can you be sure of that? May not your cousin be acquainted with
something----”

“There was nothing to be acquainted with, Mr. Raymond. We lived the most
methodical and domestic of lives. I cannot understand, for my part, why
so much should be made out of this. My uncle undoubtedly came to his
death by the hand of some intended burglar. That nothing was stolen from
the house is no proof that a burglar never entered it. As for the doors
and windows being locked, will you take the word of an Irish servant
as infallible upon such an important point? I cannot. I believe the
assassin to be one of a gang who make their living by breaking into
houses, and if you cannot honestly agree with me, do try and consider
such an explanation as possible; if not for the sake of the family
credit, why then”--and she turned her face with all its fair beauty upon
mine, eyes, cheeks, mouth all so exquisite and winsome--“why then, for
mine.”

Instantly Mr. Gryce turned towards us. “Mr. Raymond, will you be kind
enough to step this way?”

Glad to escape from my present position, I hastily obeyed.

“What has happened?” I asked.

“We propose to take you into our confidence,” was the easy response.
“Mr. Raymond, Mr. Fobbs.”

I bowed to the man I saw before me, and stood uneasily waiting. Anxious
as I was to know what we really had to fear, I still intuitively shrank
from any communication with one whom I looked upon as a spy.

“A matter of some importance,” resumed the detective. “It is not
necessary for me to remind you that it is in confidence, is it?”

“No.”

“I thought not. Mr. Fobbs you may proceed.”

Instantly the whole appearance of the man Fobbs changed. Assuming an
expression of lofty importance, he laid his large hand outspread upon
his heart and commenced.

“Detailed by Mr. Gryce to watch the movements of Miss Eleanore
Leavenworth, I left this room upon her departure from it, and followed
her and the two servants who conducted her up-stairs to her own
apartment. Once there---”

Mr. Gryce interrupted him. “Once there? where?”

“Her own room, sir.”

“Where situated?”

“At the head of the stairs.”

“That is not her room. Go on.”

“Not her room? Then it _was_ the fire she was after!” he cried, clapping
himself on the knee.

“The fire?”

“Excuse me; I am ahead of my story. She did not appear to notice me
much, though I was right behind her. It was not until she had reached
the door of this room--which was not her room!” he interpolated
dramatically, “and turned to dismiss her servants, that she seemed
conscious of having been followed. Eying me then with an air of
great dignity, quickly eclipsed, however, by an expression of patient
endurance, she walked in, leaving the door open behind her in a
courteous way I cannot sufficiently commend.”

I could not help frowning. Honest as the man appeared, this was
evidently anything but a sore subject with him. Observing me frown, he
softened his manner.

“Not seeing any other way of keeping her under my eye, except by
entering the room, I followed her in, and took a seat in a remote
corner. She flashed one look at me as I did so, and commenced pacing the
floor in a restless kind of way I’m not altogether unused to. At last
she stopped abruptly, right in the middle of the room. ‘Get me a glass
of water!’ she gasped; ‘I’m faint again--quick! on the stand in the
corner.’ Now in order to get that glass of water it was necessary for me
to pass behind a dressing mirror that reached almost to the ceiling;
and I naturally hesitated. But she turned and looked at me, and--Well,
gentlemen, I think either of you would have hastened to do what she
asked; or at least”--with a doubtful look at Mr. Gryce--“have given
your two ears for the privilege, even if you didn’t succumb to the
temptation.”

“Well, well!” exclaimed Mr. Gryce, impatiently.

“I am going on,” said he. “I stepped out of sight, then, for a moment;
but it seemed long enough for her purpose; for when I emerged, glass in
hand, she was kneeling at the grate full five feet from the spot where
she had been standing, and was fumbling with the waist of her dress in
a way to convince me she had something concealed there which she was
anxious to dispose of. I eyed her pretty closely as I handed her the
glass of water, but she was gazing into the grate, and didn’t appear to
notice. Drinking barely a drop, she gave it back, and in another moment
was holding out her hands over the fire. ‘Oh, I am so cold!’ she cried,
‘so cold.’ And I verily believe she was. At any rate, she shivered most
naturally. But there were a few dying embers in the grate, and when
I saw her thrust her hand again into the folds of her dress I became
distrustful of her intentions and, drawing a step nearer, looked over
her shoulder, when I distinctly saw her drop something into the
grate that clinked as it fell. Suspecting what it was, I was about to
interfere, when she sprang to her feet, seized the scuttle of coal that
was upon the hearth, and with one move emptied the whole upon the dying
embers. ‘I want a fire,’ she cried, ‘a fire!’ ‘That is hardly the way
to make one,’ I returned, carefully taking the coal out with my hands,
piece by piece, and putting it back into the scuttle, till--”

“Till what?” I asked, seeing him and Mr. Gryce exchange a hurried look.

“Till I found this!” opening his large hand, and showing me _a
broken-handled key._



X. MR. GRYCE RECEIVES NEW IMPETUS


    “There’s nothing ill
     Can dwell in such a temple.”

        Tempest.

THIS astounding discovery made a most unhappy impression upon me. It was
true, then. Eleanore the beautiful, the lovesome, was--I did not, could
not finish the sentence, even in the silence of my own mind.

“You look surprised,” said Mr. Gryce, glancing curiously towards the
key. “Now, I ain’t. A woman does not thrill, blush, equivocate, and
faint for nothing; especially such a woman as Miss Leavenworth.”

“A woman who could do such a deed would be the last to thrill,
equivocate, and faint,” I retorted. “Give me the key; let me see it.”

He complacently put it in my hand. “It is the one we want. No getting
out of that.”

I returned it. “If she declares herself innocent, I will believe her.”

He stared with great amazement. “You have strong faith in the women,” he
laughed. “I hope they will never disappoint you.”

I had no reply for this, and a short silence ensued, first broken by Mr.
Gryce. “There is but one thing left to do,” said he. “Fobbs, you will
have to request Miss Leavenworth to come down. Do not alarm her; only
see that she comes. To the reception room,” he added, as the man drew
off.

No sooner were we left alone than I made a move to return to Mary, but
he stopped me.

“Come and see it out,” he whispered. “She will be down in a moment; see
it out; you had best.”

Glancing back, I hesitated; but the prospect of beholding Eleanore again
drew me, in spite of myself. Telling him to wait, I returned to Mary’s
side to make my excuses.

“What is the matter--what has occurred?” she breathlessly asked.

“Nothing as yet to disturb you much. Do not be alarmed.” But my face
betrayed me.

“There is something!” said she.

“Your cousin is coming down.”

“Down here?” and she shrank visibly.

“No, to the reception room.”

“I do not understand. It is all dreadful; and no one tells me anything.”

“I pray God there may be nothing to tell. Judging from your present
faith in your cousin, there will not be. Take comfort, then, and be
assured I will inform you if anything occurs which you ought to know.”

Giving her a look of encouragement, I left her crushed against the
crimson pillows of the sofa on which she sat, and rejoined Mr. Gryce. We
had scarcely entered the reception room when Eleanore Leavenworth came
in.

More languid than she was an hour before, but haughty still, she slowly
advanced, and, meeting my eye, gently bent her head.

“I have been summoned here,” said she, directing herself exclusively to
Mr. Gryce, “by an individual whom I take to be in your employ. If so,
may I request you to make your wishes known at once, as I am quite
exhausted, and am in great need of rest.”

“Miss Leavenworth,” returned Mr. Gryce, rubbing his hands together and
staring in quite a fatherly manner at the door-knob, “I am very sorry to
trouble you, but the fact is I wish to ask you----”

But here she stopped him. “Anything in regard to the key which that man
has doubtless told you he saw me drop into the ashes?”

“Yes, Miss.”

“Then I must refuse to answer any questions concerning it. I have
nothing to say on the subject, unless it is this:”--giving him a look
full of suffering, but full of a certain sort of courage, too--“that he
was right if he told you I had the key in hiding about my person, and
that I attempted to conceal it in the ashes of the grate.”

“Still, Miss----”

But she had already withdrawn to the door. “I pray you to excuse me,”
 said she. “No argument you could advance would make any difference in my
determination; therefore it would be but a waste of energy on your
part to attempt any.” And, with a flitting glance in my direction, not
without its appeal, she quietly left the room.

For a moment Mr. Gryce stood gazing after her with a look of great
interest, then, bowing with almost exaggerated homage, he hastily
followed her out.

I had scarcely recovered from the surprise occasioned by this unexpected
movement when a quick step was heard in the hall, and Mary, flushed and
anxious, appeared at my side.

“What is it?” she inquired. “What has Eleanore been saying?”

“Alas!” I answered, “she has not said anything. That is the trouble,
Miss Leavenworth. Your cousin preserves a reticence upon certain points
very painful to witness. She ought to understand that if she persists in
doing this, that----”

“That what?” There was no mistaking the deep anxiety prompting this
question.

“That she cannot avoid the trouble that will ensue.”

For a moment she stood gazing at me, with great horror-stricken,
incredulous eyes; then sinking back into a chair, flung her hands over
her face with the cry:

“Oh, why were we ever born! Why were we allowed to live! Why did we not
perish with those who gave us birth!”

In the face of anguish like this, I could not keep still.

“Dear Miss Leavenworth,” I essayed, “there is no cause for such despair
as this. The future looks dark, but not impenetrable. Your cousin will
listen to reason, and in explaining----”

But she, deaf to my words, had again risen to her feet, and stood before
me in an attitude almost appalling.

“Some women in my position would go mad! mad! mad!”

I surveyed her with growing wonder. I thought I knew what she meant. She
was conscious of having given the cue which had led to this suspicion of
her cousin, and that in this way the trouble which hung over their heads
was of her own making. I endeavored to soothe her, but my efforts
were all unavailing. Absorbed in her own anguish, she paid but little
attention to me. Satisfied at last that I could do nothing more for her,
I turned to go. The movement seemed to arouse her.

“I am sorry to leave,” said I, “without having afforded you any comfort.
Believe me; I am very anxious to assist you. Is there no one I can send
to your side; no woman friend or relative? It is sad to leave you alone
in this house at such a time.”

“And do you expect me to remain here? Why, I should die! Here to-night?”
 and the long shudders shook her very frame.

“It is not at all necessary for you to do so, Miss Leavenworth,” broke
in a bland voice over our shoulders.

I turned with a start. Mr. Gryce was not only at our back, but had
evidently been there for some moments. Seated near the door, one hand
in his pocket, the other caressing the arm of his chair, he met our
gaze with a sidelong smile that seemed at once to beg pardon for
the intrusion, and to assure us it was made with no unworthy motive.
“Everything will be properly looked after, Miss; you can leave with
perfect safety.”

I expected to see her resent this interference; but instead of that, she
manifested a certain satisfaction in beholding him there.

Drawing me to one side, she whispered, “You think this Mr. Gryce very
clever, do you not?”

“Well,” I cautiously replied, “he ought to be to hold the position he
does. The authorities evidently repose great confidence in him.”

Stepping from my side as suddenly as she had approached it, she crossed
the room and stood before Mr. Gryce.

“Sir,” said she, gazing at him with a glance of entreaty: “I hear you
have great talents; that you can ferret out the real criminal from
a score of doubtful characters, and that nothing can escape the
penetration of your eye. If this is so, have pity on two orphan
girls, suddenly bereft of their guardian and protector, and use your
acknowledged skill in finding out who has committed this crime. It
would be folly in me to endeavor to hide from you that my cousin in her
testimony has given cause for suspicion; but I here declare her to be as
innocent of wrong as I am; and I am only endeavoring to turn the eye
of justice from the guiltless to the guilty when I entreat you to look
elsewhere for the culprit who committed this deed.” Pausing, she held
her two hands out before him. “It must have been some common burglar or
desperado; can you not bring him, then, to justice?”

Her attitude was so touching, her whole appearance so earnest and
appealing, that I saw Mr. Gryce’s countenance brim with suppressed
emotion, though his eye never left the coffee-urn upon which it had
fixed itself at her first approach.

“You must find out--you can!” she went on. “Hannah--the girl who is
gone--must know all about it. Search for her, ransack the city, do
anything; my property is at your disposal. I will offer a large reward
for the detection of the burglar who did this deed!”

Mr. Gryce slowly rose. “Miss Leavenworth,” he began, and stopped; the
man was actually agitated. “Miss Leavenworth, I did not need your very
touching appeal to incite me to my utmost duty in this case. Personal
and professional pride were in themselves sufficient. But, since you
have honored me with this expression of your wishes, I will not conceal
from you that I shall feel a certain increased interest in the affair
from this hour. What mortal man can do, I will do, and if in one month
from this day I do not come to you for my reward, Ebenezer Gryce is not
the man I have always taken him to be.”

“And Eleanore?”

“We will mention no names,” said he, gently waving his hand to and fro.

A few minutes later, I left the house with Miss Leavenworth, she having
expressed a wish to have me accompany her to the home of her friend,
Mrs. Gilbert, with whom she had decided to take refuge. As we rolled
down the street in the carriage Mr. Gryce had been kind enough to
provide for us, I noticed my companion cast a look of regret behind her,
as if she could not help feeling some compunctions at this desertion of
her cousin.

But this expression was soon changed for the alert look of one who
dreads to see a certain face start up from some unknown quarter.
Glancing up and down the street, peering furtively into doorways as
we passed, starting and trembling if a sudden figure appeared on the
curbstone, she did not seem to breathe with perfect ease till we had
left the avenue behind us and entered upon Thirty-seventh Street. Then,
all at once her natural color returned and, leaning gently toward me,
she asked if I had a pencil and piece of paper I could give her. I
fortunately possessed both. Handing them to her, I watched her with some
little curiosity while she wrote two or three lines, wondering she could
choose such a time and place for the purpose.

“A little note I wish to send,” she explained, glancing at the almost
illegible scrawl with an expression of doubt. “Couldn’t you stop the
carriage a moment while I direct it?”

I did so, and in another instant the leaf which I had torn from my
note-book was folded, directed, and sealed with a stamp which she had
taken from her own pocket-book.

“That is a crazy-looking epistle,” she muttered, as she laid it,
direction downwards, in her lap.

“Why not wait, then, till you arrive at your destination, where you can
seal it properly, and direct it at your leisure?”

“Because I am in haste. I wish to mail it now. Look, there is a box on
the corner; please ask the driver to stop once more.”

“Shall I not post it for you?” I asked, holding out my hand.

But she shook her head, and, without waiting for my assistance, opened
the door on her own side of the carriage and leaped to the ground. Even
then she paused to glance up and down the street, before venturing to
drop her hastily written letter into the box. But when it had left her
hand, she looked brighter and more hopeful than I had yet seen her. And
when, a few moments later, she turned to bid me good-by in front of her
friend’s house, it was with almost a cheerful air she put out her hand
and entreated me to call on her the next day, and inform her how the
inquest progressed.

I shall not attempt to disguise from you the fact that I spent all
that long evening in going over the testimony given at the inquest,
endeavoring to reconcile what I had heard with any other theory than
that of Eleanore’s guilt. Taking a piece of paper, I jotted down the
leading causes of suspicion as follows:

1. Her late disagreement with her uncle, and evident estrangement from
him, as testified to by Mr. Harwell.

2. The mysterious disappearance of one of the servants of the house.

3. The forcible accusation made by her cousin,--overheard, however, only
by Mr. Gryce and myself.

4. Her equivocation in regard to the handkerchief found stained with
pistol smut on the scene of the tragedy.

5. Her refusal to speak in regard to the paper which she was supposed to
have taken from Mr. Leavenworth’s table immediately upon the removal of
the body.

6. The finding of the library key in her possession.

“A dark record,” I involuntarily decided, as I looked it over; but
even in doing so began jotting down on the other side of the sheet the
following explanatory notes:

1. Disagreements and even estrangements between relatives are common.
Cases where such disagreements and estrangements have led to crime,
rare.

2. The disappearance of Hannah points no more certainly in one direction
than another.

3. If Mary’s private accusation of her cousin was forcible and
convincing, her public declaration that she neither knew nor suspected
who might be the author of this crime, was equally so. To be sure, the
former possessed the advantage of being uttered spontaneously; but it
was likewise true that it was spoken under momentary excitement, without
foresight of the consequences, and possibly without due consideration of
the facts.

4, 5. An innocent man or woman, under the influence of terror, will
often equivocate in regard to matters that seem to criminate them.

But the key! What could I say to that? Nothing. With that key in her
possession, and unexplained, Eleanore Leavenworth stood in an attitude
of suspicion which even I felt forced to recognize. Brought to this
point, I thrust the paper into my pocket, and took up the evening
_Express_. Instantly my eye fell upon these words:


    SHOCKING MURDER

    MR. LEAVENWORTH, THE WELL-KNOWN MILLIONAIRE, FOUND DEAD IN HIS ROOM

    NO CLUE TO THE PERPETRATOR OF THE DEED

    THE AWFUL CRIME COMMITTED WITH A PISTOL--EXTRAORDINARY FEATURES OF
    THE AFFAIR

Ah! here at least was one comfort; her name was not yet mentioned
as that of a suspected party. But what might not the morrow bring? I
thought of Mr. Gryce’s expressive look as he handed me that key, and
shuddered.

“She must be innocent; she cannot be otherwise,” I reiterated to myself,
and then pausing, asked what warranty I had of this? Only her beautiful
face; only, only her beautiful face. Abashed, I dropped the newspaper,
and went down-stairs just as a telegraph boy arrived with a message from
Mr. Veeley. It was signed by the proprietor of the hotel at which Mr.
Veeley was then stopping and ran thus:


    “WASHINGTON, D. C.

    “Mr. Everett Raymond--

    “Mr. Veeley is lying at my house ill. Have not shown him telegram,
    fearing results. Will do so as soon as advisable.

    “Thomas Loworthy.”

I went in musing. Why this sudden sensation of relief on my part? Could
it be that I had unconsciously been guilty of cherishing a latent dread
of my senior’s return? Why, who else could know so well the secret
springs which governed this family? Who else could so effectually put me
upon the right track? Was it possible that I, Everett Raymond, hesitated
to know the truth in any case? No, that should never be said; and,
sitting down again, I drew out the memoranda I had made and, looking
them carefully over, wrote against No. 6 the word _suspicious_ in good
round characters. There! no one could say, after that, I had allowed
myself to be blinded by a bewitching face from seeing what, in a woman
with no claims to comeliness, would be considered at once an almost
indubitable evidence of guilt.

And yet, after it was all done, I found myself repeating aloud as I
gazed at it: “If she declares herself innocent, I will believe her.” So
completely are we the creatures of our own predilections.



XI. THE SUMMONS


    “The pink of courtesy.”
         Romeo and Juliet.

THE morning papers contained a more detailed account of the murder than
those of the evening before; but, to my great relief, in none of them
was Eleanore’s name mentioned in the connection I most dreaded.

The final paragraph in the _Times_ ran thus: “The detectives are upon
the track of the missing girl, Hannah.” And in the _Herald_ I read the
following notice:

“_A Liberal Reward_ will be given by the relatives of Horatio
Leavenworth, Esq., deceased, for any news of the whereabouts of one
Hannah Chester, disappeared from the house -------- Fifth Avenue since
the evening of March 4. Said girl was of Irish extraction; in age about
twenty-five, and may be known by the following characteristics. Form
tall and slender; hair dark brown with a tinge of red; complexion fresh;
features delicate and well made; hands small, but with the fingers much
pricked by the use of the needle; feet large, and of a coarser type than
the hands. She had on when last seen a checked gingham dress, brown
and white, and was supposed to have wrapped herself in a red and green
blanket shawl, very old. Beside the above distinctive marks, she had
upon her right hand wrist the scar of a large burn; also a pit or two of
smallpox upon the left temple.”

This paragraph turned my thoughts in a new direction. Oddly enough, I
had expended very little thought upon this girl; and yet how apparent
it was that she was the one person upon whose testimony, if given,
the whole case in reality hinged, I could not agree with those who
considered her as personally implicated in the murder. An accomplice,
conscious of what was before her, would have hid in her pockets whatever
money she possessed. But the roll of bills found in Hannah’s trunk
proved her _to_ have left too hurriedly for this precaution. On the
other hand, if this girl had come unexpectedly upon the assassin at his
work, how could she have been hustled from the house without creating
a disturbance loud enough to have been heard by the ladies, one of
whom had her door open? An innocent girl’s first impulse upon such an
occasion would have been to scream; and yet no scream was heard; she
simply disappeared. What were we to think then? That the person seen
by her was one both known and trusted? I would not consider such a
possibility; so laying down the paper, I endeavored to put away all
further consideration of the affair till I had acquired more facts
upon which to base the theory. But who can control his thoughts when
over-excited upon any one theme? All the morning I found myself turning
the case over in my mind, arriving ever at one of two conclusions.
Hannah Chester must be found, or Eleanore Leavenworth must explain when
and by what means the key of the library door came into her possession.

At two o’clock I started from my office to attend the inquest; but,
being delayed on the way, missed arriving at the house until after the
delivery of the verdict. This was a disappointment to me, especially as
by these means I lost the opportunity of seeing Eleanore Leavenworth,
she having retired to her room immediately upon the dismissal of the
jury. But Mr. Harwell was visible, and from him I heard what the verdict
had been.

“Death by means of a pistol shot from the hand of some person unknown.”

The result of the inquest was a great relief to me. I had feared worse.
Nor could I help seeing that, for all his studied self-command, the
pale-faced secretary shared in my satisfaction.

What was less of a relief to me was the fact, soon communicated, that
Mr. Gryce and his subordinates had left the premises immediately upon
the delivery of the verdict. Mr. Gryce was not the man to forsake an
affair like this while anything of importance connected with it remained
unexplained. Could it be he meditated any decisive action? Somewhat
alarmed, I was about to hurry from the house for the purpose of learning
what his intentions were, when a sudden movement in the front lower
window of the house on the opposite side of the way arrested my
attention, and, looking closer, I detected the face of Mr. Fobbs peering
out from behind the curtain. The sight assured me I was not wrong in my
estimate of Mr. Gryce; and, struck with pity for the desolate girl left
to meet the exigencies of a fate to which this watch upon her movements
was but the evident precursor, I stepped back and sent her a note, in
which, as Mr. Veeley’s representative, I proffered my services in case
of any sudden emergency, saying I was always to be found in my rooms
between the hours of six and eight. This done, I proceeded to the house
in Thirty-seventh Street where I had left Miss Mary Leavenworth the day
before.

Ushered into the long and narrow drawing-room which of late years
has been so fashionable in our uptown houses, I found myself almost
immediately in the presence of Miss Leavenworth.

“Oh,” she cried, with an eloquent gesture of welcome, “I had begun to
think I was forsaken!” and advancing impulsively, she held out her hand.
“What is the news from home?”

“A verdict of murder, Miss Leavenworth.”

Her eyes did not lose their question.

“Perpetrated by party or parties unknown.”

A look of relief broke softly across her features.

“And they are all gone?” she exclaimed.

“I found no one in the house who did not belong there.”

“Oh! then we can breathe easily again.”

I glanced hastily up and down the room.

“There is no one here,” said she.

And still I hesitated. At length, in an awkward way enough, I turned
towards her and said:

“I do not wish either to offend or alarm you, but I must say that I
consider it your duty to return to your own home to-night.”

“Why?” she stammered. “Is there any particular reason for my doing so?
Have you not perceived the impossibility of my remaining in the same
house with Eleanore?”

“Miss Leavenworth, I cannot recognize any so-called impossibility of
this nature. Eleanore is your cousin; has been brought up to regard you
as a sister; it is not worthy of you to desert her at the time of her
necessity. You will see this as I do, if you will allow yourself a
moment’s dispassionate thought.”

“Dispassionate thought is hardly possible under the circumstances,” she
returned, with a smile of bitter irony.

But before I could reply to this, she softened, and asked if I was very
anxious to have her return; and when I replied, “More than I can say,”
 she trembled and looked for a moment as if she were half inclined to
yield; but suddenly broke into tears, crying it was impossible, and that
I was cruel to ask it.

I drew back, baffled and sore. “Pardon me,” said I, “I have indeed
transgressed the bounds allotted to me. I will not do so again; you have
doubtless many friends; let some of them advise you.”

She turned upon me all fire. “The friends you speak of are flatterers.
You alone have the courage to command me to do what is right.”

“Excuse me, I do not command; I only entreat.”

She made no reply, but began pacing the room, her eyes fixed, her hands
working convulsively. “You little know what you ask,” said she. “I feel
as though the very atmosphere of that house would destroy me; but--why
cannot Eleanore come here?” she impulsively inquired. “I know Mrs.
Gilbert will be quite willing, and I could keep my room, and we need not
meet.”

“You forget that there is another call at home, besides the one I have
already mentioned. To-morrow afternoon your uncle is to be buried.”

“O yes; poor, poor uncle!”

“You are the head of the household,” I now ventured, “and the proper
one to attend to the final offices towards one who has done so much for
you.”

There was something strange in the look which she gave me. “It is true,”
 she assented. Then, with a grand turn of her body, and a quick air of
determination: “I am desirous of being worthy of your good opinion. I
will go back to my cousin, Mr. Raymond.”

I felt my spirits rise a little; I took her by the hand. “May that
cousin have no need of the comfort which I am now sure you will be ready
to give her.”

Her hand dropped from mine. “I mean to do my duty,” was her cold
response.

As I descended the stoop, I met a certain thin and fashionably dressed
young man, who gave me a very sharp look as he passed. As he wore his
clothes a little too conspicuously for the perfect gentleman, and as I
had some remembrance of having seen him at the inquest, I set him down
for a man in Mr. Gryce’s employ, and hasted on towards the avenue; when
what was my surprise to find on the corner another person, who,
while pretending to be on the look out for a car, cast upon me, as I
approached, a furtive glance of intense inquiry. As this latter was,
without question, a gentleman, I felt some annoyance, and, walking
quietly up to him, asked if he found my countenance familiar, that he
scrutinized it so closely.

“I find it a very agreeable one,” was his unexpected reply, as he turned
from me and walked down the avenue.

Nettled, and in no small degree mortified, at the disadvantage in which
his courtesy had placed me, I stood watching him as he disappeared,
asking myself who and what he was. For he was not only a gentleman, but
a marked one; possessing features of unusual symmetry as well as a form
of peculiar elegance. Not so very young--he might well be forty--there
were yet evident on his face the impress of youth’s strongest emotions,
not a curve of his chin nor a glance of his eye betraying in any way the
slightest leaning towards _ennui,_ though face and figure were of that
type which seems most to invite and cherish it.

“He can have no connection with the police force,” thought I; “nor is it
by any means certain that he knows me, or is interested in my affairs;
but I shall not soon forget him, for all that.”

The summons from Eleanore Leavenworth came about eight o’clock in the
evening. It was brought by Thomas, and read as follows:

“Come, Oh, come! I--” there breaking off in a tremble, as if the pen had
fallen from a nerveless hand.

It did not take me long to find my way to her home.



XII. ELEANORE.


    “Constant you are--
     ... And for secrecy
     No lady closer.”

        Henry IV.

    “No, ‘t is slander,
    Whose edge is sharper than the sword whose tongue
    Outvenoms all the worms of Nile.”

        Cymbeline.

THE door was opened by Molly. “You will find Miss Eleanore in the
drawing-room, sir,” she said, ushering me in.

Fearing I knew not what, I hurried to the room thus indicated, feeling
as never before the sumptuousness of the magnificent hall with its
antique flooring, carved woods, and bronze ornamentations:--the mockery
of _things_ for the first time forcing itself upon me. Laying my hand
on the drawing-room door, I listened. All was silent. Slowly pulling it
open, I lifted the heavy satin curtains hanging before me to the floor,
and looked within. What a picture met my eyes!

Sitting in the light of a solitary gas jet, whose faint glimmering just
served to make visible the glancing satin and stainless marble of
the gorgeous apartment, I beheld Eleanore Leavenworth. Pale as the
sculptured image of the Psyche that towered above her from the mellow
dusk of the bow-window near which she sat, beautiful as it, and almost
as immobile, she crouched with rigid hands frozen in forgotten entreaty
before her, apparently insensible to sound, movement, or touch; a silent
figure of despair in presence of an implacable fate.

Impressed by the scene, I stood with my hand upon the curtain,
hesitating if to advance or retreat, when suddenly a sharp tremble shook
her impassive frame, the rigid hands unlocked, the stony eyes softened,
and, springing to her feet, she uttered a cry of satisfaction, and
advanced towards me.

“Miss Leavenworth!” I exclaimed, starting at the sound of my own voice.

She paused, and pressed her hands to her face, as if the world and all
she had forgotten had rushed back upon her at this simple utterance of
her name.

“What is it?” I asked.

Her hands fell heavily. “Do you not know? They--they are beginning to
say that I--” she paused, and clutched her throat. “Read!” she gasped,
pointing to a newspaper lying on the floor at her feet.

I stooped and lifted what showed itself at first glance to be the
_Evening Telegram._ It needed but a single look to inform me to what she
referred. There, in startling characters, I beheld:


    THE LEAVENWORTH MURDER

    LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN THE MYSTERIOUS CASE

    A MEMBER OF THE MURDERED MAN’S OWN FAMILY
    STRONGLY SUSPECTED OF THE CRIME

    THE MOST BEAUTIFUL WOMAN IN NEW YORK UNDER A CLOUD

    PAST HISTORY OF MISS ELEANORE LEAVENWORTH

I was prepared for it; had schooled myself for this very thing, you
might say; and yet I could not help recoiling. Dropping the paper from
my hand, I stood before her, longing and yet dreading to look into her
face.

“What does it mean?” she panted; “what, what does it mean? Is the world
mad?” and her eyes, fixed and glassy, stared into mine as if she found
it impossible to grasp the sense of this outrage.

I shook my head. I could not reply.

“To accuse _me_” she murmured; “me, me!” striking her breast with her
clenched hand, “who loved the very ground he trod upon; who would have
cast my own body between him and the deadly bullet if I had only known
his danger. Oh!” she cried, “it is not a slander they utter, but a
dagger which they thrust into my heart!”

Overcome by her misery, but determined not to show my compassion until
more thoroughly convinced of her complete innocence, I replied, after a
pause:

“This seems to strike you with great surprise, Miss Leavenworth; were
you not then able to foresee what must follow your determined reticence
upon certain points? Did you know so little of human nature as to
imagine that, situated as you are, you could keep silence in regard to
any matter connected with this crime, without arousing the antagonism of
the crowd, to say nothing of the suspicions of the police?”

“But--but----”

I hurriedly waved my hand. “When you defied the coroner to find
any suspicious paper in your possession; when”--I forced myself to
speak--“you refused to tell Mr. Gryce how you came in possession of the
key--”

She drew hastily back, a heavy pall seeming to fall over her with my
words.

“Don’t,” she whispered, looking in terror about her. “Don’t! Sometimes I
think the walls have ears, and that the very shadows listen.”

“Ah,” I returned; “then you hope to keep from the world what is known to
the detectives?”

She did not answer.

“Miss Leavenworth,” I went on, “I am afraid you do not comprehend
your position. Try to look at the case for a moment in the light of
an unprejudiced person; try to see for yourself the necessity of
explaining----”

“But I cannot explain,” she murmured huskily.

“Cannot!”

I do not know whether it was the tone of my voice or the word itself,
but that simple expression seemed to affect her like a blow.

“Oh!” she cried, shrinking back: “you do not, cannot doubt me, too? I
thought that you--” and stopped. “I did not dream that I--” and stopped
again. Suddenly her whole form quivered. “Oh, I see! You have mistrusted
me from the first; the appearances against me have been too strong”; and
she sank inert, lost in the depths of her shame and humiliation. “Ah,
but now I am forsaken!” she murmured.

The appeal went to my heart. Starting forward, I exclaimed: “Miss
Leavenworth, I am but a man; I cannot see you so distressed. Say
that you are innocent, and I will believe you, without regard to
appearances.”

Springing erect, she towered upon me. “Can any one look in my face
and accuse me of guilt?” Then, as I sadly shook my head, she hurriedly
gasped: “You want further proof!” and, quivering with an extraordinary
emotion, she sprang to the door.

“Come, then,” she cried, “come!” her eyes flashing full of resolve upon
me.

Aroused, appalled, moved in spite of myself, I crossed the room to where
she stood; but she was already in the hall. Hastening after her, filled
with a fear I dared not express, I stood at the foot of the stairs; she
was half-way to the top. Following her into the hall above, I saw her
form standing erect and noble at the door of her uncle’s bedroom.

“Come!” she again cried, but this time in a calm and reverential tone;
and flinging the door open before her, she passed in.

Subduing the wonder which I felt, I slowly followed her. There was no
light in the room of death, but the flame of the gas-burner, at the far
end of the hall, shone weirdly in, and by its glimmering I beheld her
kneeling at the shrouded bed, her head bowed above that of the murdered
man, her hand upon his breast.

“You have said that if I declared my innocence you would believe me,”
 she exclaimed, lifting her head as I entered. “See here,” and laying
her cheek against the pallid brow of her dead benefactor, she kissed the
clay-cold lips softly, wildly, agonizedly, then, leaping to her feet,
cried, in a subdued but thrilling tone: “Could I do that if I were
guilty? Would not the breath freeze on my lips, the blood congeal in
my veins, and my heart faint at this contact? Son of a father loved and
reverenced, can you believe me to be a woman stained with crime when I
can do this?” and kneeling again she cast her arms over and about that
inanimate form, looking in my face at the same time with an expression
no mortal touch could paint, nor tongue describe.

“In olden times,” she went on, “they used to say that a dead body would
bleed if its murderer came in contact with it. What then would happen
here if I, his daughter, his cherished child, loaded with benefits,
enriched with his jewels, warm with his kisses, should be the thing they
accuse me of? Would not the body of the outraged dead burst its very
shroud and repel me?”

I could not answer; in the presence of some scenes the tongue forgets
its functions.

“Oh!” she went on, “if there is a God in heaven who loves justice and
hates a crime, let Him hear me now. If I, by thought or action, with
or without intention, have been the means of bringing this dear head to
this pass; if so much as the shadow of guilt, let alone the substance,
lies upon my heart and across these feeble woman’s hands, may His wrath
speak in righteous retribution to the world, and here, upon the breast
of the dead, let this guilty forehead fall, never to rise again!”

An awed silence followed this invocation; then a long, long sigh of
utter relief rose tremulously from my breast, and all the feelings
hitherto suppressed in my heart burst their bonds, and leaning towards
her I took her hand in mine.

“You do not, cannot believe me tainted by crime now?” she whispered,
the smile which does not stir the lips, but rather emanates from the
countenance, like the flowering of an inner peace, breaking softly out
on cheek and brow.

“Crime!” The word broke uncontrollably from my lips; “crime!”

“No,” she said calmly, “the man does not live who could accuse me of
crime, _here_.”

For reply, I took her hand, which lay in mine, and placed it on the
breast of the dead.

Softly, slowly, gratefully, she bowed her head.

“Now let the struggle come!” she whispered. “There is one who will
believe in me, however dark appearances may be.”



XIII. THE PROBLEM


    “But who would force the soul, tilts with a straw
     Against a champion cased in adamant.”
         Wordsworth.

WHEN we re-entered the parlor below, the first sight that met our eyes
was Mary, standing wrapped in her long cloak in the centre of the room.
She had arrived during our absence, and now awaited us with lifted head
and countenance fixed in its proudest expression. Looking in her face, I
realized what the embarrassment of this meeting must be to these
women, and would have retreated, but something in the attitude of Mary
Leavenworth seemed to forbid my doing so. At the same time, determined
that the opportunity should not pass without some sort of reconcilement
between them, I stepped forward, and, bowing to Mary, said:

“Your cousin has just succeeded in convincing me of her entire
innocence, Miss Leavenworth. I am now ready to join Mr. Gryce, heart and
soul, in finding out the true culprit.”

“I should have thought one look into Eleanore Leavenworth’s face would
have been enough to satisfy you that she is incapable of crime,” was
her unexpected answer; and, lifting her head with a proud gesture, Mary
Leavenworth fixed her eyes steadfastly on mine.

I felt the blood flash to my brow, but before I could speak, her voice
rose again still more coldly than before.

“It is hard for a delicate girl, unused to aught but the most flattering
expressions of regard, to be obliged to assure the world of her
innocence in respect to the committal of a great crime. Eleanore has
my sympathy.” And sweeping her cloak from her shoulders with a quick
gesture, she turned her gaze for the first time upon her cousin.

Instantly Eleanore advanced, as if to meet it; and I could not but feel
that, for some reason, this moment possessed an importance for them
which I was scarcely competent to measure. But if I found myself unable
to realize its significance, I at least responded to its intensity. And
indeed it was an occasion to remember. To behold two such women, either
of whom might be considered the model of her time, face to face
and drawn up in evident antagonism, was a sight to move the dullest
sensibilities. But there was something more in this scene than that. It
was the shock of all the most passionate emotions of the human soul;
the meeting of waters of whose depth and force I could only guess by the
effect. Eleanore was the first to recover. Drawing back with the cold
haughtiness which, alas, I had almost forgotten in the display of later
and softer emotions, she exclaimed:

“There is something better than sympathy, and that is justice”; and
turned, as if to go. “I will confer with you in the reception room, Mr.
Raymond.”

But Mary, springing forward, caught her back with one powerful hand.
“No,” she cried, “you shall confer with _me!_ I have something to say to
you, Eleanore Leavenworth.” And, taking her stand in the centre of the
room, she waited.

I glanced at Eleanore, saw this was no place for me, and hastily
withdrew. For ten long minutes I paced the floor of the reception room,
a prey to a thousand doubts and conjectures. What was the secret of this
home? What had given rise to the deadly mistrust continually manifested
between these cousins, fitted by nature for the completest companionship
and the most cordial friendship? It was not a thing of to-day or
yesterday. No sudden flame could awake such concentrated heat of emotion
as that of which I had just been the unwilling witness. One must go
farther back than this murder to find the root of a mistrust so great
that the struggle it caused made itself felt even where I stood, though
nothing but the faintest murmur came to my ears through the closed
doors.

Presently the drawing-room curtain was raised, and Mary’s voice was
heard in distinct articulation.

“The same roof can never shelter us both after this. To-morrow, you or I
find another home.” And, blushing and panting, she stepped into the
hall and advanced to where I stood. But at the first sight of my face,
a change came over her; all her pride seemed to dissolve, and, flinging
out her hands, as if to ward off scrutiny, she fled from my side, and
rushed weeping up-stairs.

I was yet laboring under the oppression caused by this painful
termination of the strange scene when the parlor curtain was again
lifted, and Eleanore entered the room where I was. Pale but calm,
showing no evidences of the struggle she had just been through, unless
by a little extra weariness about the eyes, she sat down by my side,
and, meeting my gaze with one unfathomable in its courage, said after
a pause: “Tell me where I stand; let me know the worst at once; I fear
that I have not indeed comprehended my own position.”

Rejoiced to hear this acknowledgment from her lips, I hastened to
comply. I began by placing before her the whole case as it appeared
to an unprejudiced person; enlarged upon the causes of suspicion, and
pointed out in what regard some things looked dark against her, which
perhaps to her own mind were easily explainable and of small account;
tried to make her see the importance of her decision, and finally wound
up with an appeal. Would she not confide in me?

“But I thought you were satisfied?” she tremblingly remarked.

“And so I am; but I want the world to be so, too.”

“Ah; now you ask too much! The finger of suspicion never forgets the way
it has once pointed,” she sadly answered. “My name is tainted forever.”

“And you will submit to this, when a word--”

“I am thinking that any word of mine now would make very little
difference,” she murmured.

I looked away, the vision of Mr. Fobbs, in hiding behind the curtains of
the opposite house, recurring painfully to my mind.

“If the affair looks as bad as you say it does,” she pursued, “it is
scarcely probable that Mr. Gryce will care much for any interpretation
of mine in regard to the matter.”

“Mr. Gryce would be glad to know where you procured that key, if only to
assist him in turning his inquiries in the right direction.”

She did not reply, and my spirits sank in renewed depression.

“It is worth your while to satisfy him,” I pursued; “and though it may
compromise some one you desire to shield----”

She rose impetuously. “I shall never divulge to any one how I came in
possession of that key.” And sitting again, she locked her hands in
fixed resolve before her.

I rose in my turn and paced the floor, the fang of an unreasoning
jealousy striking deep into my heart.

“Mr. Raymond, if the worst should come, and all who love me should plead
on bended knees for me to tell, I will never do it.”

“Then,” said I, determined not to disclose my secret thought, but
equally resolved to find out if possible her motive for this silence,
“you desire to defeat the cause of justice.”

She neither spoke nor moved.

“Miss Leavenworth,” I now said, “this determined shielding of another at
the expense of your own good name is no doubt generous of you; but
your friends and the lovers of truth and justice cannot accept such a
sacrifice.”

She started haughtily. “Sir!” she said.

“If you will not assist us,” I went on calmly, but determinedly, “we
must do without your aid. After the scene I have just witnessed above;
after the triumphant conviction which you have forced upon me, not only
of your innocence, but your horror of the crime and its consequences, I
should feel myself less than a man if I did not sacrifice even your own
good opinion, in urging your cause, and clearing your character from
this foul aspersion.”

Again that heavy silence.

“What do you propose to do?” she asked, at last.

Crossing the room, I stood before her. “I propose to relieve you utterly
and forever from suspicion, by finding out and revealing to the world
the true culprit.”

I expected to see her recoil, so positive had I become by this time
as to who that culprit was. But instead of that, she merely folded her
hands still more tightly and exclaimed:

“I doubt if you will be able to do that, Mr. Raymond.”

“Doubt if I will be able to put my finger upon the guilty man, or doubt
if I will be able to bring him to justice?”

“I doubt,” she said with strong effort, “if any one ever knows who is
the guilty person in this case.”

“There is one who knows,” I said with a desire to test her.

“One?”

“The girl Hannah is acquainted with the mystery of that night’s evil
doings, Miss Leavenworth. Find Hannah, and we find one who can point out
to us the assassin of your uncle.”

“That is mere supposition,” she said; but I saw the blow had told.

“Your cousin has offered a large reward for the girl, and the whole
country is on the lookout. Within a week we shall see her in our midst.”

A change took place in her expression and bearing.

“The girl cannot help me,” she said.

Baffled by her manner, I drew back. “Is there anything or anybody that
can?”

She slowly looked away.

“Miss Leavenworth,” I continued with renewed earnestness, “you have no
brother to plead with you, you have no mother to guide you; let me then
entreat, in default of nearer and dearer friends, that you will rely
sufficiently upon me to tell me one thing.”

“What is it?” she asked.

“Whether you took the paper imputed to you from the library table?”

She did not instantly respond, but sat looking earnestly before her with
an intentness which seemed to argue that she was weighing the question
as well as her reply. Finally, turning toward me, she said:

“In answering you, I speak in confidence. Mr. Raymond, I did.”

Crushing back the sigh of despair that arose to my lips, I went on.

“I will not inquire what the paper was,”--she waved her hand
deprecatingly,--“but this much more you will tell me. Is that paper
still in existence?”

She looked me steadily in the face.

“It is not.”

I could with difficulty forbear showing my disappointment. “Miss
Leavenworth,” I now said, “it may seem cruel for me to press you at this
time; nothing less than my strong realization of the peril in which you
stand would induce me to run the risk of incurring your displeasure by
asking what under other circumstances would seem puerile and insulting
questions. You have told me one thing which I strongly desired to know;
will you also inform me what it was you heard that night while sitting
in your room, between the time of Mr. Harwell’s going up-stairs and the
closing of the library door, of which you made mention at the inquest?”

I had pushed my inquiries too far, and I saw it immediately.

“Mr. Raymond,” she returned, “influenced by my desire not to appear
utterly ungrateful to you, I have been led to reply in confidence to one
of your urgent appeals; but I can go no further. Do not ask me to.”

Stricken to the heart by her look of reproach, I answered with some
sadness that her wishes should be respected. “Not but what I intend to
make every effort in my power to discover the true author of this crime.
That is a sacred duty which I feel myself called upon to perform; but I
will ask you no more questions, nor distress you with further appeals.
What is done shall be done without your assistance, and with no other
hope than that in the event of my success you will acknowledge my
motives to have been pure and my action disinterested.”

“I am ready to acknowledge that now,” she began, but paused and looked
with almost agonized entreaty in my face. “Mr. Raymond, cannot you leave
things as they are? Won’t you? I don’t ask for assistance, nor do I want
it; I would rather----”

But I would not listen. “Guilt has no right to profit by the generosity
of the guiltless. The hand that struck this blow shall not be
accountable for the loss of a noble woman’s honor and happiness as well.

“I shall do what I can, Miss Leavenworth.”

As I walked down the avenue that night, feeling like an adventurous
traveller that in a moment of desperation has set his foot upon a plank
stretching in narrow perspective over a chasm of immeasurable depth,
this problem evolved itself from the shadows before me: How, with no
other clue than the persuasion that Eleanore Leavenworth was engaged in
shielding another at the expense of her own good name, I was to
combat the prejudices of Mr. Gryce, find out the real assassin of Mr.
Leavenworth, and free an innocent woman from the suspicion that had, not
without some show of reason, fallen upon her?



BOOK II. HENRY CLAVERING



XIV. MR. GRYCE AT HOME


    “Nay, but hear me.”
         Measure for Measure.

THAT the guilty person for whom Eleanore Leavenworth stood ready to
sacrifice herself was one for whom she had formerly cherished affection,
I could no longer doubt; love, or the strong sense of duty growing out
of love, being alone sufficient to account for such determined action.
Obnoxious as it was to all my prejudices, one name alone, that of the
commonplace secretary, with his sudden heats and changeful manners, his
odd ways and studied self-possession, would recur to my mind whenever I
asked myself who this person could be.

Not that, without the light which had been thrown upon the affair by
Eleanore’s strange behavior, I should have selected this man as one in
any way open to suspicion; the peculiarity of his manner at the inquest
not being marked enough to counteract the improbability of one in his
relations to the deceased finding sufficient motive for a crime so
manifestly without favorable results to himself. But if love had entered
as a factor into the affair, what might not be expected? James Harwell,
simple amanuensis to a retired tea-merchant, was one man; James Harwell,
swayed by passion for a woman beautiful as Eleanore Leavenworth, was
another; and in placing him upon the list of those parties open to
suspicion I felt I was only doing what was warranted by a proper
consideration of probabilities.

But, between casual suspicion and actual proof, what a gulf! To believe
James Harwell capable of guilt, and to find evidence enough to accuse
him of it, were two very different things. I felt myself instinctively
shrink from the task, before I had fully made up my mind to attempt it;
some relenting thought of his unhappy position, if innocent, forcing
itself upon me, and making my very distrust of him seem personally
ungenerous if not absolutely unjust. If I had liked the man better, I
should not have been so ready to look upon him with doubt.

But Eleanore must be saved at all hazards. Once delivered up to the
blight of suspicion, who could tell what the result might be; the arrest
of her person perhaps,--a thing which, once accomplished, would cast a
shadow over her young life that it would take more than time to dispel.
The accusation of an impecunious secretary would be less horrible than
this. I determined to make an early call upon Mr. Gryce.

Meanwhile the contrasted pictures of Eleanore standing with her hand
upon the breast of the dead, her face upraised and mirroring a glory,
I could not recall without emotion; and Mary, fleeing a short half-hour
later indignantly from her presence, haunted me and kept me awake long
after midnight. It was like a double vision of light and darkness that,
while contrasting, neither assimilated nor harmonized. I could not flee
from it. Do what I would, the two pictures followed me, filling my soul
with alternate hope and distrust, till I knew not whether to place my
hand with Eleanore on the breast of the dead, and swear implicit faith
in her truth and purity, or to turn my face like Mary, and fly from what
I could neither comprehend nor reconcile.

Expectant of difficulty, I started next morning upon my search for Mr.
Gryce, with strong determination not to allow myself to become flurried
by disappointment nor discouraged by premature failure. My business was
to save Eleanore Leavenworth; and to do that, it was necessary for me to
preserve, not only my equanimity, but my self-possession. The worst
fear I anticipated was that matters would reach a crisis before I could
acquire the right, or obtain the opportunity, to interfere. However, the
fact of Mr. Leavenworth’s funeral being announced for that day gave
me some comfort in that direction; my knowledge of Mr. Gryce being
sufficient, as I thought, to warrant me in believing he would wait till
after that ceremony before proceeding to extreme measures.

I do not know that I had any very definite ideas of what a detective’s
home should be; but when I stood before the neat three-story brick house
to which I had been directed, I could not but acknowledge there was
something in the aspect of its half-open shutters, over closely drawn
curtains of spotless purity, highly suggestive of the character of its
inmate.

A pale-looking youth, with vivid locks of red hair hanging straight down
over either ear, answered my rather nervous ring. To my inquiry as to
whether Mr. Gryce was in, he gave a kind of snort which might have meant
no, but which I took to mean yes.

“My name is Raymond, and I wish to see him.”

He gave me one glance that took in every detail of my person and
apparel, and pointed to a door at the head of the stairs. Not waiting
for further directions, I hastened up, knocked at the door he had
designated, and went in. The broad back of Mr. Gryce, stooping above a
desk that might have come over in the _Mayflower,_ confronted me.

“Well!” he exclaimed; “this is an honor.” And rising, he opened with a
squeak and shut with a bang the door of an enormous stove that occupied
the centre of the room. “Rather chilly day, eh?”

“Yes,” I returned, eyeing him closely to see if he was in a
communicative mood. “But I have had but little time to consider the
state of the weather. My anxiety in regard to this murder----”

“To be sure,” he interrupted, fixing his eyes upon the poker, though
not with any hostile intention, I am sure. “A puzzling piece of business
enough. But perhaps it is an open book to you. I see you have something
to communicate.”

“I have, though I doubt if it is of the nature you expect. Mr. Gryce,
since I saw you last, my convictions upon a certain point have been
strengthened into an absolute belief. The object of your suspicions is
an innocent woman.”

If I had expected him to betray any surprise at this, I was destined to
be disappointed. “That is a very pleasing belief,” he observed. “I honor
you for entertaining it, Mr. Raymond.”

I suppressed a movement of anger. “So thoroughly is it mine,” I went on,
in the determination to arouse him in some way, “that I have come here
to-day to ask you in the name of justice and common humanity to suspend
action in that direction till we can convince ourselves there is no
truer scent to go upon.”

But there was no more show of curiosity than before. “Indeed!” he cried;
“that is a singular request to come from a man like you.”

I was not to be discomposed, “Mr. Gryce,” I went on, “a woman’s name,
once tarnished, remains so forever. Eleanore Leavenworth has too many
noble traits to be thoughtlessly dealt with in so momentous a crisis. If
you will give me your attention, I promise you shall not regret it.”

He smiled, and allowed his eyes to roam from the poker to the arm of my
chair. “Very well,” he remarked; “I hear you; say on.”

I drew my notes from my pocketbook, and laid them on the table.

“What! memoranda?” he exclaimed. “Unsafe, very; never put your plans on
paper.”

Taking no heed of the interruption, I went on.

“Mr. Gryce, I have had fuller opportunities than yourself for studying
this woman. I have seen her in a position which no guilty person could
occupy, and I am assured, beyond all doubt, that not only her hands, but
her heart, are pure from this crime. She may have some knowledge of its
secrets; that I do not presume to deny. The key seen in her possession
would refute me if I did. But what if she has? You can never wish to see
so lovely a being brought to shame for withholding information which she
evidently considers it her duty to keep back, when by a little patient
finesse we may succeed in our purposes without it.”

“But,” interposed the detective, “say this is so; how are we to arrive
at the knowledge we want without following out the only clue which has
yet been given us?”

“You will never reach it by following out any clue given you by Eleanore
Leavenworth.”

His eyebrows lifted expressively, but he said nothing.

“Miss Eleanore Leavenworth has been used by some one acquainted with her
firmness, generosity, and perhaps love. Let us discover who possesses
sufficient power over her to control her to this extent, and we find the
man we seek.”

“Humph!” came from Mr. Gryce’s compressed lips, and no more.

Determined that he should speak, I waited.

“You have, then, some one in your mind”; he remarked at last, almost
flippantly.

“I mention no names,” I returned. “All I want is further time.”

“You are, then, intending to make a personal business of this matter?”

“I am.”

He gave a long, low whistle. “May I ask,” he inquired at length,
“whether you expect to work entirely by yourself; or whether, if a
suitable coadjutor were provided, you would disdain his assistance and
slight his advice?”

“I desire nothing more than to have you for my colleague.”

The smile upon his face deepened ironically. “You must feel very sure of
yourself!” said he.

“I am very sure of Miss Leavenworth.”

The reply seemed to please him. “Let us hear what you propose doing.”

I did not immediately answer. The truth was, I had formed no plans.

“It seems to me,” he continued, “that you have undertaken a rather
difficult task for an amateur. Better leave it to me, Mr. Raymond;
better leave it to me.”

“I am sure,” I returned, “that nothing would please me better----”

“Not,” he interrupted, “but that a word from you now and then would
be welcome. I am not an egotist. I am open to suggestions: as, for
instance, now, if you could conveniently inform me of all you have
yourself seen and heard in regard to this matter, I should be most happy
to listen.”

Relieved to find him so amenable, I asked myself what I really had to
tell; not so much that he would consider vital. However, it would not do
to hesitate now.

“Mr. Gryce,” said I, “I have but few facts to add to those already known
to you. Indeed, I am more moved by convictions than facts. That Eleanore
Leavenworth never committed this crime, I am assured. That, on the other
hand, the real perpetrator is known to her, I am equally certain;
and that for some reason she considers it a sacred duty to shield the
assassin, even at the risk of her own safety, follows as a matter
of course from the facts. Now, with such data, it cannot be a very
difficult task for you or me to work out satisfactorily, to our own
minds at least, who this person can be. A little more knowledge of the
family--”

“You know nothing of its secret history, then?”

“Nothing.”

“Do not even know whether either of these girls is engaged to be
married?”

“I do not,” I returned, wincing at this direct expression of my own
thoughts.

He remained a moment silent. “Mr. Raymond,” he cried at last, “have
you any idea of the disadvantages under which a detective labors? For
instance, now, you imagine I can insinuate myself into all sorts of
society, perhaps; but you are mistaken. Strange as it may appear, I have
never by any possibility of means succeeded with one class of persons at
all. I cannot pass myself off for a gentleman. Tailors and barbers are
no good; I am always found out.”

He looked so dejected I could scarcely forbear smiling, notwithstanding
my secret care and anxiety.

“I have even employed a French valet, who understood dancing and
whiskers; but it was all of no avail. The first gentleman I approached
stared at me,--real gentleman, I mean, none of your American
dandies,--and I had no stare to return; I had forgotten that emergency
in my confabs with Pierre Catnille Marie Make-face.”

Amused, but a little discomposed by this sudden turn in the
conversation, I looked at Mr. Gryce inquiringly.

“Now you, I dare say, have no trouble? Was born one, perhaps. Can even
ask a lady to dance without blushing, eh?”

“Well,--” I commenced.

“Just so,” he replied; “now, I can’t. I can enter a house, bow to the
mistress of it, let her be as elegant as she will, so long as I have
a writ of arrest in my hand, or some such professional matter upon my
mind; but when it comes to visiting in kid gloves, raising a glass of
champagne in response to a toast--and such like, I am absolutely good
for nothing.” And he plunged his two hands into his hair, and looked
dolefully at the head of the cane I carried in my hand. “But it is much
the same with the whole of us. When we are in want of a gentleman to
work for us, we have to go outside of our profession.”

I began to see what he was driving at; but held my peace, vaguely
conscious I was likely to prove a necessity to him, after all.

“Mr. Raymond,” he now said, almost abruptly; “do you know a gentleman by
the name of Clavering residing at present at the Hoffman House?”

“Not that I am aware of.”

“He is very polished in his manners; would you mind making his
acquaintance?”

I followed Mr. Gryce’s example, and stared at the chimney-piece. “I
cannot answer till I understand matters a little better,” I returned at
length.

“There is not much to understand. Mr. Henry Clavering, a gentleman and
a man of the world, resides at the Hoffman House. He is a stranger in
town, without being strange; drives, walks, smokes, but never visits;
looks at the ladies, but is never seen to bow to one. In short, a
person whom it is desirable to know; but whom, being a proud man,
with something of the old-world prejudice against Yankee freedom and
forwardness, I could no more approach in the way of acquaintance than I
could the Emperor of Austria.”

“And you wish----”

“He would make a very agreeable companion for a rising young lawyer
of good family and undoubted respectability. I have no doubt, if you
undertook to cultivate him, you would find him well worth the trouble.”

“But----”

“Might even desire to take him into familiar relations; to confide in
him, and----”

“Mr. Gryce,” I hastily interrupted; “I can never consent to plot for any
man’s friendship for the sake of betraying him to the police.”

“It is essential to your plans to make the acquaintance of Mr.
Clavering,” he dryly replied.

“Oh!” I returned, a light breaking in upon me; “he has some connection
with this case, then?”

Mr. Gryce smoothed his coat-sleeve thoughtfully. “I don’t know as it
will be necessary for you to betray him. You wouldn’t object to being
introduced to him?”

“No.”

“Nor, if you found him pleasant, to converse with him?”

“No.”

“Not even if, in the course of conversation, you should come across
something that might serve as a clue in your efforts to save Eleanore
Leavenworth?”

The no I uttered this time was less assured; the part of a spy was the
very last one I desired to play in the coming drama.

“Well, then,” he went on, ignoring the doubtful tone in which my assent
had been given, “I advise you to immediately take up your quarters at
the Hoffman House.”

“I doubt if that would do,” I said. “If I am not mistaken, I have
already seen this gentleman, and spoken to him.”

“Where?”

“Describe him first.”

“Well, he is tall, finely formed, of very upright carriage, with a
handsome dark face, brown hair streaked with gray, a piercing eye, and a
smooth address. A very imposing personage, I assure you.”

“I have reason to think I have seen him,” I returned; and in a few words
told him when and where.

“Humph!” said he at the conclusion; “he is evidently as much interested
in you as we are in him.

“How ‘s that? I think I see,” he added, after a moment’s thought.
“Pity you spoke to him; may have created an unfavorable impression; and
everything depends upon your meeting without any distrust.”

He rose and paced the floor.

“Well, we must move slowly, that is all. Give him a chance to see you in
other and better lights. Drop into the Hoffman House reading-room.
Talk with the best men you meet while there; but not too much, or too
indiscriminately. Mr. Clavering is fastidious, and will not feel honored
by the attentions of one who is hail-fellow-well-met with everybody.
Show yourself for what you are, and leave all advances to him; he ‘ll
make them.”

“Supposing we are under a mistake, and the man I met on the corner of
Thirty-seventh Street was not Mr. Clavering?”

“I should be greatly surprised, that’s all.”

Not knowing what further objection to make, I remained silent.

“And this head of mine would have to put on its thinking-cap,” he
pursued jovially.

“Mr. Gryce,” I now said, anxious to show that all this talk about an
unknown party had not served to put my own plans from my mind, “there is
one person of whom we have not spoken.”

“No?” he exclaimed softly, wheeling around until his broad back
confronted me. “And who may that be?”

“Why, who but Mr.--” I could get no further. What right had I to
mention any man’s name in this connection, without possessing sufficient
evidence against him to make such mention justifiable? “I beg your
pardon,” said I; “but I think I will hold to my first impulse, and speak
no names.”

“Harwell?” he ejaculated easily.

The quick blush rising to my face gave an involuntary assent.

“I see no reason why we shouldn’t speak of him,” he went on; “that is,
if there is anything to be gained by it.”

“His testimony at the inquest was honest, you think?”

“It has not been disproved.”

“He is a peculiar man.”

“And so am I.”

I felt myself slightly nonplussed; and, conscious of appearing at a
disadvantage, lifted my hat from the table and prepared to take my
leave; but, suddenly thinking of Hannah, turned and asked if there was
any news of her.

He seemed to debate with himself, hesitating so long that I began to
doubt if this man intended to confide in me, after all, when suddenly he
brought his two hands down before him and exclaimed vehemently:

“The evil one himself is in this business! If the earth had opened and
swallowed up this girl, she couldn’t have more effectually disappeared.”

I experienced a sinking of the heart. Eleanore had said: “Hannah can do
nothing for me.” Could it be that the girl was indeed gone, and forever?

“I have innumerable agents at work, to say nothing of the general
public; and yet not so much as a whisper has come to me in regard to her
whereabouts or situation. I am only afraid we shall find her floating in
the river some fine morning, without a confession in her pocket.”

“Everything hangs upon that girl’s testimony,” I remarked.

He gave a short grunt. “What does Miss Leavenworth say about it?”

“That the girl cannot help her.”

I thought he looked a trifle surprised at this, but he covered it with a
nod and an exclamation. “She must be found for all that,” said he, “and
shall, if I have to send out Q.”

“Q?”

“An agent of mine who is a living interrogation point; so we call him
_Q,_ which is short for query.” Then, as I turned again to go: “When the
contents of the will are made known, come to me.”

The will! I had forgotten the will.



XV. WAYS OPENING


    “It is not and it cannot come to good.”
         Hamlet.

I ATTENDED the funeral of Mr. Leavenworth, but did not see the
ladies before or after the ceremony. I, however, had a few moments’
conversation with Mr. Harwell; which, without eliciting anything new,
provided me with food for abundant conjecture. For he had asked, almost
at first greeting, if I had seen the _Telegram_ of the night before;
and when I responded in the affirmative, turned such a look of mingled
distress and appeal upon me, I was tempted to ask how such a frightful
insinuation against a young lady of reputation and breeding could ever
have got into the papers. It was his reply that struck me.

“That the guilty party might be driven by remorse to own himself the
true culprit.”

A curious remark to come from a person who had no knowledge or
suspicion of the criminal and his character; and I would have pushed
the conversation further, but the secretary, who was a man of few words,
drew off at this, and could be induced to say no more. Evidently it was
my business to cultivate Mr. Clavering, or any one else who could throw
any light upon the secret history of these girls.

That evening I received notice that Mr. Veeley had arrived home, but
was in no condition to consult with me upon so painful a subject as
the murder of Mr. Leavenworth. Also a line from Eleanore, giving me her
address, but requesting me at the same time not to call unless I had
something of importance to communicate, as she was too ill to receive
visitors. The little note affected me. Ill, alone, and in a strange
home,--‘twas pitiful!

The next day, pursuant to the wishes of Mr. Gryce, in I stepped into the
Hoffman House, and took a seat in the reading room. I had been there but
a few moments when a gentleman entered whom I immediately recognized
as the same I had spoken to on the corner of Thirty-seventh Street
and Sixth Avenue. He must have remembered me also, for he seemed to be
slightly embarrassed at seeing me; but, recovering himself, took up a
paper and soon became to all appearance lost in its contents, though I
could feel his handsome black eye upon me, studying my features,
figure, apparel, and movements with a degree of interest which equally
astonished and disconcerted me. I felt that it would be injudicious on
my part to return his scrutiny, anxious as I was to meet his eye and
learn what emotion had so fired his curiosity in regard to a perfect
stranger; so I rose, and, crossing to an old friend of mine who sat at
a table opposite, commenced a desultory conversation, in the course of
which I took occasion to ask if he knew who the handsome stranger was.
Dick Furbish was a society man, and knew everybody.

“His name is Clavering, and he comes from London. I don’t know anything
more about him, though he is to be seen everywhere except in private
houses. He has not been received into society yet; waiting for letters
of introduction, perhaps.”

“A gentleman?”

“Undoubtedly.”

“One you speak to?”

“Oh, yes; I talk to him, but the conversation is very one-sided.”

I could not help smiling at the grimace with which Dick accompanied this
remark. “Which same goes to prove,” he went on, “that he is the real
thing.”

Laughing outright this time, I left him, and in a few minutes sauntered
from the room.

As I mingled again with the crowd on Broadway, I found myself wondering
immensely over this slight experience. That this unknown gentleman from
London, who went everywhere except into private houses, could be in
any way connected with the affair I had so at heart, seemed not only
improbable but absurd; and for the first time I felt tempted to doubt
the sagacity of Mr. Gryce in recommending him to my attention.

The next day I repeated the experiment, but with no greater success
than before. Mr. Clavering came into the room, but, seeing me, did
not remain. I began to realize it was no easy matter to make his
acquaintance. To atone for my disappointment, I called on Mary
Leavenworth in the evening. She received me with almost a sister-like
familiarity.

“Ah,” she cried, after introducing me to an elderly lady at her
side,--some connection of the family, I believe, who had come to remain
with her for a while,--“you are here to tell me Hannah is found; is it
not so?”

I shook my head, sorry to disappoint her. “No,” said I; “not yet.”

“But Mr. Gryce was here to-day, and he told me he hoped she would be
heard from within twenty-four hours.”

“Mr. Gryce here!”

“Yes; came to report how matters were progressing,--not that they seemed
to have advanced very far.”

“You could hardly have expected that yet. You must not be so easily
discouraged.”

“But I cannot help it; every day, every hour that passes in this
uncertainty, is like a mountain weight here”; and she laid one trembling
hand upon her bosom. “I would have the whole world at work. I would
leave no stone unturned; I----”

“What would you do?”

“Oh, I don’t know,” she cried, her whole manner suddenly changing;
“nothing, perhaps.” Then, before I could reply to this: “Have you seen
Eleanore to-day?”

I answered in the negative.

She did not seem satisfied, but waited till her friend left the room
before saying more. Then, with an earnest look, inquired if I knew
whether Eleanore was well.

“I fear she is not,” I returned.

“It is a great trial to me, Eleanore being away. Not,” she resumed,
noting, perhaps, my incredulous look, “that I would have you think I
wish to disclaim my share in bringing about the present unhappy state
of things. I am willing to acknowledge I was the first to propose a
separation. But it is none the easier to bear on that account.”

“It is not as hard for you as for her,” said I.

“Not as hard? Why? because she is left comparatively poor, while I am
rich--is that what you would say? Ah,” she went on, without waiting for
my answer, “would I could persuade Eleanore to share my riches with me!
Willingly would I bestow upon her the half I have received; but I fear
she could never be induced to accept so much as a dollar from me.”

“Under the circumstances it would be better for her not to.”

“Just what I thought; yet it would ease me of a great weight if she
would. This fortune, suddenly thrown into my lap, sits like an incubus
upon me, Mr. Raymond. When the will was read to-day which makes me
possessor of so much wealth, I could not but feel that a heavy, blinding
pall had settled upon me, spotted with blood and woven of horrors. Ah,
how different from the feelings with which I have been accustomed to
anticipate this day! For, Mr. Raymond,” she went on, with a hurried
gasp, “dreadful as it seems now, I have been reared to look forward to
this hour with pride, if not with actual longing. Money has been made
so much of in my small world. Not that I wish in this evil time of
retribution to lay blame upon any one; least of all upon my uncle; but
from the day, twelve years ago, when for the first time he took us in
his arms, and looking down upon our childish faces, exclaimed: ‘The
light-haired one pleases me best; she shall be my heiress,’ I have
been petted, cajoled, and spoiled; called little princess, and uncle’s
darling, till it is only strange I retain in this prejudiced breast any
of the impulses of generous womanhood; yes, though I was aware from the
first that whim alone had raised this distinction between myself and
cousin; a distinction which superior beauty, worth, or accomplishments
could never have drawn; Eleanore being more than my equal in all these
things.” Pausing, she choked back the sudden sob that rose in her
throat, with an effort at self-control which was at once touching and
admirable. Then, while my eyes stole to her face, murmured in a low,
appealing voice: “If I have faults, you see there is some slight excuse
for them; arrogance, vanity, and selfishness being considered in the gay
young heiress as no more than so many assertions of a laudable dignity.
Ah! ah,” she bitterly exclaimed “money alone has been the ruin of us
all!” Then, with a falling of her voice: “And now it has come to me
with its heritage of evil, and I--I would give it all for--But this is
weakness! I have no right to afflict you with my griefs. Pray forget all
I have said, Mr. Raymond, or regard my complaints as the utterances of
an unhappy girl loaded down with sorrows and oppressed by the weight of
many perplexities and terrors.”

“But I do not wish to forget,” I replied. “You have spoken some good
words, manifested much noble emotion. Your possessions cannot but prove
a blessing to you if you enter upon them with such feelings as these.”

But, with a quick gesture, she ejaculated: “Impossible! they cannot
prove a blessing.” Then, as if startled at her own words, bit her lip
and hastily added: “Very great wealth is never a blessing.

“And now,” said she, with a total change of manner, “I wish to
address you on a subject which may strike you as ill-timed, but which,
nevertheless, I must mention, if the purpose I have at heart is ever to
be accomplished. My uncle, as you know, was engaged at the time of his
death in writing a book on Chinese customs and prejudices. It was a work
which he was anxious to see published, and naturally I desire to carry
out his wishes; but, in order to do so, I find it necessary not only
to interest myself in the matter now,--Mr. Harwell’s services being
required, and it being my wish to dismiss that gentleman as soon as
possible--but to find some one competent to supervise its completion.
Now I have heard,--I have been told,--that you were the one of all
others to do this; and though it is difficult if not improper for me to
ask so great a favor of one who but a week ago was a perfect stranger to
me, it would afford me the keenest pleasure if you would consent to look
over this manuscript and tell me what remains to be done.”

The timidity with which these words were uttered proved her to be in
earnest, and I could not but wonder at the strange coincidence of this
request with my secret wishes; it having been a question with me for
some time how I was to gain free access to this house without in any way
compromising either its inmates or myself. I did not know then that Mr.
Gryce had been the one to recommend me to her favor in this respect.
But, whatever satisfaction I may have experienced, I felt myself in duty
bound to plead my incompetence for a task so entirely out of the line
of my profession, and to suggest the employment of some one better
acquainted with such matters than myself. But she would not listen to
me.

“Mr. Harwell has notes and memoranda in plenty,” she exclaimed, “and
can give you all the information necessary. You will have no difficulty;
indeed, you will not.”

“But cannot Mr. Harwell himself do all that is requisite? He seems to be
a clever and diligent young man.”

But she shook her head. “He thinks he can; but I know uncle never
trusted him with the composition of a single sentence.”

“But perhaps he will not be pleased,--Mr. Harwell, I mean--with the
intrusion of a stranger into his work.”

She opened her eyes with astonishment. “That makes no difference,” she
cried. “Mr. Harwell is in my pay, and has nothing to say about it.
But he will not object. I have already consulted him, and he expresses
himself as satisfied with the arrangement.”

“Very well,” said I; “then I will promise to consider the subject. I
can at any rate look over the manuscript and give you my opinion of its
condition.”

“Oh, thank you,” said she, with the prettiest gesture of satisfaction.
“How kind you are, and what can I ever do to repay you? But would you
like to see Mr. Harwell himself?” and she moved towards the door; but
suddenly paused, whispering, with a short shudder of remembrance: “He is
in the library; do you mind?”

Crushing down the sick qualm that arose at the mention of that spot, I
replied in the negative.

“The papers are all there, and he says he can work better in his old
place than anywhere else; but if you wish, I can call him down.”

But I would not listen to this, and myself led the way to the foot of
the stairs.

“I have sometimes thought I would lock up that room,” she hurriedly
observed; “but something restrains me. I can no more do so than I can
leave this house; a power beyond myself forces me to confront all its
horrors. And yet I suffer continually from terror. Sometimes, in the
darkness of the night--But I will not distress you. I have already said
too much; come,” and with a sudden lift of the head she mounted the
stairs.

Mr. Harwell was seated, when we entered that fatal room, in the one
chair of all others I expected to see unoccupied; and as I beheld his
meagre figure bending where such a little while before his eyes had
encountered the outstretched form of his murdered employer, I could not
but marvel over the unimaginativeness of the man who, in the face of
such memories, could not only appropriate that very spot for his own
use, but pursue his avocations there with so much calmness and evident
precision. But in another moment I discovered that the disposition of
the light in the room made that one seat the only desirable one for his
purpose; and instantly my wonder changed to admiration at this quiet
surrender of personal feeling to the requirements of the occasion.

He looked up mechanically as we came in, but did not rise, his
countenance wearing the absorbed expression which bespeaks the
preoccupied mind.

“He is utterly oblivious,” Mary whispered; “that is a way of his.
I doubt if he knows who or what it is that has disturbed him.” And,
advancing into the room, she passed across his line of vision, as if
to call attention to herself, and said: “I have brought Mr. Raymond
up-stairs to see you, Mr. Harwell. He has been so kind as to accede to
my wishes in regard to the completion of the manuscript now before you.”

Slowly Mr. Harwell rose, wiped his pen, and put it away; manifesting,
however, a reluctance in doing so that proved this interference to be
in reality anything but agreeable to him. Observing this, I did not wait
for him to speak, but took up the pile of manuscript, arranged in one
mass on the table, saying:

“This seems to be very clearly written; if you will excuse me, I will
glance over it and thus learn something of its general character.”

He bowed, uttered a word or so of acquiescence, then, as Mary left the
room, awkwardly reseated himself, and took up his pen.

Instantly the manuscript and all connected with it vanished from my
thoughts; and Eleanore, her situation, and the mystery surrounding
this family, returned upon me with renewed force. Looking the secretary
steadily in the face, I remarked:

“I am very glad of this opportunity of seeing you a moment alone, Mr.
Harwell, if only for the purpose of saying----”

“Anything in regard to the murder?”

“Yes,” I began.

“Then you must pardon me,” he respectfully but firmly replied. “It is
a disagreeable subject which I cannot bear to think of, much less
discuss.”

Disconcerted and, what was more, convinced of the impossibility of
obtaining any information from this man, I abandoned the attempt; and,
taking up the manuscript once more, endeavored to master in some small
degree the nature of its contents. Succeeding beyond my hopes, I opened
a short conversation with him in regard to it, and finally, coming to
the conclusion I could accomplish what Miss Leavenworth desired, left
him and descended again to the reception room.

When, an hour or so later, I withdrew from the house, it was with the
feeling that one obstacle had been removed from my path. If I failed
in what I had undertaken, it would not be from lack of opportunity of
studying the inmates of this dwelling.



XVI. THE WILL OF A MILLIONAIRE


    “Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
     Which we ascribe to Heaven.”
         All’s Well that Ends Well.

THE next morning’s _Tribune_ contained a synopsis of Mr. Leavenworth’s
will. Its provisions were a surprise to me; for, while the bulk of his
immense estate was, according to the general understanding, bequeathed
to his niece, Mary, it appeared by a codicil, attached to his will some
five years before, that Eleanore was not entirely forgotten, she having
been made the recipient of a legacy which, if not large, was at least
sufficient to support her in comfort. After listening to the various
comments of my associates on the subject, I proceeded to the house
of Mr. Gryce, in obedience to his request to call upon him as soon as
possible after the publication of the will.

“Good-morning,” he remarked as I entered, but whether addressing me or
the frowning top of the desk before which he was sitting it would be
difficult to say. “Won’t you sit?” nodding with a curious back movement
of his head towards a chair in his rear.

I drew up the chair to his side. “I am curious to know,” I remarked,
“what you have to say about this will, and its probable effect upon the
matters we have in hand.”

“What is your own idea in regard to it?”

“Well, I think upon the whole it will make but little difference in
public opinion. Those who thought Eleanore guilty before will feel that
they possess now greater cause than ever to doubt her innocence; while
those who have hitherto hesitated to suspect her will not consider
that the comparatively small amount bequeathed her would constitute an
adequate motive for so great a crime.”

“You have heard men talk; what seems to be the general opinion among
those you converse with?”

“That the motive of the tragedy will be found in the partiality shown in
so singular a will, though how, they do not profess to know.”

Mr. Gryce suddenly became interested in one of the small drawers before
him.

“And all this has not set you thinking?” said he.

“Thinking,” returned I. “I don’t know what you mean. I am sure I have
done nothing but think for the last three days. I----”

“Of course--of course,” he cried. “I didn’t mean to say anything
disagreeable. And so you have seen Mr. Clavering?”

“Just seen him; no more.”

“And are you going to assist Mr. Harwell in finishing Mr. Leavenworth’s
book?”

“How did you learn that?”

He only smiled.

“Yes,” said I; “Miss Leavenworth has requested me to do her that little
favor.”

“She is a queenly creature!” he exclaimed in a burst of enthusiasm.
Then, with an instant return to his business-like tone: “You are going
to have opportunities, Mr. Raymond. Now there are two things I want you
to find out; first, what is the connection between these ladies and Mr.
Clavering----”

“There is a connection, then?”

“Undoubtedly. And secondly, what is the cause of the unfriendly feeling
which evidently exists between the cousins.”

I drew back and pondered the position offered me. A spy in a fair
woman’s house! How could I reconcile it with my natural instincts as a
gentleman?

“Cannot you find some one better adapted to learn these secrets for
you?” I asked at length. “The part of a spy is anything but agreeable to
my feelings, I assure you.”

Mr. Gryce’s brows fell.

“I will assist Mr. Harwell in his efforts to arrange Mr. Leavenworth’s
manuscript for the press,” I said; “I will give Mr. Clavering an
opportunity to form my acquaintance; and I will listen, if Miss
Leavenworth chooses to make me her confidant in any way. But any
hearkening at doors, surprises, unworthy feints or ungentlemanly
subterfuges, I herewith disclaim as outside of my province; my task
being to find out what I can in an open way, and yours to search into
the nooks and corners of this wretched business.”

“In other words, you are to play the hound, and I the mole; just so, I
know what belongs to a gentleman.”

“And now,” said I, “what news of Hannah?”

He shook both hands high in the air. “None.”

I cannot say I was greatly surprised, that evening, when, upon
descending from an hour’s labor with Mr. Harwell, I encountered Miss
Leavenworth standing at the foot of the stairs. There had been something
in her bearing, the night before, which prepared me for another
interview this evening, though her manner of commencing it was a
surprise. “Mr. Raymond,” said she, with an air of marked embarrassment,
“I want to ask you a question. I believe you to be a good man, and I
know you will answer me conscientiously. As a brother would,” she added,
lifting her eyes for a moment to my face. “I know it will sound strange;
but remember, I have no adviser but you, and I must ask some one. Mr.
Raymond, do you think a person could do something that was very wrong,
and yet grow to be thoroughly good afterwards?”

“Certainly,” I replied; “if he were truly sorry for his fault.”

“But say it was more than a fault; say it was an actual harm; would not
the memory of that one evil hour cast a lasting shadow over one’s life?”

“That depends upon the nature of the harm and its effect upon others.
If one had irreparably injured a fellow-being, it would be hard for a
person of sensitive nature to live a happy life afterwards; though the
fact of not living a happy life ought to be no reason why one should not
live a good life.”

“But to live a good life would it be necessary to reveal the evil you
had done? Cannot one go on and do right without confessing to the world
a past wrong?”

“Yes, unless by its confession he can in some way make reparation.”

My answer seemed to trouble her. Drawing back, she stood for one moment
in a thoughtful attitude before me, her beauty shining with almost a
statuesque splendor in the glow of the porcelain-shaded lamp at her
side. Nor, though she presently roused herself, leading the way into the
drawing-room with a gesture that was allurement itself, did she recur to
this topic again; but rather seemed to strive, in the conversation that
followed, to make me forget what had already passed between us. That she
did not succeed, was owing to my intense and unfailing interest in her
cousin.

As I descended the stoop, I saw Thomas, the butler, leaning over the
area gate. Immediately I was seized with an impulse to interrogate him
in regard to a matter which had more or less interested me ever since
the inquest; and that was, who was the Mr. Robbins who had called
upon Eleanore the night of the murder? But Thomas was decidedly
uncommunicative. He remembered such a person called, but could not
describe his looks any further than to say that he was not a small man.

I did not press the matter.



XVII. THE BEGINNING OF GREAT SURPRISES


    “Vous regardez une etoile pour deux motifs, parce qu’elle est
    lumineuse et parce qu’elle est impenetrable. Vous avez aupres
    de vous un plus doux rayonnement et un pas grand mystere, la femme.”
         Les Miserables.

AND now followed days in which I seemed to make little or no progress.
Mr. Clavering, disturbed perhaps by my presence, forsook his usual
haunts, thus depriving me of all opportunity of making his acquaintance
in any natural manner, while the evenings spent at Miss Leavenworth’s
were productive of little else than constant suspense and uneasiness.

The manuscript required less revision than I supposed. But, in the
course of making such few changes as were necessary, I had ample
opportunity of studying the character of Mr. Harwell. I found him to be
neither more nor less than an excellent amanuensis. Stiff, unbending,
and sombre, but true to his duty and reliable in its performance, I
learned to respect him, and even to like him; and this, too, though I
saw the liking was not reciprocated, whatever the respect may have been.
He never spoke of Eleanore Leavenworth or, indeed, mentioned the family
or its trouble in any way; till I began to feel that all this reticence
had a cause deeper than the nature of the man, and that if he did
speak, it would be to some purpose. This suspicion, of course, kept me
restlessly eager in his presence. I could not forbear giving him sly
glances now and then, to see how he acted when he believed himself
unobserved; but he was ever the same, a passive, diligent, unexcitable
worker.

This continual beating against a stone wall, for thus I regarded it,
became at last almost unendurable. Clavering shy, and the secretary
unapproachable--how was I to gain anything? The short interviews I had
with Mary did not help matters. Haughty, constrained, feverish, pettish,
grateful, appealing, everything at once, and never twice the same, I
learned to dread, even while I coveted, an interview. She appeared to be
passing through some crisis which occasioned her the keenest suffering.
I have seen her, when she thought herself alone, throw up her hands
with the gesture which we use to ward off a coming evil or shut out some
hideous vision. I have likewise beheld her standing with her proud head
abased, her nervous hands drooping, her whole form sinking and inert, as
if the pressure of a weight she could neither upbear nor cast aside
had robbed her even of the show of resistance. But this was only once.
Ordinarily she was at least stately in her trouble. Even when the
softest appeal came into her eyes she stood erect, and retained her
expression of conscious power. Even the night she met me in the hall,
with feverish cheeks and lips trembling with eagerness, only to turn and
fly again without giving utterance to what she had to say, she comported
herself with a fiery dignity that was well nigh imposing.

That all this meant something, I was sure; and so I kept my patience
alive with the hope that some day she would make a revelation. Those
quivering lips would not always remain closed; the secret involving
Eleanore’s honor and happiness would be divulged by this restless being,
if by no one else. Nor was the memory of that extraordinary, if not
cruel, accusation I had heard her make enough to destroy this hope--for
hope it had grown to be--so that I found myself insensibly shortening
my time with Mr. Harwell in the library, and extending my _tete-a-tete_
visits with Mary in the reception room, till the imperturbable secretary
was forced to complain that he was often left for hours without work.

But, as I say, days passed, and a second Monday evening came round
without seeing me any further advanced upon the problem I had set myself
to solve than when I first started upon it two weeks before. The subject
of the murder had not even been broached; nor was Hannah spoken of,
though I observed the papers were not allowed to languish an instant
upon the stoop; mistress and servants betraying equal interest in their
contents. All this was strange to me. It was as if you saw a group of
human beings eating, drinking, and sleeping upon the sides of a volcano
hot with a late eruption and trembling with the birth of a new one. I
longed to break this silence as we shiver glass: by shouting the name
of Eleanore through those gilded rooms and satin-draped vestibules. But
this Monday evening I was in a calmer mood. I was determined to expect
nothing from my visits to Mary Leavenworth’s house; and entered it upon
the eve in question with an equanimity such as I had not experienced
since the first day I passed under its unhappy portals.

But when, upon nearing the reception room, I saw Mary pacing the floor
with the air of one who is restlessly awaiting something or somebody,
I took a sudden resolution, and, advancing towards her, said: “Do I see
you alone, Miss Leavenworth?”

She paused in her hurried action, blushed and bowed, but, contrary to
her usual custom, did not bid me enter.

“Will it be too great an intrusion on my part, if I venture to come in?”
 I asked.

Her glance flashed uneasily to the clock, and she seemed about to excuse
herself, but suddenly yielded, and, drawing up a chair before the fire,
motioned me towards it. Though she endeavored to appear calm, I vaguely
felt I had chanced upon her in one of her most agitated moods, and that
I had only to broach the subject I had in mind to behold her haughtiness
disappear before me like melting snow. I also felt that I had but few
moments in which to do it. I accordingly plunged immediately into the
subject.

“Miss Leavenworth,” said I, “in obtruding upon you to-night, I have a
purpose other than that of giving myself a pleasure. I have come to make
an appeal.”

Instantly I saw that in some way I had started wrong. “An appeal to make
to me?” she asked, breathing coldness from every feature of her face.

“Yes,” I went on, with passionate recklessness. “Balked in every other
endeavor to learn the truth, I have come to you, whom I believe to be
noble at the core, for that help which seems likely to fail us in every
other direction: for the word which, if it does not absolutely save your
cousin, will at least put us upon the track of what will.”

“I do not understand what you mean,” she protested, slightly shrinking.

“Miss Leavenworth,” I pursued, “it is needless for me to tell you in
what position your cousin stands. You, who remember both the form and
drift of the questions put to her at the inquest, comprehend it all
without any explanation from me. But what you may not know is this, that
unless she is speedily relieved from the suspicion which, justly or not,
has attached itself to her name, the consequences which such suspicion
entails must fall upon her, and----”

“Good God!” she cried; “you do not mean she will be----”

“Subject to arrest? Yes.”

It was a blow. Shame, horror, and anguish were in every line of her
white face. “And all because of that key!” she murmured.

“Key? How did you know anything about a key?”

“Why,” she cried, flushing painfully; “I cannot say; didn’t you tell
me?”

“No,” I returned.

“The papers, then?”

“The papers have never mentioned it.”

She grew more and more agitated. “I thought every one knew. No, I did
not, either,” she avowed, in a sudden burst of shame and penitence. “I
knew it was a secret; but--oh, Mr. Raymond, it was Eleanore herself who
told me.”

“Eleanore?”

“Yes, that last evening she was here; we were together in the
drawing-room.”

“What did she tell?”

“That the key to the library had been seen in her possession.”

I could scarcely conceal my incredulity. Eleanore, conscious of the
suspicion with which her cousin regarded her, inform that cousin of a
fact calculated to add weight to that suspicion? I could not believe
this.

“But you knew it?” Mary went on. “I have revealed nothing I ought to
have kept secret?”

“No,” said I; “and, Miss Leavenworth, it is this thing which makes
your cousin’s position absolutely dangerous. It is a fact that,
left unexplained, must ever link her name with infamy; a bit of
circumstantial evidence no sophistry can smother, and no denial
obliterate. Only her hitherto spotless reputation, and the efforts of
one who, notwithstanding appearances, believes in her innocence, keeps
her so long from the clutch of the officers of justice. That key, and
the silence preserved by her in regard to it, is sinking her slowly into
a pit from which the utmost endeavors of her best friends will soon be
inadequate to extricate her.”

“And you tell me this----”

“That you may have pity on the poor girl, who will not have pity on
herself, and by the explanation of a few circumstances, which cannot be
mysteries to you, assist in bringing her from under the dreadful shadow
that threatens to overwhelm her.”

“And would you insinuate, sir,” she cried, turning upon me with a look
of great anger, “that I know any more than you do of this matter? that
I possess any knowledge which I have not already made public concerning
the dreadful tragedy which has transformed our home into a desert, our
existence into a lasting horror? Has the blight of suspicion fallen upon
me, too; and have you come to accuse me in my own house----”

“Miss Leavenworth,” I entreated; “calm yourself. I accuse you of
nothing. I only desire you to enlighten me as to your cousin’s probable
motive for this criminating silence. You cannot be ignorant of it. You
are her cousin, almost her sister, have been at all events her daily
companion for years, and must know for whom or for what she seals her
lips, and conceals facts which, if known, would direct suspicion to the
real criminal--that is, if you really believe what you have hitherto
stated, that your cousin is an innocent woman.”

She not making any answer to this, I rose and confronted her. “Miss
Leavenworth, do you believe your cousin guiltless of this crime, or
not?”

“Guiltless? Eleanore? Oh! my God; if all the world were only as innocent
as she!”

“Then,” said I, “you must likewise believe that if she refrains from
speaking in regard to matters which to ordinary observers ought to be
explained, she does it only from motives of kindness towards one less
guiltless than herself.”

“What? No, no; I do not say that. What made you think of any such
explanation?”

“The action itself. With one of Eleanore’s character, such conduct
as hers admits of no other construction. Either she is mad, or she is
shielding another at the expense of herself.”

Mary’s lip, which had trembled, slowly steadied itself. “And whom
have you settled upon, as the person for whom Eleanore thus sacrifices
herself?”

“Ah,” said I, “there is where I seek assistance from you. With your
knowledge of her history----”

But Mary Leavenworth, sinking haughtily back into her chair, stopped
me with a quiet gesture. “I beg your pardon,” said she; “but you make a
mistake. I know little or nothing of Eleanore’s personal feelings. The
mystery must be solved by some one besides me.”

I changed my tactics.

“When Eleanore confessed to you that the missing key had been seen in
her possession, did she likewise inform you where she obtained it, and
for what reason she was hiding it?”

“No.”

“Merely told you the fact, without any explanation?”

“Yes.”

“Was not that a strange piece of gratuitous information for her to
give one who, but a few hours before, had accused her to the face of
committing a deadly crime?”

“What do you mean?”’ she asked, her voice suddenly sinking.

“You will not deny that you were once, not only ready to believe her
guilty, but that you actually charged her with having perpetrated this
crime.”

“Explain yourself!” she cried.

“Miss Leavenworth, do you not remember what you said in that room
upstairs, when you were alone with your cousin on the morning of the
inquest, just before Mr. Gryce and myself entered your presence?”

Her eyes did not fall, but they filled with sudden terror.

“You heard?” she whispered.

“I could not help it. I was just outside the door, and----”

“What did you hear?”

I told her.

“And Mr. Gryce?”

“He was at my side.”

It seemed as if her eyes would devour my face. “Yet nothing was said
when you came in?”

“No.”

“You, however, have never forgotten it?”

“How could we, Miss Leavenworth?”

Her head fell forward in her hands, and for one wild moment she seemed
lost in despair. Then she roused, and desperately exclaimed:

“And that is why you come here to-night. With that sentence written upon
your heart, you invade my presence, torture me with questions----”

“Pardon me,” I broke in; “are my questions such as you, with reasonable
regard for the honor of one with whom you are accustomed to associate,
should hesitate to answer? Do I derogate from my manhood in asking you
how and why you came to make an accusation of so grave a nature, at a
time when all the circumstances of the case were freshly before you,
only to insist fully as strongly upon your cousin’s innocence when
you found there was even more cause for your imputation than you had
supposed?”

She did not seem to hear me. “Oh, my cruel fate!” she murmured. “Oh, my
cruel fate!”

“Miss Leavenworth,” said I, rising, and taking my stand before her;
“although there is a temporary estrangement between you and your cousin,
you cannot wish to seem her enemy. Speak, then; let me at least know the
name of him for whom she thus immolates herself. A hint from you----”

But rising, with a strange look, to her feet, she interrupted me with a
stern remark: “If you do not know, I cannot inform you; do not ask me,
Mr. Raymond.” And she glanced at the clock for the second time.

I took another turn.

“Miss Leavenworth, you once asked me if a person who had committed a
wrong ought necessarily to confess it; and I replied no, unless by the
confession reparation could be made. Do you remember?”

Her lips moved, but no words issued from them.

“I begin to think,” I solemnly proceeded, following the lead of her
emotion, “that confession is the only way out of this difficulty: that
only by the words you can utter Eleanore can be saved from the doom that
awaits her. Will you not then show yourself a true woman by responding
to my earnest entreaties?”

I seemed to have touched the right chord; for she trembled, and a look
of wistfulness filled her eyes. “Oh, if I could!” she murmured.

“And why can you not? You will never be happy till you do. Eleanore
persists in silence; but that is no reason why you should emulate her
example. You only make her position more doubtful by it.”

“I know it; but I cannot help myself. Fate has too strong a hold upon
me; I cannot break away.”

“That is not true. Any one can escape from bonds imaginary as yours.”

“No, no,” she protested; “you do not understand.”

“I understand this: that the path of rectitude is a straight one, and
that he who steps into devious byways is going astray.”

A flicker of light, pathetic beyond description, flashed for a moment
across her face; her throat rose as with one wild sob; her lips opened;
she seemed yielding, when--A sharp ring at the front door-bell!

“Oh,” she cried, sharply turning, “tell him I cannot see him; tell
him----”

“Miss Leavenworth,” said I, taking her by both hands, “never mind the
door; never mind anything but this. I have asked you a question which
involves the mystery of this whole affair; answer me, then, for your
soul’s sake; tell me, what the unhappy circumstances were which could
induce you--”

But she tore her hands from mine. “The door!” she cried; “it will open,
and--”

Stepping into the hall, I met Thomas coming up the basement stairs. “Go
back,” said I; “I will call you when you are wanted.”

With a bow he disappeared.

“You expect me to answer,” she exclaimed, when I re-entered, “now, in a
moment? I cannot.”

“But----”

“Impossible!” fastening her gaze upon the front door.

“Miss Leavenworth!”

She shuddered.

“I fear the time will never come, if you do not speak now.”

“Impossible,” she reiterated.

Another twang at the bell.

“You hear!” said she.

I went into the hall and called Thomas. “You may open the door now,”
 said I, and moved to return to her side.

But, with a gesture of command, she pointed up-stairs. “Leave me!” and
her glance passed on to Thomas, who stopped where he was.

“I will see you again before I go,” said I, and hastened up-stairs.

Thomas opened the door. “Is Miss Leavenworth in?” I heard a rich,
tremulous voice inquire.

“Yes, sir,” came in the butler’s most respectful and measured accents,
and, leaning over the banisters I beheld, to my amazement, the form of
Mr. Clavering enter the front hall and move towards the reception room.



XVIII. ON THE STAIRS


    “You cannot _say_ I did it.”
         Macbeth.

EXCITED, tremulous, filled with wonder at this unlooked-for event, I
paused for a moment to collect my scattered senses, when the sound of
a low, monotonous voice breaking upon my ear from the direction of the
library, I approached and found Mr. Harwell reading aloud from his late
employer’s manuscript. It would be difficult for me to describe the
effect which this simple discovery made upon me at this time. There,
in that room of late death, withdrawn from the turmoil of the world, a
hermit in his skeleton-lined cell, this man employed himself in reading
and rereading, with passive interest, the words of the dead, while above
and below, human beings agonized in doubt and shame. Listening, I heard
these words:

“By these means their native rulers will not only lose their jealous
terror of our institutions, but acquire an actual curiosity in regard to
them.”

Opening the door I went in.

“Ah! you are late, sir,” was the greeting with which he rose and brought
forward a chair.

My reply was probably inaudible, for he added, as he passed to his own
seat:

“I am afraid you are not well.”

I roused myself.

“I am not ill.” And, pulling the papers towards me, I began looking them
over. But the words danced before my eyes, and I was obliged to give up
all attempt at work for that night.

“I fear I am unable to assist you this evening, Mr. Harwell. The fact
is, I find it difficult to give proper attention to this business while
the man who by a dastardly assassination has made it necessary goes
unpunished.”

The secretary in his turn pushed the papers aside, as if moved by a
sudden distaste of them, but gave me no answer.

“You told me, when you first came to me with news of this fearful
tragedy, that it was a mystery; but it is one which must be solved,
Mr. Harwell; it is wearing out the lives of too many whom we love and
respect.”

The secretary gave me a look. “Miss Eleanore?” he murmured.

“And Miss Mary,” I went on; “myself, you, and many others.”

“You have manifested much interest in the matter from the
beginning,”--he said, methodically dipping his pen into the ink.

I stared at him in amazement.

“And you,” said I; “do you take no interest in that which involves not
only the safety, but the happiness and honor, of the family in which you
have dwelt so long?”

He looked at me with increased coldness. “I have no wish to discuss
this subject. I believe I have before prayed you to spare me its
introduction.” And he arose.

“But I cannot consider your wishes in this regard,” I persisted. “If you
know any facts, connected with this affair, which have not yet been made
public, it is manifestly your duty to state them. The position which
Miss Eleanore occupies at this time is one which should arouse the sense
of justice in every true breast; and if you----”

“If I knew anything which would serve to release her from her unhappy
position, Mr. Raymond, I should have spoken long ago.”

I bit my lip, weary of these continual bafflings, and rose also.

“If you have nothing more to say,” he went on, “and feel utterly
disinclined to work, why, I should be glad to excuse myself, as I have
an engagement out.”

“Do not let me keep you,” I said, bitterly. “I can take care of myself.”

He turned upon me with a short stare, as if this display of feeling
was well nigh incomprehensible to him; and then, with a quiet, almost
compassionate bow left the room. I heard him go up-stairs, felt the
jar when his room door closed, and sat down to enjoy my solitude. But
solitude in that room was unbearable. By the time Mr. Harwell again
descended, I felt I could remain no longer, and, stepping into the hall,
told him that if he had no objection I would accompany him for a short
stroll.

He bowed a stiff assent, and hastened before me down the stairs. By the
time I had closed the library door, he was half-way to the foot, and I
was just remarking to myself upon the unpliability of his figure and the
awkwardness of his carriage, as seen from my present standpoint, when
suddenly I saw him stop, clutch the banister at his side, and hang there
with a startled, deathly expression upon his half-turned countenance,
which fixed me for an instant where I was in breathless astonishment,
and then caused me to rush down to his side, catch him by the arm, and
cry:

“What is it? what is the matter?”

But, thrusting out his hand, he pushed me upwards. “Go back!” he
whispered, in a voice shaking with intensest emotion, “go back.” And
catching me by the arm, he literally pulled me up the stairs. Arrived
at the top, he loosened his grasp, and leaning, quivering from head to
foot, over the banisters, glared below.

“Who is that?” he cried. “Who is that man? What is his name?”

Startled in my turn, I bent beside him, and saw Henry Clavering come out
of the reception room and cross the hall.

“That is Mr. Clavering,” I whispered, with all the self-possession I
could muster; “do you know him?”

Mr. Harwell fell back against the opposite wall. “Clavering, Clavering,”
 he murmured with quaking lips; then, suddenly bounding forward, clutched
the railing before him, and fixing me with his eyes, from which all the
stoic calmness had gone down forever in flame and frenzy, gurgled into
my ear: “You want to know who the assassin of Mr. Leavenworth is, do
you? Look there, then: that is the man, Clavering!” And with a leap, he
bounded from my side, and, swaying like a drunken man, disappeared from
my gaze in the hall above.

My first impulse was to follow him. Rushing upstairs, I knocked at the
door of his room, but no response came to my summons. I then called
his name in the hall, but without avail; he was determined not to show
himself. Resolved that he should not thus escape me, I returned to the
library, and wrote him a short note, in which I asked for an explanation
of his tremendous accusation, saying I would be in my rooms the next
evening at six, when I should expect to see him. This done I descended
to rejoin Mary.

But the evening was destined to be full of disappointments. She had
retired to her room while I was in the library, and I lost the interview
from which I expected so much. “The woman is slippery as an eel,” I
inwardly commented, pacing the hall in my chagrin. “Wrapped in mystery,
she expects me to feel for her the respect due to one of frank and open
nature.”

I was about to leave the house, when I saw Thomas descending the stairs
with a letter in his hand.

“Miss Leavenworth’s compliments, sir, and she is too fatigued to remain
below this evening.”

I moved aside to read the note he handed me, feeling a little
conscience-stricken as I traced the hurried, trembling handwriting
through the following words:


    “You ask more than I can give. Matters must be received as they are
    without explanation from me. It is the grief of my life to deny you;
    but I have no choice. God forgive us all and keep us from despair.

    “M.”

And below:


    “As we cannot meet now without embarrassment, it is better we should
    bear our burdens in silence and apart. Mr. Harwell will visit you.
    Farewell!”

As I was crossing Thirty-second Street, I heard a quick footstep behind
me, and turning, saw Thomas at my side. “Excuse me, sir,” said he, “but
I have something a little particular to say to you. When you asked me
the other night what sort of a person the gentleman was who called
on Miss Eleanore the evening of the murder, I didn’t answer you as I
should. The fact is, the detectives had been talking to me about that
very thing, and I felt shy; but, sir, I know you are a friend of the
family, and I want to tell you now that that same gentleman, whoever
he was,--Mr. Robbins, he called himself then,--was at the house again
tonight, sir, and the name he gave me this time to carry to Miss
Leavenworth was Clavering. Yes, sir,” he went on, seeing me start; “and,
as I told Molly, he acts queer for a stranger. When he came the other
night, he hesitated a long time before asking for Miss Eleanore, and
when I wanted his name, took out a card and wrote on it the one I told
you of, sir, with a look on his face a little peculiar for a caller;
besides----”

“Well?”

“Mr. Raymond,” the butler went on, in a low, excited voice, edging up
very closely to me in the darkness. “There is something I have never
told any living being but Molly, sir, which may be of use to those as
wishes to find out who committed this murder.”

“A fact or a suspicion?” I inquired.

“A fact, sir; which I beg your pardon for troubling you with at this
time; but Molly will give me no rest unless I speak of it to you or Mr.
Gryce; her feelings being so worked up on Hannah’s account, whom we all
know is innocent, though folks do dare to say as how she must be guilty
just because she is not to be found the minute they want her.”

“But this fact?” I urged.

“Well, the fact is this. You see--I would tell Mr. Gryce,” he resumed,
unconscious of my anxiety, “but I have my fears of detectives, sir; they
catch you up so quick at times, and seem to think you know so much more
than you really do.”

“But this fact,” I again broke in.

“O yes, sir; the fact is, that that night, the one of the murder you
know, I saw Mr. Clavering, Robbins, or whatever his name is, enter the
house, but neither I nor any one else saw him go out of it; nor do I
know that he _did.”_

“What do you mean?”

“Well, sir, what I mean is this. When I came down from Miss Eleanore and
told Mr. Robbins, as he called himself at that time, that my mistress
was ill and unable to see him (the word she gave me, sir, to deliver)
Mr. Robbins, instead of bowing and leaving the house like a gentleman,
stepped into the reception room and sat down. He may have felt sick, he
looked pale enough; at any rate, he asked me for a glass of water.
Not knowing any reason then for suspicionating any one’s actions, I
immediately went down to the kitchen for it, leaving him there in the
reception room alone. But before I could get it, I heard the front door
close. ‘What’s that?’ said Molly, who was helping me, sir. ‘I don’t
know,’ said I, ‘unless it’s the gentleman has got tired of waiting and
gone.’ ‘If he’s gone, he won’t want the water,’ she said. So down I set
the pitcher, and up-stairs I come; and sure enough he was gone, or so
I thought then. But who knows, sir, if he was not in that room or the
drawing-room, which was dark that night, all the time I was a-shutting
up of the house?”

I made no reply to this; I was more startled than I cared to reveal.

“You see, sir, I wouldn’t speak of such a thing about any person that
comes to see the young ladies; but we all know some one who was in the
house that night murdered my master, and as it was not Hannah----”

“You say that Miss Eleanore refused to see him,” I interrupted, in the
hope that the simple suggestion would be enough to elicitate further
details of his interview with Eleanore.

“Yes, sir. When she first looked at the card, she showed a little
hesitation; but in a moment she grew very flushed in the face, and bade
me say what I told you. I should never have thought of it again if I had
not seen him come blazoning and bold into the house this evening, with
a new name on his tongue. Indeed, and I do not like to think any evil of
him now; but Molly would have it I should speak to you, sir, and ease my
mind,--and that is all, sir.”

When I arrived home that night, I entered into my memorandum-book a
new list of suspicious circumstances, but this time they were under the
caption “C” instead of “E.”



XIX. IN MY OFFICE


    “Something between an hindrance and a help.”
         Wordsworth.

THE next day as, with nerves unstrung and an exhausted brain, I entered
my office, I was greeted by the announcement:

“A gentleman, sir, in your private room--been waiting some time, very
impatient.”

Weary, in no mood to hold consultation with clients new or old, I
advanced with anything but an eager step towards my room, when, upon
opening the door, I saw--Mr. Clavering.

Too much astounded for the moment to speak, I bowed to him silently,
whereupon he approached me with the air and dignity of a highly bred
gentleman, and presented his card, on which I saw written, in free and
handsome characters, his whole name, Henry Ritchie Clavering. After this
introduction of himself, he apologized for making so unceremonious
a call, saying, in excuse, that he was a stranger in town; that his
business was one of great urgency; that he had casually heard honorable
mention of me as a lawyer and a gentleman, and so had ventured to seek
this interview on behalf of a friend who was so unfortunately situated
as to require the opinion and advice of a lawyer upon a question which
not only involved an extraordinary state of facts, but was of a nature
peculiarly embarrassing to him, owing to his ignorance of American laws,
and the legal bearing of these facts upon the same.

Having thus secured my attention, and awakened my curiosity, he asked me
if I would permit him to relate his story. Recovering in a measure from
my astonishment, and subduing the extreme repulsion, almost horror,
I felt for the man, I signified my assent; at which he drew from his
pocket a memorandum-book from which he read in substance as follows:

“An Englishman travelling in this country meets, at a fashionable
watering-place, an American girl, with whom he falls deeply in love, and
whom, after a few days, he desires to marry. Knowing his position to be
good, his fortune ample, and his intentions highly honorable, he offers
her his hand, and is accepted. But a decided opposition arising in the
family to the match, he is compelled to disguise his sentiments, though
the engagement remained unbroken. While matters were in this uncertain
condition, he received advices from England demanding his instant
return, and, alarmed at the prospect of a protracted absence from the
object of his affections, he writes to the lady, informing her of
the circumstances, and proposing a secret marriage. She consents with
stipulations; the first of which is, that he should leave her instantly
upon the conclusion of the ceremony, and the second, that he should
intrust the public declaration of the marriage to her. It was not
precisely what he wished, but anything which served to make her his
own was acceptable at such a crisis. He readily enters into the plans
proposed. Meeting the lady at a parsonage, some twenty miles from the
watering-place at which she was staying, he stands up with her before
a Methodist preacher, and the ceremony of marriage is performed. There
were two witnesses, a hired man of the minister, called in for the
purpose, and a lady friend who came with the bride; but there was no
license, and the bride had not completed her twenty-first year. Now, was
that marriage legal? If the lady, wedded in good faith upon that day by
my friend, chooses to deny that she is his lawful wife, can he hold
her to a compact entered into in so informal a manner? In short, Mr.
Raymond, is my friend the lawful husband of that girl or not?”

While listening to this story, I found myself yielding to feelings
greatly in contrast to those with which I greeted the relator but a
moment before. I became so interested in his “friend’s” case as to
quite forget, for the time being, that I had ever seen or heard of Henry
Clavering; and after learning that the marriage ceremony took place in
the State of New York, I replied to him, as near as I can remember, in
the following words:

“In this State, and I believe it to be American law, marriage is a
civil contract, requiring neither license, priest, ceremony, nor
certificate--and in some cases witnesses are not even necessary to give
it validity. Of old, the modes of getting a wife were the same as those
of acquiring any other species of property, and they are not materially
changed at the present time. It is enough that the man and woman say to
each other, ‘From this time we are married,’ or, ‘You are now my wife,’
or, ‘my husband,’ as the case may be. The mutual consent is all that is
necessary. In fact, you may contract marriage as you contract to lend a
sum of money, or to buy the merest trifle.”

“Then your opinion is----”

“That upon your statement, your friend is the lawful husband of the lady
in question; presuming, of course, that no legal disabilities of either
party existed to prevent such a union. As to the young lady’s age, I
will merely say that any fourteen-year-old girl can be a party to a
marriage contract.”

Mr. Clavering bowed, his countenance assuming a look of great
satisfaction. “I am very glad to hear this,” said he; “my friend’s
happiness is entirely involved in the establishment of his marriage.”

He appeared so relieved, my curiosity was yet further aroused. I
therefore said: “I have given you my opinion as to the legality of this
marriage; but it may be quite another thing to prove it, should the same
be contested.”

He started, cast me an inquiring look, and murmured:

“True.”

“Allow me to ask you a few questions. Was the lady married under her own
name?”

“She was.”

“The gentleman?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Did the lady receive a certificate?”

“She did.”

“Properly signed by the minister and witnesses?”

He bowed his head in assent.

“Did she keep this?”

“I cannot say; but I presume she did.”

“The witnesses were----”

“A hired man of the minister----”

“Who can be found?”

“Who cannot be found.”

“Dead or disappeared?”

“The minister is dead, the man has disappeared.”

“The minister dead!”

“Three months since.”

“And the marriage took place when?”

“Last July.”

“The other witness, the lady friend, where is she?”

“She can be found; but her action is not to be depended upon.”

“Has the gentleman himself no proofs of this marriage?”

Mr. Clavering shook his head. “He cannot even prove he was in the town
where it took place on that particular day.”

“The marriage certificate was, however, filed with the clerk of the
town?” said I.

“It was not, sir.”

“How was that?”

“I cannot say. I only know that my friend has made inquiry, and that no
such paper is to be found.”

I leaned slowly back and looked at him. “I do not wonder your friend is
concerned in regard to his position, if what you hint is true, and the
lady seems disposed to deny that any such ceremony ever took place.
Still, if he wishes to go to law, the Court may decide in his favor,
though I doubt it. His sworn word is all he would have to go upon, and
if she contradicts his testimony under oath, why the sympathy of a jury
is, as a rule, with the woman.”

Mr. Clavering rose, looked at me with some earnestness, and finally
asked, in a tone which, though somewhat changed, lacked nothing of its
former suavity, if I would be kind enough to give him in writing that
portion of my opinion which directly bore upon the legality of the
marriage; that such a paper would go far towards satisfying his friend
that his case had been properly presented; as he was aware that no
respectable lawyer would put his name to a legal opinion without first
having carefully arrived at his conclusions by a thorough examination of
the law bearing upon the facts submitted.

This request seeming so reasonable, I unhesitatingly complied with it,
and handed him the opinion. He took it, and, after reading it carefully
over, deliberately copied it into his memorandum-book. This done, he
turned towards me, a strong, though hitherto subdued, emotion showing
itself in his countenance.

“Now, sir,” said he, rising upon me to the full height of his majestic
figure, “I have but one more request to make; and that is, that you will
receive back this opinion into your own possession, and in the day you
think to lead a beautiful woman to the altar, pause and ask yourself:
‘Am I sure that the hand I clasp with such impassioned fervor is free?
Have I any certainty for knowing that it has not already been given
away, like that of the lady whom, in this opinion of mine, I have
declared to be a wedded wife according to the laws of my country? ’”

“Mr. Clavering!”

But he, with an urbane bow, laid his hand upon the knob of the door. “I
thank you for your courtesy, Mr. Raymond, and I bid you good-day. I hope
you will have no need of consulting that paper before I see you again.”
 And with another bow, he passed out.

It was the most vital shock I had yet experienced; and for a moment
I stood paralyzed. Me! me! Why should he mix me up with the affair
unless--but I would not contemplate that possibility. Eleanore married,
and to this man? No, no; anything but that! And yet I found myself
continually turning the supposition over in my mind until, to escape
the torment of my own conjectures, I seized my hat, and rushed into
the street in the hope of finding him again and extorting from him an
explanation of his mysterious conduct. But by the time I reached the
sidewalk, he was nowhere to be seen. A thousand busy men, with their
various cares and purposes, had pushed themselves between us, and I was
obliged to return to my office with my doubts unsolved.

I think I never experienced a longer day; but it passed, and at five
o’clock I had the satisfaction of inquiring for Mr. Clavering at the
Hoffman House. Judge of my surprise when I learned that his visit to
my office was his last action before taking passage upon the steamer
leaving that day for Liverpool; that he was now on the high seas, and
all chance of another interview with him was at an end. I could scarcely
believe the fact at first; but after a talk with the cabman who
had driven him off to my office and thence to the steamer, I became
convinced. My first feeling was one of shame. I had been brought face to
face with the accused man, had received an intimation from him that he
was not expecting to see me again for some time, and had weakly gone on
attending to my own affairs and allowed him to escape, like the simple
tyro that I was. My next, the necessity of notifying Mr. Gryce of this
man’s departure. But it was now six o’clock, the hour set apart for my
interview with Mr. Harwell. I could not afford to miss that, so merely
stopping to despatch a line to Mr. Gryce, in which I promised to visit
him that evening, I turned my steps towards home. I found Mr. Harwell
there before me.



XX. “TRUEMAN! TRUEMAN! TRUEMAN!”


    “Often do the spirits
    Of great events stride on before the events,
    And in to-day already walks to-morrow.”
         Coleridge.

INSTANTLY a great dread seized me. What revelations might not this man
be going to make! But I subdued the feeling; and, greeting him with what
cordiality I could, settled myself to listen to his explanations.

But Trueman Harwell had no explanations to give, or so it seemed; on
the contrary, he had come to apologize for the very violent words he had
used the evening before; words which, whatever their effect upon me, he
now felt bound to declare had been used without sufficient basis in fact
to make their utterance of the least importance.

“But you must have thought you had grounds for so tremendous an
accusation, or your act was that of a madman.”

His brow wrinkled heavily, and his eyes assumed a very gloomy
expression. “It does not follow,” he returned. “Under the pressure of
surprise, I have known men utter convictions no better founded than mine
without running the risk of being called mad.”

“Surprise? Mr. Clavering’s face or form must, then, have been known to
you. The mere fact of seeing a strange gentleman in the hall would have
been insufficient to cause you astonishment, Mr. Harwell.”

He uneasily fingered the back of the chair before which he stood, but
made no reply.

“Sit down,” I again urged, this time with a touch of command in my
voice. “This is a serious matter, and I intend to deal with it as it
deserves. You once said that if you knew anything which might serve
to exonerate Eleanore Leavenworth from the suspicion under which she
stands, you would be ready to impart it.”

“Pardon me. I said that if I had ever known anything calculated to
release her from her unhappy position, I would have spoken,” he coldly
corrected.

“Do not quibble. You know, and I know, that you are keeping something
back; and I ask you, in her behalf, and in the cause of justice, to tell
me what it is.”

“You are mistaken,” was his dogged reply. “I have reasons, perhaps, for
certain conclusions I may have drawn; but my conscience will not allow
me in cold blood to give utterance to suspicions which may not only
damage the reputation of an honest man, but place me in the unpleasant
position of an accuser without substantial foundation for my
accusations.”

“You occupy that position already,” I retorted, with equal coldness.
“Nothing can make me forget that in my presence you have denounced Henry
Clavering as the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth. You had better explain
yourself, Mr. Harwell.”

He gave me a short look, but moved around and took the chair. “You have
me at a disadvantage,” he said, in a lighter tone. “If you choose to
profit by your position, and press me to disclose the little I know, I
can only regret the necessity under which I lie, and speak.”

“Then you are deterred by conscientious scruples alone?”

“Yes, and by the meagreness of the facts at my command.”

“I will judge of the facts when I have heard them.”

He raised his eyes to mine, and I was astonished to observe a strange
eagerness in their depths; evidently his convictions were stronger
than his scruples. “Mr. Raymond,” he began, “you are a lawyer, and
undoubtedly a practical man; but you may know what it is to scent danger
before you see it, to feel influences working in the air over and
about you, and yet be in ignorance of what it is that affects you so
powerfully, till chance reveals that an enemy has been at your side, or
a friend passed your window, or the shadow of death crossed your book as
you read, or mingled with your breath as you slept?”

I shook my head, fascinated by the intensity of his gaze into some sort
of response.

“Then you cannot understand me, or what I have suffered these last three
weeks.” And he drew back with an icy reserve that seemed to promise but
little to my now thoroughly awakened curiosity.

“I beg your pardon,” I hastened to say; “but the fact of my never having
experienced such sensations does not hinder me from comprehending the
emotions of others more affected by spiritual influences than myself.”

He drew himself slowly forward. “Then you will not ridicule me if I say
that upon the eve of Mr. Leavenworth’s murder I experienced in a dream
all that afterwards occurred; saw him murdered, saw”--and he clasped
his hands before him, in an attitude inexpressibly convincing, while his
voice sank to a horrified whisper, “saw the face of his murderer!”

I started, looked at him in amazement, a thrill as at a ghostly presence
running through me.

“And was that----” I began.

“My reason for denouncing the man I beheld before me in the hall of
Miss Leavenworth’s house last night? It was.” And, taking out his
handkerchief, he wiped his forehead, on which the perspiration was
standing in large drops.

“You would then intimate that the face you saw in your dream and the
face you saw in the hall last night were the same?”

He gravely nodded his head.

I drew my chair nearer to his. “Tell me your dream,” said I.

“It was the night before Mr. Leavenworth’s murder. I had gone to bed
feeling especially contented with myself and the world at large; for,
though my life is anything but a happy one,” and he heaved a short sigh,
“some pleasant words had been said to me that day, and I was revelling
in the happiness they conferred, when suddenly a chill struck my heart,
and the darkness which a moment before had appeared to me as the abode
of peace thrilled to the sound of a supernatural cry, and I heard my
name, ‘Trueman, Trueman, Trueman,’ repeated three times in a voice I did
not recognize, and starting from my pillow beheld at my bedside a woman.
Her face was strange to me,” he solemnly proceeded, “but I can give you
each and every detail of it, as, bending above me, she stared into my
eyes with a growing terror that seemed to implore help, though her lips
were quiet, and only the memory of that cry echoed in my ears.”

“Describe the face,” I interposed.

“It was a round, fair, lady’s face. Very lovely in contour, but devoid
of coloring; not beautiful, but winning from its childlike look of
trust. The hair, banded upon the low, broad forehead, was brown; the
eyes, which were very far apart, gray; the mouth, which was its most
charming feature, delicate of make and very expressive. There was
a dimple in the chin, but none in the cheeks. It was a face to be
remembered.”

“Go on,” said I.

“Meeting the gaze of those imploring eyes, I started up. Instantly the
face and all vanished, and I became conscious, as we sometimes do in
dreams, of a certain movement in the hall below, and the next instant
the gliding figure of a man of imposing size entered the library.
I remember experiencing a certain thrill at this, half terror, half
curiosity, though I seemed to know, as if by intuition, what he was
going to do. Strange to say, I now seemed to change my personality,
and to be no longer a third party watching these proceedings, but Mr.
Leavenworth himself, sitting at his library table and feeling his doom
crawling upon him without capacity for speech or power of movement to
avert it. Though my back was towards the man, I could feel his stealthy
form traverse the passage, enter the room beyond, pass to that stand
where the pistol was, try the drawer, find it locked, turn the key,
procure the pistol, weigh it in an accustomed hand, and advance again.
I could feel each footstep he took as though his feet were in truth upon
my heart, and I remember staring at the table before me as if I expected
every moment to see it run with my own blood. I can see now how the
letters I had been writing danced upon the paper before me, appearing
to my eyes to take the phantom shapes of persons and things long ago
forgotten; crowding my last moments with regrets and dead shames, wild
longings, and unspeakable agonies, through all of which that face, the
face of my former dream, mingled, pale, sweet, and searching, while
closer and closer behind me crept that noiseless foot till I could
feel the glaring of the assassin’s eyes across the narrow threshold
separating me from death and hear the click of his teeth as he set his
lips for the final act. Ah!” and the secretary’s livid face showed the
touch of awful horror, “what words can describe such an experience as
that? In one moment, all the agonies of hell in the heart and brain,
the next a blank through which I seemed to see afar, and as if suddenly
removed from all this, a crouching figure looking at its work with
starting eyes and pallid back-drawn lips; and seeing, recognize no face
that I had ever known, but one so handsome, so remarkable, so unique in
its formation and character, that it would be as easy for me to mistake
the countenance of my father as the look and figure of the man revealed
to me in my dream.”

“And this face?” said I, in a voice I failed to recognize as my own.

“Was that of him whom we saw leave Mary Leavenworth’s presence last
night and go down the hall to the front door.”



XXI. A PREJUDICE


    “True, I talk of dreams,
     Which are the children of an idle brain
     Begot of nothing but vain phantasy.”
         --Romeo and Juliet.

FOR one moment I sat a prey to superstitious horror; then, my natural
incredulity asserting itself, I looked up and remarked:

“You say that all this took place the night previous to the actual
occurrence?”

He bowed his head. “For a warning,” he declared.

“But you did not seem to take it as such?”

“No; I am subject to horrible dreams. I thought but little of it in a
superstitious way till I looked next day upon Mr. Leavenworth’s dead
body.”

“I do not wonder you behaved strangely at the inquest.”

“Ah, sir,” he returned, with a slow, sad smile; “no one knows what
I suffered in my endeavors not to tell more than I actually knew,
irrespective of my dream, of this murder and the manner of its
accomplishment.”

“You believe, then, that your dream foreshadowed the manner of the
murder as well as the fact?”

“I do.”

“It is a pity it did not go a little further, then, and tell us how
the assassin escaped from, if not how he entered, a house so securely
fastened.”

His face flushed. “That would have been convenient,” he repeated.
“Also, if I had been informed where Hannah was, and why a stranger and a
gentleman should have stooped to the committal of such a crime.”

Seeing that he was nettled, I dropped my bantering vein. “Why do you
say a stranger?” I asked; “are you so well acquainted with all who visit
that house as to be able to say who are and who are not strangers to the
family?

“I am well acquainted with the faces of their friends, and Henry
Clavering is not amongst the number; but----”

“Were you ever with Mr. Leavenworth,” I interrupted, “when he has been
away from home; in the country, for instance, or upon his travels?”

“No.” But the negative came with some constraint.

“Yet I suppose he was in the habit of absenting himself from home?”

“Certainly.”

“Can you tell me where he was last July, he and the ladies?”

“Yes, sir; they went to R----. The famous watering-place, you know. Ah,”
 he cried, seeing a change in my face, “do you think he could have met
them there?”

I looked at him for a moment, then, rising in my turn, stood level with
him, and exclaimed:

“You are keeping something back, Mr. Harwell; you have more knowledge of
this man than you have hitherto given me to understand. What is it?”

He seemed astonished at my penetration, but replied: “I know no more
of the man than I have already informed you; but”--and a burning flush
crossed his face, “if you are determined to pursue this matter--” and he
paused, with an inquiring look.

“I am resolved to find out all I can about Henry Clavering,” was my
decided answer.

“Then,” said he, “I can tell you this much. Henry Clavering wrote a
letter to Mr. Leavenworth a few days before the murder, which I have
some reason to believe produced a marked effect upon the household.”
 And, folding his arms, the secretary stood quietly awaiting my next
question.

“How do you know?” I asked.

“I opened it by mistake. I was in the habit of reading Mr. Leavenworth’s
business letters, and this, being from one unaccustomed to write to him,
lacked the mark which usually distinguished those of a private nature.”

“And you saw the name of Clavering?”

“I did; Henry Ritchie Clavering.”

“Did you read the letter?” I was trembling now.

The secretary did not reply.

“Mr. Harwell,” I reiterated, “this is no time for false delicacy. Did
you read that letter?”

“I did; but hastily, and with an agitated conscience.”

“You can, however, recall its general drift?”

“It was some complaint in regard to the treatment received by him at the
hand of one of Mr. Leavenworth’s nieces. I remember nothing more.”

“Which niece?”

“There were no names mentioned.”

“But you inferred----”

“No, sir; that is just what I did not do. I forced myself to forget the
whole thing.”

“And yet you say it produced an effect upon the family?”

“I can see now that it did. None of them have ever appeared quite the
same as before.”

“Mr. Harwell,” I gravely continued; “when you were questioned as to the
receipt of any letter by Mr. Leavenworth, which might seem in any manner
to be connected with this tragedy, you denied having seen any such; how
was that?”

“Mr. Raymond, you are a gentleman; have a chivalrous regard for the
ladies; do you think you could have brought yourself (even if in your
secret heart you considered some such result possible, which I am not
ready to say I did) to mention, at such a time as that, the receipt of
a letter complaining of the treatment received from one of Mr.
Leavenworth’s nieces, as a suspicious circumstance worthy to be taken
into account by a coroner’s jury?”

I shook my head. I could not but acknowledge the impossibility.

“What reason had I for thinking that letter was one of importance? I
knew of no Henry Ritchie Clavering.”

“And yet you seemed to think it was. I remember you hesitated before
replying.”

“It is true; but not as I should hesitate now, if the question were put
to me again.”

Silence followed these words, during which I took two or three turns up
and down the room.

“This is all very fanciful,” I remarked, laughing in the vain endeavor
to throw off the superstitious horror his words had awakened.

He bent his head in assent. “I know it,” said he. “I am practical myself
in broad daylight, and recognize the flimsiness of an accusation based
upon a poor, hardworking secretary’s dream, as plainly as you do. This
is the reason I desired to keep from speaking at all; but, Mr. Raymond,”
 and his long, thin hand fell upon my arm with a nervous intensity which
gave me almost the sensation of an electrical shock, “if the murderer of
Mr. Leavenworth is ever brought to confess his deed, mark my words, he
will prove to be the man of my dream.”

I drew a long breath. For a moment his belief was mine; and a mingled
sensation of relief and exquisite pain swept over me as I thought of the
possibility of Eleanore being exonerated from crime only to be plunged
into fresh humiliation and deeper abysses of suffering.

“He stalks the streets in freedom now,” the secretary went on, as if to
himself; “even dares to enter the house he has so wofully desecrated;
but justice is justice and, sooner or later, something will transpire
which will prove to you that a premonition so wonderful as that
I received had its significance; that the voice calling ‘Trueman,
Trueman,’ was something more than the empty utterances of an excited
brain; that it was Justice itself, calling attention to the guilty.”

I looked at him in wonder. Did he know that the officers of justice were
already upon the track of this same Clavering? I judged not from his
look, but felt an inclination to make an effort and see.

“You speak with strange conviction,” I said; “but in all probability
you are doomed to be disappointed. So far as we know, Mr. Clavering is a
respectable man.”

He lifted his hat from the table. “I do not propose to denounce him;
I do not even propose to speak his name again. I am not a fool, Mr.
Raymond. I have spoken thus plainly to you only in explanation of last
night’s most unfortunate betrayal; and while I trust you will regard
what I have told you as confidential, I also hope you will give me
credit for behaving, on the whole, as well as could be expected under
the circumstances.” And he held out his hand.

“Certainly,” I replied as I took it. Then, with a sudden impulse to
test the accuracy of this story of his, inquired if he had any means of
verifying his statement of having had this dream at the time spoken of:
that is, before the murder and not afterwards.

“No, sir; I know myself that I had it the night previous to that of Mr.
Leavenworth’s death; but I cannot prove the fact.”

“Did not speak of it next morning to any one?”

“O no, sir; I was scarcely in a position to do so.”

“Yet it must have had a great effect upon you, unfitting you for
work----”

“Nothing unfits me for work,” was his bitter reply.

“I believe you,” I returned, remembering his diligence for the last few
days. “But you must at least have shown some traces of having passed an
uncomfortable night. Have you no recollection of any one speaking to you
in regard to your appearance the next morning?”

“Mr. Leavenworth may have done so; no one else would be likely to
notice.” There was sadness in the tone, and my own voice softened as I
said:

“I shall not be at the house to-night, Mr. Harwell; nor do I know when
I shall return there. Personal considerations keep me from Miss
Leavenworth’s presence for a time, and I look to you to carry on the
work we have undertaken without my assistance, unless you can bring it
here----”

“I can do that.”

“I shall expect you, then, to-morrow evening.”

“Very well, sir”; and he was going, when a sudden thought seemed to
strike him. “Sir,” he said, “as we do not wish to return to this subject
again, and as I have a natural curiosity in regard to this man, would
you object to telling me what you know of him? You believe him to be a
respectable man; are you acquainted with him, Mr. Raymond?”

“I know his name, and where he resides.”

“And where is that?”

“In London; he is an Englishman.”

“Ah!” he murmured, with a strange intonation.

“Why do you say that?”

He bit his lip, looked down, then up, finally fixed his eyes on mine,
and returned, with marked emphasis: “I used an exclamation, sir, because
I was startled.”

“Startled?”

“Yes; you say he is an Englishman. Mr. Leavenworth had the most bitter
antagonism to the English. It was one of his marked peculiarities. He
would never be introduced to one if he could help it.”

It was my turn to look thoughtful.

“You know,” continued the secretary, “that Mr. Leavenworth was a man who
carried his prejudices to the extreme. He had a hatred for the English
race amounting to mania. If he had known the letter I have mentioned was
from an Englishman, I doubt if he would have read it. He used to say he
would sooner see a daughter of his dead before him than married to an
Englishman.”

I turned hastily aside to hide the effect which this announcement made
upon me.

“You think I am exaggerating,” he said. “Ask Mr. Veeley.”

“No,” I replied. “I have no reason for thinking so.”

“He had doubtless some cause for hating the English with which we are
unacquainted,” pursued the secretary. “He spent some time in Liverpool
when young, and had, of course, many opportunities for studying their
manners and character.” And the secretary made another movement, as if
to leave.

But it was my turn to detain him now. “Mr. Harwell, you must excuse me.
You have been on familiar terms with Mr. Leavenworth for so long. Do you
think that, in the case of one of his nieces, say, desiring to marry a
gentleman of that nationality, his prejudice was sufficient to cause him
to absolutely forbid the match?”

“I do.”

I moved back. I had learned what I wished, and saw no further reason for
prolonging the interview.



XXII. PATCH-WORK


    “Come, give us a taste of your quality.”
         Hamlet.

STARTING with the assumption that Mr. Clavering in his conversation of
the morning had been giving me, with more or less accuracy, a
detailed account of his own experience and position regarding Eleanore
Leavenworth, I asked myself what particular facts it would be necessary
for me to establish in order to prove the truth of this assumption, and
found them to be:

I. That Mr. Clavering had not only been in this country at the time
designated, but that he had been located for some little time at a
watering-place in New York State.

II. That this watering-place should correspond to the one in which Miss
Eleanore Leavenworth was staying at the same time.

III. That they had been seen while there to hold more or less
communication.

IV. That they had both been absent from town, at some one time, long
enough to have gone through the ceremony of marriage at a point twenty
miles or so away.

V. That a Methodist clergyman, who has since died, lived at that time
within a radius of twenty miles of said watering-place.

I next asked myself how I was to establish these facts. Mr. Clavering’s
life was as yet too little known to me to offer me any assistance; so,
leaving it for the present, I took up the thread of Eleanore’s history,
and found that at the time given me she had been in R----, a fashionable
watering-place in this State. Now, if his was true, and my theory
correct, he must have been there also. To prove this fact, became,
consequently, my first business. I resolved to go to R---- on the
morrow.

But before proceeding in an undertaking of such importance, I considered
it expedient to make such inquiries and collect such facts as the few
hours I had left to work in rendered possible. I went first to the house
of Mr. Gryce.

I found him lying upon a hard sofa, in the bare sitting-room I have
before mentioned, suffering from a severe attack of rheumatism. His
hands were done up in bandages, and his feet incased in multiplied folds
of a dingy red shawl which looked as if it had been through the wars.
Greeting me with a short nod that was both a welcome and an apology,
he devoted a few words to an explanation of his unwonted position; and
then, without further preliminaries, rushed into the subject which was
uppermost in both our minds by inquiring, in a slightly sarcastic way,
if I was very much surprised to find my bird flown when I returned to
the Hoffman House that afternoon.

“I was astonished to find you allowed him to fly at this time,”
 I replied. “From the manner in which you requested me to make his
acquaintance, I supposed you considered him an important character in
the tragedy which has just been enacted.”

“And what makes you think I don’t? Oh, the fact that I let him go off
so easily? That’s no proof. I never fiddle with the brakes till the
car starts down-hill. But let that pass for the present; Mr. Clavering,
then, did not explain himself before going?”

“That is a question which I find it exceedingly difficult to answer.
Hampered by circumstances, I cannot at present speak with the directness
which is your due, but what I can say, I will. Know, then, that in my
opinion Mr. Clavering did explain himself in an interview with me this
morning. But it was done in so blind a way, it will be necessary for me
to make a few investigations before I shall feel sufficiently sure of
my ground to take you into my confidence. He has given me a possible
clue----”

“Wait,” said Mr. Gryce; “does he know this? Was it done intentionally
and with sinister motive, or unconsciously and in plain good faith?”

“In good faith, I should say.”

Mr. Gryce remained silent for a moment. “It is very unfortunate you
cannot explain yourself a little more definitely,” he said at last. “I
am almost afraid to trust you to make investigations, as you call them,
on your own hook. You are not used to the business, and will lose time,
to say nothing of running upon false scents, and using up your strength
on unprofitable details.”

“You should have thought of that when you admitted me into partnership.”

“And you absolutely insist upon working this mine alone?”

“Mr. Gryce, the matter stands just here. Mr. Clavering, for all I know,
is a gentleman of untarnished reputation. I am not even aware for what
purpose you set me upon his trail. I only know that in thus following
it I have come upon certain facts that seem worthy of further
investigation.”

“Well, well; you know best. But the days are slipping by. Something must
be done, and soon. The public are becoming clamorous.”

“I know it, and for that reason I have come to you for such assistance
as you can give me at this stage of the proceedings. You are in
possession of certain facts relating to this man which it concerns me
to know, or your conduct in reference to him has been purposeless. Now,
frankly, will you make me master of those facts: in short, tell me all
you know of Mr. Clavering, without requiring an immediate return of
confidence on my part?”

“That is asking a great deal of a professional detective.”

“I know it, and under other circumstances I should hesitate long before
preferring such a request; but as things are, I don’t see how I am to
proceed in the matter without some such concession on your part. At all
events----”

“Wait a moment! Is not Mr. Clavering the lover of one of the young
ladies?”

Anxious as I was to preserve the secret of my interest in that
gentleman, I could not prevent the blush from rising to my face at the
suddenness of this question.

“I thought as much,” he went on. “Being neither a relative nor
acknowledged friend, I took it for granted he must occupy some such
position as that in the family.”

“I do not see why you should draw such an inference,” said I, anxious
to determine how much he knew about him. “Mr. Clavering is a stranger in
town; has not even been in this country long; has indeed had no time to
establish himself upon any such footing as you suggest.”

“This is not the only time Mr. Clavering has been in New York. He was
here a year ago to my certain knowledge.”

“You know that?”

“Yes.”

“How much more do you know? Can it be possible I am groping blindly
about for facts which are already in your possession? I pray you listen
to my entreaties, Mr. Gryce, and acquaint me at once with what I want to
know. You will not regret it. I have no selfish motive in this matter.
If I succeed, the glory shall be yours; it I fail, the shame of the
defeat shall be mine.”

“That is fair,” he muttered. “And how about the reward?”

“My reward will be to free an innocent woman from the imputation of
crime which hangs over her.”

This assurance seemed to satisfy him. His voice and appearance changed;
for a moment he looked quite confidential. “Well, well,” said he; “and
what is it you want to know?”

“I should first like to know how your suspicions came to light on him
at all. What reason had you for thinking a gentleman of his bearing and
position was in any way connected with this affair?”

“That is a question you ought not to be obliged to put,” he returned.

“How so?”

“Simply because the opportunity of answering it was in your hands before
ever it came into mine.”

“What do you mean?”

“Don’t you remember the letter mailed in your presence by Miss Mary
Leavenworth during your drive from her home to that of her friend in
Thirty-seventh Street?”

“On the afternoon of the inquest?”

“Yes.”

“Certainly, but----”

“You never thought to look at its superscription before it was dropped
into the box.”

“I had neither opportunity nor right to do so.”

“Was it not written in your presence?”

“It was.”

“And you never regarded the affair as worth your attention?”

“However I may have regarded it, I did not see how I could prevent Miss
Leavenworth from dropping a letter into a box if she chose to do so.”

“That is because you are a _gentleman._ Well, it has its disadvantages,”
 he muttered broodingly.

“But you,” said I; “how came you to know anything about this letter?
Ah, I see,” remembering that the carriage in which we were riding at the
time had been procured for us by him. “The man on the box was in your
pay, and informed, as you call it.”

Mr. Gryce winked at his muffled toes mysteriously. “That is not the
point,” he said. “Enough that I heard that a letter, which might
reasonably prove to be of some interest to me, had been dropped at such
an hour into the box on the corner of a certain street. That, coinciding
in the opinion of my informant, I telegraphed to the station connected
with that box to take note of the address of a suspicious-looking letter
about to pass through their hands on the way to the General Post Office,
and following up the telegram in person, found that a curious epistle
addressed in lead pencil and sealed with a stamp, had just arrived, the
address of which I was allowed to see----”

“And which was?”

“Henry R. Clavering, Hoffman House, New York.”

I drew a deep breath. “And so that is how your attention first came to
be directed to this man?”

“Yes.”

“Strange. But go on--what next?”

“Why, next I followed up the clue by going to the Hoffman House and
instituting inquiries. I learned that Mr. Clavering was a regular guest
of the hotel. That he had come there, direct from the Liverpool
steamer, about three months since, and, registering his name as Henry
R. Clavering, Esq., London, had engaged a first-class room which he had
kept ever since. That, although nothing definite was known concerning
him, he had been seen with various highly respectable people, both of
his own nation and ours, by all of whom he was treated with respect. And
lastly, that while not liberal, he had given many evidences of being a
man of means. So much done, I entered the office, and waited for him to
come in, in the hope of having an opportunity to observe his manner when
the clerk handed him that strange-looking letter from Mary Leavenworth.”

“And did you succeed?”

“No; an awkward gawk of a fellow stepped between us just at the critical
moment, and shut off my view. But I heard enough that evening from the
clerk and servants, of the agitation he had shown on receiving it, to
convince me I was upon a trail worth following. I accordingly put on
my men, and for two days Mr. Clavering was subjected to the most
rigid watch a man ever walked under. But nothing was gained by it; his
interest in the murder, if interest at all, was a secret one; and though
he walked the streets, studied the papers, and haunted the vicinity
of the house in Fifth Avenue, he not only refrained from actually
approaching it, but made no attempt to communicate with any of the
family. Meanwhile, you crossed my path, and with your determination
incited me to renewed effort. Convinced from Mr. Clavering’s bearing,
and the gossip I had by this time gathered in regard to him, that no one
short of a gentleman and a friend could succeed in getting at the clue
of his connection with this family, I handed him over to you, and----”

“Found me rather an unmanageable colleague.”

Mr. Gryce smiled very much as if a sour plum had been put in his mouth,
but made no reply; and a momentary pause ensued.

“Did you think to inquire,” I asked at last, “if any one knew where Mr.
Clavering had spent the evening of the murder?”

“Yes; but with no good result. It was agreed he went out during the
evening; also that he was in his bed in the morning when the servant
came in to make his fire; but further than this no one seemed posted.”

“So that, in fact, you gleaned nothing that would in any way connect
this man with the murder except his marked and agitated interest in it,
and the fact that a niece of the murdered man had written a letter to
him?”

“That is all.”

“Another question; did you hear in what manner and at what time he
procured a newspaper that evening?”

“No; I only learned that he was observed, by more than one, to hasten
out of the dining-room with the _Post_ in his hand, and go immediately
to his room without touching his dinner.”

“Humph! that does not look---”

“If Mr. Clavering had had a guilty knowledge of the crime, he would
either have ordered dinner before opening the paper, or, having ordered
it, he would have eaten it.”

“Then you do not believe, from what you have learned, that Mr. Clavering
is the guilty party?”

Mr. Gryce shifted uneasily, glanced at the papers protruding from my
coat pocket and exclaimed: “I am ready to be convinced by you that he
is.”

That sentence recalled me to the business in hand. Without appearing to
notice his look, I recurred to my questions.

“How came you to know that Mr. Clavering was in this city last summer?
Did you learn that, too, at the Hoffman House?”

“No; I ascertained that in quite another way. In short, I have had a
communication from London in regard to the matter.

“From London?”

“Yes; I’ve a friend there in my own line of business, who sometimes
assists me with a bit of information, when requested.”

“But how? You have not had time to write to London, and receive an
answer since the murder.”

“It is not necessary to write. It is enough for me to telegraph him the
name of a person, for him to understand that I want to know everything
he can gather in a reasonable length of time about that person.”

“And you sent the name of Mr. Clavering to him?”

“Yes, in cipher.”

“And have received a reply?”

“This morning.”

I looked towards his desk.

“It is not there,” he said; “if you will be kind enough to feel in my
breast pocket you will find a letter----”

It was in my hand before he finished his sentence. “Excuse my
eagerness,” I said. “This kind of business is new to me, you know.”

He smiled indulgently at a very old and faded picture hanging on the
wall before him. “Eagerness is not a fault; only the betrayal of it. But
read out what you have there. Let us hear what my friend Brown has to
tell us of Mr. Henry Ritchie Clavering, of Portland Place, London.”

I took the paper to the light and read as follows:


    “Henry Ritchie Clavering, Gentleman, aged 43. Born in

    ----, Hertfordshire, England. His father was Chas. Clavering, for
    short time in the army. Mother was Helen Ritchie, of Dumfriesshire,
    Scotland; she is still living. Home with H. R. C., in Portland Place,
    London. H. R. C. is a bachelor, 6 ft. high, squarely built, weight
    about 12 stone. Dark complexion, regular features. Eyes dark brown;
    nose straight. Called a handsome man; walks erect and rapidly. In
    society is considered a good fellow; rather a favorite, especially with
    ladies. Is liberal, not extravagant; reported to be worth about
    5000 pounds per year, and appearances give color to this statement.
    Property consists of a small estate in Hertfordshire, and some funds,
    amount not known. Since writing this much, a correspondent sends the
    following in regard to his history. In ‘46 went from uncle’s house to
    Eton. From Eton went to Oxford, graduating in ‘56. Scholarship good. In
    1855 his uncle died, and his father succeeded to the estates. Father
    died in ‘57 by a fall from his horse or a similar accident. Within a
    very short time H. R. C. took his mother to London, to the residence
    named, where they have lived to the present time.

    “Travelled considerably in 1860; part of the time was with
    ----, of Munich; also in party of Vandervorts from New York; went
    as far east as Cairo. Went to America in 1875 alone, but at end of
    three months returned on account of mother’s illness. Nothing is known
    of his movements while in America.

    “From servants learn that he was always a favorite from a boy. More
    recently has become somewhat taciturn. Toward last of his stay watched
    the post carefully, especially foreign ones. Posted scarcely anything
    but newspapers. Has written to Munich. Have seen, from waste-paper
    basket, torn envelope directed to Amy Belden, no address. American
    correspondents mostly in Boston; two in New York. Names not known, but
    supposed to be bankers. Brought home considerable luggage, and fitted
    up part of house, as for a lady. This was closed soon afterwards. Left
    for America two months since. Has been, I understand, travelling in the
    south. Has telegraphed twice to Portland Place. His friends hear from
    him but rarely. Letters rec’d recently, posted in New York. One by last
    steamer posted in F----, N. Y.

    “Business here conducted by ----. In the country, ---- of ---- has
    charge of the property.

    “BROWN.”

The document fell from my hands.

F----, N. Y., was a small town near R----.

“Your friend is a trump,” I declared. “He tells me just what I wanted
most to know.” And, taking out my book, I made memoranda of the facts
which had most forcibly struck me during my perusal of the communication
before me. “With the aid of what he tells me, I shall ferret out the
mystery of Henry Clavering in a week; see if I do not.”

“And how soon,” inquired Mr. Gryce, “may I expect to be allowed to take
a hand in the game?”

“As soon as I am reasonably assured I am upon the right tack.”

“And what will it take to assure you of that?”

“Not much; a certain point settled, and----”

“Hold on; who knows but what I can do that for you?” And, looking
towards the desk which stood in the corner, Mr. Gryce asked me if I
would be kind enough to open the top drawer and bring him the bits of
partly-burned paper I would find there.

Hastily complying, I brought three or four strips of ragged paper, and
laid them on the table at his side.

“Another result of Fobbs’ researches under the coal on the first day of
the inquest,” Mr. Gryce abruptly explained. “You thought the key was
all he found. Well, it wasn’t. A second turning over of the coal brought
these to light, and very interesting they are, too.”

I immediately bent over the torn and discolored scraps with great
anxiety. They were four in number, and appeared at first glance to be
the mere remnants of a sheet of common writing-paper, torn lengthwise
into strips, and twisted up into lighters; but, upon closer inspection,
they showed traces of writing upon one side, and, what was more
important still, the presence of one or more drops of spattered blood.
This latter discovery was horrible to me, and so overcame me for the
moment that I put the scraps down, and, turning towards Mr. Gryce,
inquired:

“What do you make of them?”

“That is just the question I was going to put to you.”

Swallowing my disgust, I took them up again. “They look like the
remnants of some old letter,” said I.

“They have that appearance,” Mr. Gryce grimly assented.

“A letter which, from the drop of blood observable on the written side,
must have been lying face up on Mr. Leavenworth’s table at the time of
the murder--”

“Just so.”

“And from the uniformity in width of each of these pieces, as well as
their tendency to curl up when left alone, must first have been torn
into even strips, and then severally rolled up, before being tossed into
the grate where they were afterwards found.”

“That is all good,” said Mr. Gryce; “go on.”

“The writing, so far as discernible, is that of a cultivated gentleman.
It is not that of Mr. Leavenworth; for I have studied his chirography
too much lately not to know it at a glance; but it may be--Hold!” I
suddenly exclaimed, “have you any mucilage handy? I think, if I could
paste these strips down upon a piece of paper, so that they would
remain flat, I should be able to tell you what I think of them much more
easily.”

“There is mucilage on the desk,” signified Mr. Gryce.

Procuring it, I proceeded to consult the scraps once more for evidence
to guide me in their arrangement. These were more marked than I
expected; the longer and best preserved strip, with its “Mr. Hor” at
the top, showing itself at first blush to be the left-hand margin of
the letter, while the machine-cut edge of the next in length presented
tokens fully as conclusive of its being the right-hand margin of the
same. Selecting these, then, I pasted them down on a piece of paper at
just the distance they would occupy if the sheet from which they were
torn was of the ordinary commercial note size. Immediately it became
apparent: first, that it would take two other strips of the same width
to fill up the space left between them; and secondly, that the writing
did not terminate at the foot of the sheet, but was carried on to
another page.

Taking up the third strip, I looked at its edge; it was machine-cut
at the top, and showed by the arrangement of its words that it was
the margin strip of a second leaf. Pasting that down by itself, I
scrutinized the fourth, and finding it also machine-cut at the top but
not on the side, endeavored to fit it to the piece already pasted down,
but the words would not match. Moving it along to the position it
would hold if it were the third strip, I fastened it down; the whole
presenting, when completed, the appearance seen on the opposite page.

“Well!” exclaimed Mr. Gryce, “that’s business.” Then, as I held it up
before his eyes: “But don’t show it to me. Study it yourself, and tell
me what you think of it.”

“Well,” said I, “this much is certain: that it is a letter directed to
Mr. Leavenworth from some House, and dated--let’s see; that is an _h,_
isn’t it?” And I pointed to the one letter just discernible on the line
under the word House.

“I should think so; but don’t ask me.”

“It must be an _h._ The year is 1875, and this is not the termination
of either January or February. Dated, then, March 1st, 1876, and
signed----”

Mr. Gryce rolled his eyes in anticipatory ecstasy towards the ceiling.

“By Henry Clavering,” I announced without hesitation.

Mr. Gryce’s eyes returned to his swathed finger-ends. “Humph! how do you
know that?”

“Wait a moment, and I’ll show you”; and, taking out of my pocket the
card which Mr. Clavering had handed me as an introduction at our late
interview, I laid it underneath the last line of writing on the second
page. One glance was sufficient. Henry Ritchie Clavering on the card;
H----chie--in the same handwriting on the letter.

“Clavering it is,” said he, “without a doubt.” But I saw he was not
surprised.

“And now,” I continued, “for its general tenor and meaning.” And,
commencing at the beginning, I read aloud the words as they came, with
pauses at the breaks, something as follows: “Mr. Hor--Dear--a niece whom
yo--one too who see--the love and trus--any other man ca--autiful, so
char----s she in face fo----conversation. ery rose has its----rose is no
exception------ely as she is, char----tender as she is,
s----------pable of tramplin------one who trusted----heart------------.
-------------------- him to----he owes a----honor----ance.

“If------t believe ---- her to----cruel----face,---- what is----ble
serv----yours

“H------tchie”

“It reads like a complaint against one of Mr. Leavenworth’s nieces,” I
said, and started at my own words.

“What is it?” cried Mr. Gryce; “what is the matter?”

“Why,” said I, “the fact is I have heard this very letter spoken of.
It _is_ a complaint against one of Mr. Leavenworth’s nieces, and was
written by Mr. Clavering.” And I told him of Mr. Harwell’s communication
in regard to the matter.

“Ah! then Mr. Harwell has been talking, has he? I thought he had
forsworn gossip.”

“Mr. Harwell and I have seen each other almost daily for the last two
weeks,” I replied. “It would be strange if he had nothing to tell me.”

“And he says he has read a letter written to Mr. Leavenworth by Mr.
Clavering?”

“Yes; but the particular words of which he has now forgotten.”

“These few here may assist him in recalling the rest.”

“I would rather not admit him to a knowledge of the existence of
this piece of evidence. I don’t believe in letting any one into our
confidence whom we can conscientiously keep out.”

“I see you don’t,” dryly responded Mr. Gryce.

Not appearing to notice the fling conveyed by these words, I took up the
letter once more, and began pointing out such half-formed words in it
as I thought we might venture to complete, as the Hor--, yo--,
see--utiful----, har----, for----, tramplin----, pable----, serv----.

This done, I next proposed the introduction of such others as seemed
necessary to the sense, as _Leavenworth_ after _Horatio; Sir_ after
_Dear; have_ with a possible _you_ before _a niece; thorn_ after _its_
in the phrase _rose has its; on after trampling; whom_ after _to;
debt after a; you_ after _If; me ask_ after _believe; beautiful_ after
_cruel._

Between the columns of words thus furnished I interposed a phrase or
two, here and there, the whole reading upon its completion as follows:

“------------ House.” March 1st, 1876.

“_Mr. Horatio Leavenworth; Dear Sir:_

“(You) have a niece whom you    one too who seems    worthy    the love
and trust     of any other man ca    so    beautiful, so charming    is
she in face form and    conversation.    But every rose has its thorn
and (this) rose is no exception    lovely as she is, charming (as she
is,) tender as she is, she    is    capable of trampling on     one who
trusted her heart a

him to whom she owes a debt of honor a    ance

“If you don’t believe me ask her to    her    cruel beautiful face   
what is (her) humble servant yours:

“Henry Ritchie Clavering.”

“I think that will do,” said Mr. Gryce. “Its general tenor is evident,
and that is all we want at this time.”

“The whole tone of it is anything but complimentary to the lady it
mentions,” I remarked. “He must have had, or imagined he had, some
desperate grievance, to provoke him to the use of such plain language in
regard to one he can still characterize as tender, charming, beautiful.”

“Grievances are apt to lie back of mysterious crimes.”

“I think I know what this one was,” I said; “but”--seeing him look
up--“must decline to communicate my suspicion to you for the present. My
theory stands unshaken, and in some degree confirmed; and that is all I
can say.”

“Then this letter does not supply the link you wanted?”

“No: it is a valuable bit of evidence; but it is not the link I am in
search of just now.”

“Yet it must be an important clue, or Eleanore Leavenworth would not
have been to such pains, first to take it in the way she did from her
uncle’s table, and secondly----”

“Wait! what makes you think this is the paper she took, or was believed
to have taken, from Mr. Leavenworth’s table on that fatal morning?”

“Why, the fact that it was found together with the key, which we know
she dropped into the grate, and that there are drops of blood on it.”

I shook my head.

“Why do you shake your head?” asked Mr. Gryce.

“Because I am not satisfied with your reason for believing this to be
the paper taken by her from Mr. Leavenworth’s table.”

“And why?”

“Well, first, because Fobbs does not speak of seeing any paper in her
hand, when she bent over the fire; leaving us to conclude that these
pieces were in the scuttle of coal she threw upon it; which surely you
must acknowledge to be a strange place for her to have put a paper she
took such pains to gain possession of; and, secondly, for the reason
that these scraps were twisted as if they had been used for curl papers,
or something of that kind; a fact hard to explain by your hypothesis.”

The detective’s eye stole in the direction of my necktie, which was as
near as he ever came to a face. “You are a bright one,” said he; “a very
bright one. I quite admire you, Mr. Raymond.”

A little surprised, and not altogether pleased with this unexpected
compliment, I regarded him doubtfully for a moment and then asked:

“What is your opinion upon the matter?”

“Oh, you know I have no opinion. I gave up everything of that kind when
I put the affair into your hands.”

“Still----”

“That the letter of which these scraps are the remnant was on Mr.
Leavenworth’s table at the time of the murder is believed. That upon the
body being removed, a paper was taken from the table by Miss Eleanore
Leavenworth, is also believed. That, when she found her action had been
noticed, and attention called to this paper and the key, she resorted to
subterfuge in order to escape the vigilance of the watch that had been
set over her, and, partially succeeding in her endeavor, flung the key
into the fire from which these same scraps were afterwards recovered, is
also known. The conclusion I leave to your judgment.”

“Very well, then,” said I, rising; “we will let conclusions go for the
present. My mind must be satisfied in regard to the truth or falsity of
a certain theory of mine, for my judgment to be worth much on this or
any other matter connected with the affair.”

And, only waiting to get the address of his subordinate P., in case
I should need assistance in my investigations, I left Mr. Gryce, and
proceeded immediately to the house of Mr. Veeley.



XXIII. THE STORY OF A CHARMING WOMAN


    “Fe, fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman.”
         --Old Song.

    “I hold you as a thing enskied and sainted.”
         --Measure for Measure.

“YOU have never heard, then, the particulars of Mr. Leavenworth’s
marriage?”

It was my partner who spoke. I had been asking him to explain to me Mr.
Leavenworth’s well-known antipathy to the English race.

“No.”

“If you had, you would not need to come to me for this explanation. But
it is not strange you are ignorant of the matter. I doubt if there
are half a dozen persons in existence who could tell you where Horatio
Leavenworth found the lovely woman who afterwards became his wife,
much less give you any details of the circumstances which led to his
marriage.”

“I am very fortunate, then, in being in the confidence of one who can.
What were those circumstances, Mr. Veeley?”

“It will aid you but little to hear. Horatio Leavenworth, when a young
man, was very ambitious; so much so, that at one time he aspired to
marry a wealthy lady of Providence. But, chancing to go to England, he
there met a young woman whose grace and charm had such an effect upon
him that he relinquished all thought of the Providence lady, though it
was some time before he could face the prospect of marrying the one
who had so greatly interested him; as she was not only in humble
circumstances, but was encumbered with a child concerning whose
parentage the neighbors professed ignorance, and she had nothing to
say. But, as is very apt to be the case in an affair like this, love and
admiration soon got the better of worldly wisdom. Taking his future
in his hands, he offered himself as her husband, when she immediately
proved herself worthy of his regard by entering at once into those
explanations he was too much of a gentleman to demand.

The story she told was pitiful. She proved to be an American by birth,
her father having been a well-known merchant of Chicago. While he lived,
her home was one of luxury, but just as she was emerging into womanhood
he died. It was at his funeral she met the man destined to be her ruin.
How he came there she never knew; he was not a friend of her father’s.
It is enough he was there, and saw her, and that in three weeks--don’t
shudder, she was such a child--they were married. In twenty-four hours
she knew what that word meant for her; it meant blows. Everett, I am
telling no fanciful story. In twenty-four hours after that girl was
married, her husband, coming drunk into the house, found her in his way,
and knocked her down. It was but the beginning. Her father’s estate, on
being settled up, proving to be less than expected, he carried her off
to England, where he did not wait to be drunk in order to maltreat her.
She was not free from his cruelty night or day. Before she was sixteen,
she had run the whole gamut of human suffering; and that, not at the
hands of a coarse, common ruffian, but from an elegant, handsome,
luxury-loving gentleman, whose taste in dress was so nice he would
sooner fling a garment of hers into the fire than see her go into
company clad in a manner he did not consider becoming. She bore it till
her child was born, then she fled. Two days after the little one saw the
light, she rose from her bed and, taking her baby in her arms, ran out
of the house. The few jewels she had put into her pocket supported her
till she could set up a little shop. As for her husband, she neither saw
him, nor heard from him, from the day she left him till about two weeks
before Horatio Leavenworth first met her, when she learned from the
papers that he was dead. She was, therefore, free; but though she loved
Horatio Leavenworth with all her heart, she would not marry him. She
felt herself forever stained and soiled by the one awful year of abuse
and contamination. Nor could he persuade her. Not till the death of her
child, a month or so after his proposal, did she consent to give him her
hand and what remained of her unhappy life. He brought her to New York,
surrounded her with luxury and every tender care, but the arrow had gone
too deep; two years from the day her child breathed its last, she too
died. It was the blow of his life to Horatio Leavenworth; he was never
the same man again. Though Mary and Eleanore shortly after entered his
home, he never recovered his old light-heartedness. Money became his
idol, and the ambition to make and leave a great fortune behind him
modified all his views of life. But one proof remained that he never
forgot the wife of his youth, and that was, he could not bear to have
the word ‘Englishman’ uttered in his hearing.”

Mr. Veeley paused, and I rose to go. “Do you remember how Mrs.
Leavenworth looked?” I asked. “Could you describe her to me?”

He seemed a little astonished at my request, but immediately replied:
“She was a very pale woman; not strictly beautiful, but of a contour and
expression of great charm. Her hair was brown, her eyes gray--”

“And very wide apart?”

He nodded, looking still more astonished. “How came you to know? Have
you seen her picture?”

I did not answer that question. On my way downstairs, I bethought me of
a letter which I had in my pocket for Mr. Veeley’s son Fred, and,
knowing of no surer way of getting it to him that night than by leaving
it on the library table, I stepped to the door of that room, which in
this house was at the rear of the parlors, and receiving no reply to my
knock, opened it and looked in.

The room was unlighted, but a cheerful fire was burning in the grate,
and by its glow I espied a lady crouching on the hearth, whom at first
glance I took for Mrs. Veeley. But, upon advancing and addressing her by
that name, I saw my mistake; for the person before me not only refrained
from replying, but, rising at the sound of my voice, revealed a form
of such noble proportions that all possibility of its being that of the
dainty little wife of my partner fled.

“I see I have made a mistake,” said I. “I beg your pardon”; and would
have left the room, but something in the general attitude of the lady
before me restrained me, and, believing it to be Mary Leavenworth, I
inquired:

“Can it be this is Miss Leavenworth?”

The noble figure appeared to droop, the gently lifted head to fall, and
for a moment I doubted if I had been correct in my supposition. Then
form and head slowly erected themselves, a soft voice spoke, and I heard
a low “yes,” and hurriedly advancing, confronted--not Mary, with her
glancing, feverish gaze, and scarlet, trembling lips--but Eleanore, the
woman whose faintest look had moved me from the first, the woman whose
husband I believed myself to be even then pursuing to his doom!

The surprise was too great; I could neither sustain nor conceal it.
Stumbling slowly back, I murmured something about having believed it
to be her cousin; and then, conscious only of the one wish to fly a
presence I dared not encounter in my present mood, turned, when her
rich, heart-full voice rose once more and I heard:

“You will not leave me without a word, Mr. Raymond, now that chance has
thrown us together?” Then, as I came slowly forward: “Were you so very
much astonished to find me here?”

“I do not know--I did not expect--” was my incoherent reply. “I had
heard you were ill; that you went nowhere; that you had no wish to see
your friends.”

“I have been ill,” she said; “but I am better now, and have come to
spend the night with Mrs. Veeley, because I could not endure the stare
of the four walls of my room any longer.”

This was said without any effort at plaintiveness, but rather as if she
thought it necessary to excuse herself for being where she was.

“I am glad you did so,” said I. “You ought to be here all the while.
That dreary, lonesome boarding-house is no place for you, Miss
Leavenworth. It distresses us all to feel that you are exiling yourself
at this time.”

“I do not wish anybody to be distressed,” she returned. “It is best for
me to be where I am. Nor am I altogether alone. There is a child there
whose innocent eyes see nothing but innocence in mine. She will keep me
from despair. Do not let my friends be anxious; I can bear it.” Then, in
a lower tone: “There is but one thing which really unnerves me; and
that is my ignorance of what is going on at home. Sorrow I can bear, but
suspense is killing me. Will you not tell me something of Mary and home?
I cannot ask Mrs. Veeley; she is kind, but has no real knowledge of Mary
or me, nor does she know anything of our estrangement. She thinks me
obstinate, and blames me for leaving my cousin in her trouble. But you
know I could not help it. You know,--” her voice wavered off into a
tremble, and she did not conclude.

“I cannot tell you much,” I hastened to reply; “but whatever knowledge
is at my command is certainly yours. Is there anything in particular you
wish to know?”

“Yes, how Mary is; whether she is well, and--and composed.”

“Your cousin’s health is good,” I returned; “but I fear I cannot say she
is composed. She is greatly troubled about you.”

“You see her often, then?”

“I am assisting Mr. Harwell in preparing your uncle’s book for the
press, and necessarily am there much of the time.”

“My uncle’s book!” The words came in a tone of low horror.

“Yes, Miss Leavenworth. It has been thought best to bring it before the
world, and----”

“And Mary has set you at the task?”

“Yes.”

It seemed as if she could not escape from the horror which this caused.
“How could she? Oh, how could she!”

“She considers herself as fulfilling her uncle’s wishes. He was very
anxious, as you know, to have the book out by July.”

“Do not speak of it!” she broke in, “I cannot bear it.” Then, as if she
feared she had hurt my feelings by her abruptness, lowered her voice and
said: “I do not, however, know of any one I should be better pleased to
have charged with the task than yourself. With you it will be a work of
respect and reverence; but a stranger--Oh, I could not have endured a
stranger touching it.”

She was fast falling into her old horror; but rousing herself, murmured:
“I wanted to ask you something; ah, I know”--and she moved so as to
face me. “I wish to inquire if everything is as before in the house; the
servants the same and--and other things?”

“There is a Mrs. Darrell there; I do not know of any other change.”

“Mary does not talk of going away?”

“I think not.”

“But she has visitors? Some one besides Mrs. Darrell to help her bear
her loneliness?”

I knew what was coming, and strove to preserve my composure.

“Yes,” I replied; “a few.”

“Would you mind naming them?” How low her tones were, but how distinct!

“Certainly not. Mrs. Veeley, Mrs. Gilbert, Miss Martin, and a--a----”

“Go on,” she whispered.

“A gentleman by the name of Clavering.”

“You speak that name with evident embarrassment,” she said, after a
moment of intense anxiety on my part. “May I inquire why?”

Astounded, I raised my eyes to her face. It was very pale, and wore
the old look of self-repressed calm I remembered so well. I immediately
dropped my gaze.

“Why? because there are some circumstances surrounding him which have
struck me as peculiar.”

“How so?” she asked.

“He appears under two names. To-day it is Clavering; a short time ago it
was----”

“Go on.”

“Robbins.”

Her dress rustled on the hearth; there was a sound of desolation in it;
but her voice when she spoke was expressionless as that of an automaton.

“How many times has this person, of whose name you do not appear to be
certain, been to see Mary?”

“Once.”

“When was it?”

“Last night.”

“Did he stay long?”

“About twenty minutes, I should say.”

“And do you think he will come again?”

“No.”

“Why?”

“He has left the country.”

A short silence followed this, I felt her eyes searching my face, but
doubt whether, if I had known she held a loaded pistol, I could have
looked up at that moment.

“Mr. Raymond,” she at length observed, in a changed tone, “the last time
I saw you, you told me you were going to make some endeavor to restore
me to my former position before the world. I did not wish you to do so
then; nor do I wish you to do so now. Can you not make me comparatively
happy, then, by assuring me you have abandoned or will abandon a project
so hopeless?”

“It is impossible,” I replied with emphasis. “I cannot abandon it. Much
as I grieve to be a source of sorrow to you, it is best you should know
that I can never give up the hope of righting you while I live.”

She put out her hand in a sort of hopeless appeal inexpressibly touching
to behold in the fast waning firelight. But I was relentless.

“I should never be able to face the world or my own conscience if,
through any weakness of my own, I should miss the blessed privilege
of setting the wrong right, and saving a noble woman from unmerited
disgrace.” And then, seeing she was not likely to reply to this, drew a
step nearer and said: “Is there not some little kindness I can show you,
Miss Leavenworth? Is there no message you would like taken, or act it
would give you pleasure to see performed?”

She stopped to think. “No,” said she; “I have only one request to make,
and that you refuse to grant.”

“For the most unselfish of reasons,” I urged.

She slowly shook her head. “You think so”; then, before I could reply,
“I could desire one little favor shown me, however.”

“What is that?”

“That if anything should transpire; if Hannah should be found, or--or my
presence required in any way,--you will not keep me in ignorance. That
you will let me know the worst when it comes, without fail.”

“I will.”

“And now, good-night. Mrs. Veeley is coming back, and you would scarcely
wish to be found here by her.”

“No,” said I.

And yet I did not go, but stood watching the firelight flicker on her
black dress till the thought of Clavering and the duty I had for the
morrow struck coldly to my heart, and I turned away towards the
door. But at the threshold I paused again, and looked back. Oh, the
flickering, dying fire flame! Oh, the crowding, clustering shadows!
Oh, that drooping figure in their midst, with its clasped hands and its
hidden face! I see it all again; I see it as in a dream; then darkness
falls, and in the glare of gas-lighted streets, I am hastening along,
solitary and sad, to my lonely home.



XXIV. A REPORT FOLLOWED BY SMOKE


    “Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
    Where most it promises; and oft it hits
    Where Hope is coldest, and Despair most sits.”
         --All’s Well that Ends Well.

WHEN I told Mr. Gryce I only waited for the determination of one fact,
to feel justified in throwing the case unreservedly into his hands,
I alluded to the proving or disproving of the supposition that Henry
Clavering had been a guest at the same watering-place with Eleanore
Leavenworth the summer before.

When, therefore, I found myself the next morning with the Visitor Book
of the Hotel Union at R---- in my hands, it was only by the strongest
effort of will I could restrain my impatience. The suspense, however,
was short. Almost immediately I encountered his name, written not half
a page below those of Mr. Leavenworth and his nieces, and, whatever
may have been my emotion at finding my suspicions thus confirmed, I
recognized the fact that I was in the possession of a clue which would
yet lead to the solving of the fearful problem which had been imposed
upon me.

Hastening to the telegraph office, I sent a message for the man promised
me by Mr. Gryce, and receiving for an answer that he could not be with
me before three o’clock, started for the house of Mr. Monell, a client
of ours, living in R----. I found him at home and, during our interview
of two hours, suffered the ordeal of appearing at ease and interested
in what he had to say, while my heart was heavy with its first
disappointment and my brain on fire with the excitement of the work then
on my hands.

I arrived at the depot just as the train came in.

There was but one passenger for R----, a brisk young man, whose whole
appearance differed so from the description which had been given me of
Q that I at once made up my mind he could not be the man I was looking
for, and was turning away disappointed, when he approached, and handed
me a card on which was inscribed the single character “?” Even then I
could not bring myself to believe that the slyest and most successful
agent in Mr. Gryce’s employ was before me, till, catching his eye, I saw
such a keen, enjoyable twinkle sparkling in its depths that all doubt
fled, and, returning his bow with a show of satisfaction, I remarked:

“You are very punctual. I like that.”

He gave another short, quick nod. “Glad, sir, to please you. Punctuality
is too cheap a virtue not to be practised by a man on the lookout for
a rise. But what orders, sir? Down train due in ten minutes; no time to
spare.”

“Down train? What have we to do with that?”

“I thought you might wish to take it, sir. Mr. Brown”--winking
expressively at the name, “always checks his carpet-bag for home when he
sees me coming. But that is your affair; I am not particular.”

“I wish to do what is wisest under the circumstances.”

“Go home, then, as speedily as possible.” And he gave a third sharp nod
exceedingly business-like and determined.

“If I leave you, it is with the understanding that you bring your
information first to me; that you are in my employ, and in that of no
one else for the time being; and that _mum_ is the word till I give you
liberty to speak.”

“Yes, sir. When I work for Brown & Co. I do not work for Smith & Jones.
That you can count on.”

“Very well then, here are your instructions.”

He looked at the paper I handed him with a certain degree of care, then
stepped into the waiting-room and threw it into the stove, saying in
a low tone: “So much in case I should meet with some accident: have an
apoplectic fit, or anything of that sort.”

“But----”

“Oh, don’t worry; I sha’n’t forget. I’ve a memory, sir. No need of
anybody using pen and paper with me.”

And laughing in the short, quick way one would expect from a person of
his appearance and conversation, he added: “You will probably hear from
me in a day or so,” and bowing, took his brisk, free way down the street
just as the train came rushing in from the West.

My instructions to Q were as follows:

1. To find out on what day, and in whose company, the Misses Leavenworth
arrived at R---- the year before. What their movements had been while
there, and in whose society they were oftenest to be seen. Also the date
of their departure, and such facts as could be gathered in regard to
their habits, etc.

2. Ditto in respect to a Mr. Henry Clavering, fellow-guest and probable
friend of said ladies.

3. Name of individual fulfilling the following requirements: Clergyman,
Methodist, deceased since last December or thereabouts, who in July of
Seventy-five was located in some town not over twenty miles from R----.

4. Also name and present whereabouts of a man at that time in service of
the above.

To say that the interval of time necessary to a proper inquiry into
these matters was passed by me in any reasonable frame of mind, would be
to give myself credit for an equanimity of temper which I unfortunately
do not possess. Never have days seemed so long as the two which
interposed between my return from R---- and the receipt of the following
letter:

“Sir:

“Individuals mentioned arrived in R---- July 3, 1875. Party consisted
of four; the two ladies, their uncle, and the girl named Hannah.
Uncle remained three days, and then left for a short tour through
Massachusetts. Gone two weeks, during which ladies were seen more
or less with the gentleman named between us, but not to an extent
sufficient to excite gossip or occasion remark, when said gentleman
left R---- abruptly, two days after uncle’s return. Date July 19. As to
habits of ladies, more or less social. They were always to be seen
at picnics, rides, etc., and in the ballroom. M---- liked best.
E----considered grave, and, towards the last of her stay, moody. It is
remembered now that her manner was always peculiar, and that she was
more or less shunned by her cousin.

However, in the opinion of one girl still to be found at the hotel, she
was the sweetest lady that ever breathed. No particular reason for this
opinion. Uncle, ladies, and servants left R---- for New York, August 7,
1875.

“2. H. C. arrived at the hotel in R----July 6, 1875, in-company with Mr.
and Mrs. Vandervort, friends of the above. Left July 19, two weeks from
day of arrival. Little to be learned in regard to him. Remembered as the
handsome gentleman who was in the party with the L. girls, and that is
all.

“3. F----, a small town, some sixteen or seventeen miles from R----, had
for its Methodist minister, in July of last year, a man who has since
died, Samuel Stebbins by name. Date of decease, Jan. 7 of this year.

“4. Name of man in employ of S. S. at that time is Timothy Cook. He
has been absent, but returned to F---- two days ago. Can be seen if
required.”

“Ah, ha!” I cried aloud at this point, in my sudden surprise and
satisfaction; “now we have something to work upon!” And sitting down I
penned the following reply:

“T. C. wanted by all means. Also any evidence going to prove that H.
C. and E. L. were married at the house of Mr. S. on any day of July or
August last.”

Next morning came the following telegram:

“T. C. on the road. Remembers a marriage. Will be with you by 2 p.m.”

At three o’clock of that same day, I stood before Mr. Gryce. “I am here
to make my report,” I announced.

The flicker of a smile passed over his face, and he gazed for the first
time at his bound-up finger-ends with a softening aspect which must have
done them good. “I’m ready,” said he.

“Mr. Gryce,” I began, “do you remember the conclusion we came to at our
first interview in this house?”

“I remember the _one you_ came to.”

“Well, well,” I acknowledged a little peevishly, “the one I came to,
then. It was this: that if we could find to whom Eleanore Leavenworth
felt she owed her best duty and love, we should discover the man who
murdered her uncle.”

“And do you imagine you have done this?”

“I do.”

His eyes stole a little nearer my face. “Well! that is good; go on.”

“When I undertook this business of clearing Eleanore Leavenworth from
suspicion,” I resumed, “it was with the premonition that this person
would prove to be her lover; but I had no idea he would prove to be her
husband.”

Mr. Gryce’s gaze flashed like lightning to the ceiling.

“What!” he ejaculated with a frown.

“The lover of Eleanore Leavenworth is likewise her husband,” I repeated.
“Mr. Clavering holds no lesser connection to her than that.”

“How have you found that out?” demanded Mr. Gryce, in a harsh tone that
argued disappointment or displeasure.

“That I will not take time to state. The question is not how I became
acquainted with a certain thing, but is what I assert in regard to it
true. If you will cast your eye over this summary of events gleaned by
me from the lives of these two persons, I think you will agree with me
that it is.” And I held up before his eyes the following:

“During the two weeks commencing July 6, of the year 1875, and ending
July 19, of the same year, Henry R. Clavering, of London, and Eleanore
Leavenworth, of New York, were guests of the same hotel. _ Fact proved
by Visitor Book of the Hotel Union at R_----, _New York._

“They were not only guests of the same hotel, but are known to have
held more or less communication with each other. _Fact proved by such
servants now employed in R---- as were in the hotel at that time._

“July 19. Mr. Clavering left R---- abruptly, a circumstance that would
not be considered remarkable if Mr. Leavenworth, whose violent antipathy
to Englishmen as husbands is publicly known, had not just returned from
a journey.

“July 30. Mr. Clavering was seen in the parlor of Mr. Stebbins, the
Methodist minister at F----, a town about sixteen miles from R----,
where he was married to a lady of great beauty. _Proved by Timothy Cook,
a man in the employ of Mr. Stebbins, who was called in from the garden
to witness the ceremony and sign a paper supposed to be a certificate._

“July 31. Mr. Clavering takes steamer for Liverpool. _Proved by
newspapers of that date._

“September. Eleanore Leavenworth in her uncle’s house in New York,
conducting herself as usual, but pale of face and preoccupied in manner.
_Proved by servants then in her service._ Mr. Clavering in London;
watches the United States mails with eagerness, but receives no letters.
Fits up room elegantly, as for a lady. _Proved by secret communication
from London._

“November. Miss Leavenworth still in uncle’s house. No publication
of her marriage ever made. Mr. Clavering in London; shows signs of
uneasiness; the room prepared for lady closed. _Proved as above._

“January 17, 1876. Mr. Clavering, having returned to America, engages
room at Hoffman House, New York.

“March 1 or 2. Mr. Leavenworth receives a letter signed by Henry
Clavering, in which he complains of having been ill-used by one of that
gentleman’s nieces. A manifest shade falls over the family at this time.

“March 4. Mr. Clavering under a false name inquires at the door of Mr.
Leavenworth’s house for Miss Eleanore Leavenworth. _Proved by Thomas.’”_

“March 4th?” exclaimed Mr. Gryce at this point. “That was the night of
the murder.-”

“Yes; the Mr. Le Roy Robbins said to have called that evening was none
other than Mr. Clavering.”

“March 19. Miss Mary Leavenworth, in a conversation with me,
acknowledges that there is a secret in the family, and is just upon the
point of revealing its nature, when Mr. Clavering enters the house. Upon
his departure she declares her unwillingness ever to mention the subject
again.”

Mr. Gryce slowly waved the paper aside. “And from these facts you draw
the inference that Eleanore Leavenworth is the wife of Mr. Clavering?”

“I do.”

“And that, being his wife----”

“It would be natural for her to conceal anything she knew likely to
criminate him.”

“Always supposing Clavering himself had done anything criminal!”

“Of course.”

“Which latter supposition you now propose to justify!”

“Which latter supposition it is left for _us_ to justify.”

A peculiar gleam shot over Mr. Gryce’s somewhat abstracted countenance.
“Then you have no new evidence against Mr. Clavering?”

“I should think the fact just given, of his standing in the relation of
unacknowledged husband to the suspected party was something.”

“No positive evidence as to his being the assassin of Mr. Leavenworth, I
mean?”

I was obliged to admit I had none which he would consider positive. “But
I can show the existence of motive; and I can likewise show it was not
only possible, but probable, he was in the house at the time of the
murder.”

“Ah, you can!” cried Mr. Gryce, rousing a little from his abstraction.

“The motive was the usual one of self-interest. Mr. Leavenworth stood
in the way of Eleanore’s acknowledging him as a husband, and he must
therefore be put out of the way.”

“Weak!”

“Motives for murders are sometimes weak.”

“The motive for this was not. Too much calculation was shown for the arm
to have been nerved by anything short of the most deliberate intention,
founded upon the deadliest necessity of passion or avarice.”

“Avarice?”

“One should never deliberate upon the causes which have led to the
destruction of a rich man without taking into account that most common
passion of the human race.”

“But----”

“Let us hear what you have to say of Mr. Clavering’s presence in the
house at the time of the murder.”

I related what Thomas the butler had told me in regard to Mr.
Clavering’s call upon Miss Leavenworth that night, and the lack of proof
which existed as to his having left the house when supposed to do so.

“That is worth remembering,” said Mr. Gryce at the conclusion.
“Valueless as direct evidence, it might prove of great value as
corroborative.” Then, in a graver tone, he went on to say: “Mr. Raymond,
are you aware that in all this you have been strengthening the case
against Eleanore Leavenworth instead of weakening it?”

I could only ejaculate, in my sudden wonder and dismay.

“You have shown her to be secret, sly, and unprincipled; capable of
wronging those to whom she was most bound, her uncle and her husband.”

“You put it very strongly,” said I, conscious of a shocking discrepancy
between this description of Eleanore’s character and all that I had
preconceived in regard to it.

“No more so than your own conclusions from this story warrant me in
doing.” Then, as I sat silent, murmured low, and as if to himself:
“If the case was dark against her before, it is doubly so with this
supposition established of her being the woman secretly married to Mr.
Clavering.”

“And yet,” I protested, unable to give up my hope without a struggle;
“you do not, cannot, believe the noble-looking Eleanore guilty of this
horrible crime?”

“No,” he slowly said; “you might as well know right here what I think
about that. I believe Eleanore Leavenworth to be an innocent woman.”

“You do? Then what,” I cried, swaying between joy at this admission and
doubt as to the meaning of his former expressions, “remains to be done?”

Mr. Gryce quietly responded: “Why, nothing but to prove your supposition
a false one.”



XXV. TIMOTHY COOK


    “Look here upon this picture and on this.”
         --Hamlet.

I STARED at him in amazement. “I doubt if it will be so very difficult,”
 said he. Then, in a sudden burst, “Where is the man Cook?”

“He is below with Q.”

“That was a wise move; let us see the boys; have them up.”

Stepping to the door I called them.

“I expected, of course, you would want to question them,” said I, coming
back.

In another moment the spruce Q and the shock-headed Cook entered the
room.

“Ah,” said Mr. Gryce, directing his attention at the latter in his own
whimsical, non-committal way; “this is the deceased Mr. Stebbins’ hired
man, is it? Well, you look as though you could tell the truth.”

“I usually calculate to do that thing, sir; at all events, I was never
called a liar as I can remember.”

“Of course not, of course not,” returned the affable detective. Then,
without any further introduction: “What was the first name of the lady
you saw married in your master’s house last summer?”

“Bless me if I know! I don’t think I heard, sir.”

“But you recollect how she looked?”

“As well as if she was my own mother. No disrespect to the lady, sir, if
you know her,” he made haste to add, glancing hurriedly at me. “What I
mean is, she was so handsome, I could never forget the look of her sweet
face if I lived a hundred years.”

“Can you describe her?”

“I don’t know, sirs; she was tall and grand-looking, had the brightest
eyes and the whitest hand, and smiled in a way to make even a common man
like me wish he had never seen her.”

“Would you know her in a crowd?”

“I would know her anywhere.”

“Very well; now tell us all you can about that marriage.”

“Well, sirs, it was something like this. I had been in Mr. Stebbins’
employ about a year, when one morning as I was hoeing in the garden
I saw a gentleman walk rapidly up the road to our gate and come in. I
noticed him particularly, because he was so fine-looking; unlike anybody
in F----, and, indeed, unlike anybody I had ever seen, for that matter;
but I shouldn’t have thought much about that if there hadn’t come along,
not five minutes after, a buggy with two ladies in it, which stopped at
our gate, too. I saw they wanted to get out, so I went and held their
horse for them, and they got down and went into the house.”

“Did you see their faces?”

“No, sir; not then. They had veils on.”

“Very well, go on.”

“I hadn’t been to work long, before I heard some one calling my name,
and looking up, saw Mr. Stebbins standing in the doorway beckoning. I
went to him, and he said, ‘I want you, Tim; wash your hands and come
into the parlor.’ I had never been asked to do that before, and it
struck me all of a heap; but I did what he asked, and was so taken
aback at the looks of the lady I saw standing up on the floor with
the handsome gentleman, that I stumbled over a stool and made a great
racket, and didn’t know much where I was or what was going on, till I
heard Mr. Stebbins say ‘man and wife’; and then it came over me in a hot
kind of way that it was a marriage I was seeing.”

Timothy Cook stopped to wipe his forehead, as if overcome with the very
recollection, and Mr. Gryce took the opportunity to remark:

“You say there were two ladies; now where was the other one at this
time?”

“She was there, sir; but I didn’t mind much about her, I was so taken up
with the handsome one and the way she had of smiling when any one looked
at her. I never saw the beat.”

I felt a quick thrill go through me.

“Can you remember the color of her hair or eyes?”

“No, sir; I had a feeling as if she wasn’t dark, and that is all I
know.”

“But you remember her face?”

“Yes, sir!”

Mr. Gryce here whispered me to procure two pictures which I would find
in a certain drawer in his desk, and set them up in different parts of
the room unbeknown to the man.

“You have before said,” pursued Mr. Gryce, “that you have no remembrance
of her name. Now, how was that? Weren’t you called upon to sign the
certificate?”

“Yes, sir; but I am most ashamed to say it; I was in a sort of maze,
and didn’t hear much, and only remember it was a Mr. Clavering she was
married to, and that some one called some one else Elner, or something
like that. I wish I hadn’t been so stupid, sir, if it would have done
you any good.”

“Tell us about the signing of the certificate,” said Mr. Gryce.

“Well, sir, there isn’t much to tell. Mr. Stebbins asked me to put my
name down in a certain place on a piece of paper he pushed towards me,
and I put it down there; that is all.”

“Was there no other name there when you wrote yours?”

“No, sir. Afterwards Mr. Stebbins turned towards the other lady, who now
came forward, and asked her if she wouldn’t please sign it, too; and she
said,’ yes,’ and came very quickly and did so.”

“And didn’t you see her face then?”

“No, sir; her back was to me when she threw by her veil, and I only saw
Mr. Stebbins staring at her as she stooped, with a kind of wonder on his
face, which made me think she might have been something worth looking at
too; but I didn’t see her myself.”

“Well, what happened then?”

“I don’t know, sir. I went stumbling out of the room, and didn’t see
anything more.”

“Where were you when the ladies went away?”

“In the garden, sir. I had gone back to my work.”

“You saw them, then. Was the gentleman with them?”

“No, sir; that was the queer part of it all. They went back as they
came, and so did he; and in a few minutes Mr. Stebbins came out where I
was, and told me I was to say nothing about what I had seen, for it was
a secret.”

“Were you the only one in the house who knew anything about it? Weren’t
there any women around?”

“No, sir; Miss Stebbins had gone to the sewing circle.”

I had by this time some faint impression of what Mr. Gryce’s suspicions
were, and in arranging the pictures had placed one, that of Eleanore, on
the mantel-piece, and the other, which was an uncommonly fine photograph
of Mary, in plain view on the desk. But Mr. Cook’s back was as yet
towards that part of the room, and, taking advantage of the moment,
I returned and asked him if that was all he had to tell us about this
matter.

“Yes, sir.”

“Then,” said Mr. Gryce, with a glance at Q, “isn’t there something you
can give Mr. Cook in payment for his story? Look around, will you?”

Q nodded, and moved towards a cupboard in the wall at the side of the
mantel-piece; Mr. Cook following him with his eyes, as was natural,
when, with a sudden start, he crossed the room and, pausing before the
mantelpiece, looked at the picture of Eleanore which I had put there,
gave a low grunt of satisfaction or pleasure, looked at it again, and
walked away. I felt my heart leap into my throat, and, moved by what
impulse of dread or hope I cannot say, turned my back, when suddenly I
heard him give vent to a startled exclamation, followed by the words:
“Why! here she is; this is her, sirs,” and turning around saw him
hurrying towards us with Mary’s picture in his hands.

I do not know as I was greatly surprised. I was powerfully excited, as
well as conscious of a certain whirl of thought, and an unsettling of
old conclusions that was very confusing; but surprised? No. Mr. Gryce’s
manner had too well prepared me.

“This the lady who was married to Mr. Clavering, my good man? I guess
you are mistaken,” cried the detective, in a very incredulous tone.

“Mistaken? Didn’t I say I would know her anywhere? This is the lady, if
she is the president’s wife herself.” And Mr. Cook leaned over it with a
devouring look that was not without its element of homage.

“I am very much astonished,” Mr. Gryce went on, winking at me in a slow,
diabolical way which in another mood would have aroused my fiercest
anger. “Now, if you had said the other lady was the one”--pointing to
the picture on the mantelpiece,” I shouldn’t have wondered.”

“She? I never saw that lady before; but this one--would you mind telling
me her name, sirs?”

“If what you say is true, her name is Mrs. Clavering.”

“Clavering? Yes, that was his name.”

“And a very lovely lady,” said Mr. Gryce. “Morris, haven’t you found
anything yet?”

Q, for answer, brought forward glasses and a bottle.

But Mr. Cook was in no mood for liquor. I think he was struck with
remorse; for, looking from the picture to Q, and from Q to the picture,
he said:

“If I have done this lady wrong by my talk, I’ll never forgive myself.
You told me I would help her to get her rights; if you have deceived me
----”

“Oh, I haven’t deceived you,” broke in Q, in his short, sharp way. “Ask
that gentleman there if we are not all interested in Mrs. Clavering
getting her due.”

He had designated me; but I was in no mood to reply. I longed to
have the man dismissed, that I might inquire the reason of the great
complacency which I now saw overspreading Mr. Gryce’s frame, to his very
finger-ends.

“Mr. Cook needn’t be concerned,” remarked Mr. Gryce. “If he will take
a glass of warm drink to fortify him for his walk, I think he may go to
the lodgings Mr. Morris has provided for him without fear. Give the gent
a glass, and let him mix for himself.”

But it was full ten minutes before we were delivered of the man and his
vain regrets. Mary’s image had called up every latent feeling in his
heart, and I could but wonder over a loveliness capable of swaying the
low as well as the high. But at last he yielded to the seductions of the
now wily Q, and departed.

Left alone with Mr. Gryce, I must have allowed some of the confused
emotions which filled my breast to become apparent on my countenance;
for after a few minutes of ominous silence, he exclaimed very grimly,
and yet with a latent touch of that complacency I had before noticed:

“This discovery rather upsets you, doesn’t it? Well, it don’t me,”
 shutting his mouth like a trap. “I expected it.”

“Your conclusions must differ very materially from mine,” I returned;
“or you would see that this discovery alters the complexion of the whole
affair.”

“It does not alter the truth.”

“What is the truth?”

Mr. Gryce’s very legs grew thoughtful; his voice sank to its deepest
tone. “Do you very much want to know?”

“Want to know the truth? What else are we after?”

“Then,” said he, “to my notion, the complexion of things has altered,
but very much for the better. As long as Eleanore was believed to be
the wife, her action in this matter was accounted for; but the tragedy
itself was not. Why should Eleanore or Eleanore’s husband wish the death
of a man whose bounty they believed would end with his life? But with
Mary, the heiress, proved the wife!--I tell you, Mr. Raymond, it all
hangs together now. You must never, in reckoning up an affair of murder
like this, forget who it is that most profits by the deceased man’s
death.”

“But Eleanore’s silence? her concealment of certain proofs and evidences
in her own breast--how will you account for that? I can imagine a woman
devoting herself to the shielding of a husband from the consequences of
crime; but a cousin’s husband, never.”

Mr. Gryce put his feet very close together, and softly grunted. “Then
you still think Mr. Clavering the assassin of Mr. Leavenworth?”

I could only stare at him in my sudden doubt and dread. “Still think?” I
repeated.

“Mr. Clavering the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth?”

“Why, what else is there to think? You don’t--you can’t--suspect
Eleanore of having deliberately undertaken to help her cousin out of a
difficulty by taking the life of their mutual benefactor?”

“No,” said Mr. Gryce; “no, I do not think Eleanore Leavenworth had any
hand in the business.”

“Then who--” I began, and stopped, lost in the dark vista that was
opening before me.

“Who? Why, who but the one whose past deceit and present necessity
demanded his death as a relief? Who but the beautiful, money-loving,
man-deceiving goddess----”

I leaped to my feet in my sudden horror and repugnance. “Do not mention
the name! You are wrong; but do not speak the name.”

“Excuse me,” said he; “but it will have to be spoken many times, and we
may as well begin here and now--who then but Mary Leavenworth; or, if
you like it better, Mrs. Henry Clavering? Are you so much surprised? It
has been my thought from the beginning.”



XXVI. MR. GRYCE EXPLAINS HIMSELF


    “Sits the wind in that corner?”
         --Much Ado about Nothing.

I DO not propose to enter into a description of the mingled feelings
aroused in me by this announcement. As a drowning man is said to live
over in one terrible instant the events of a lifetime, so each word
uttered in my hearing by Mary, from her first introduction to me in her
own room, on the morning of the inquest, to our final conversation on
the night of Mr. Clavering’s call, swept in one wild phantasmagoria
through my brain, leaving me aghast at the signification which her whole
conduct seemed to acquire from the lurid light which now fell upon it.

“I perceive that I have pulled down an avalanche of doubts about your
ears,” exclaimed my companion from the height of his calm superiority.
“You never thought of this possibility, then, yourself?”

“Do not ask me what I have thought. I only know I will never believe
your suspicions true. That, however much Mary may have been benefited by
her uncle’s death, she never had a hand in it; actual hand, I mean.”

“And what makes you so sure of this?”

“And what makes you so sure of the contrary? It is for you to prove, not
for me to prove her innocence.”

“Ah,” said Mr. Gryce, in his slow, sarcastic way, “you recollect that
principle of law, do you? If I remember rightly, you have not always
been so punctilious in regarding it, or wishing to have it regarded,
when the question was whether Mr. Clavering was the assassin or not.”

“But he is a man. It does not seem so dreadful to accuse a man of a
crime. But a woman! and such a woman! I cannot listen to it; it is
horrible. Nothing short of absolute confession on her part will ever
make me believe Mary Leavenworth, or any other woman, committed this
deed. It was too cruel, too deliberate, too----”

“Read the criminal records,” broke in Mr. Gryce.

But I was obstinate. “I do not care for the criminal records. All the
criminal records in the world would never make me believe Eleanore
perpetrated this crime, nor will I be less generous towards her cousin.
Mary Leavenworth is a faulty woman, but not a guilty one.”

“You are more lenient in your judgment of her than her cousin was, it
appears.”

“I do not understand you,” I muttered, feeling a new and yet more
fearful light breaking upon me.

“What! have you forgotten, in the hurry of these late events, the
sentence of accusation which we overheard uttered between these ladies
on the morning of the inquest?”

“No, but----”

“You believed it to have been spoken by Mary to Eleanore?”

“Of course; didn’t you?”

Oh, the smile which crossed Mr. Gryce’s face! “Scarcely. I left that
baby-play for you. I thought one was enough to follow on that tack.”

The light, the light that was breaking upon me! “And do you mean to say
it was Eleanore who was speaking at that time? That I have been laboring
all these weeks under a terrible mistake, and that you could have
righted me with a word, and did not?”

“Well, as to that, I had a purpose in letting you follow your own lead
for a while. In the first place, I was not sure myself which spoke;
though I had but little doubt about the matter. The voices are, as you
must have noticed, very much alike, while the attitudes in which we
found them upon entering were such as to be explainable equally by the
supposition that Mary was in the act of launching a denunciation, or in
that of repelling one. So that, while I did not hesitate myself as to
the true explanation of the scene before me, I was pleased to find you
accept a contrary one; as in this way both theories had a chance of
being tested; as was right in a case of so much mystery. You accordingly
took up the affair with one idea for your starting-point, and I with
another. You saw every fact as it developed through the medium of Mary’s
belief in Eleanore’s guilt, and I through the opposite. And what has
been the result? With you, doubt, contradiction, constant unsettlement,
and unwarranted resorts to strange sources for reconcilement between
appearances and your own convictions; with me, growing assurance, and
a belief which each and every development so far has but served to
strengthen and make more probable.”

Again that wild panorama of events, looks, and words swept before me.
Mary’s reiterated assertions of her cousin’s innocence, Eleanore’s
attitude of lofty silence in regard to certain matters which might be
considered by her as pointing towards the murderer.

“Your theory must be the correct one,” I finally admitted; “it was
undoubtedly Eleanore who spoke. She believes in Mary’s guilt, and I have
been blind, indeed, not to have seen it from the first.”

“If Eleanore Leavenworth believes in her cousin’s criminality, she must
have some good reasons for doing so.”

I was obliged to admit that too. “She did not conceal in her bosom that
telltale key,--found who knows where?--and destroy, or seek to destroy,
it and the letter which introduced her cousin to the public as the
unprincipled destroyer of a trusting man’s peace, for nothing.”

“No, no.”

“And yet you, a stranger, a young man who have never seen Mary
Leavenworth in any other light than that in which her coquettish nature
sought to display itself, presume to say she is innocent, in the face of
the attitude maintained from the first by her cousin!”

“But,” said I, in my great unwillingness to accept his conclusions,
“Eleanore Leavenworth is but mortal. She may have been mistaken in her
inferences. She has never stated what her suspicion was founded upon;
nor can we know what basis she has for maintaining the attitude you
speak of. Clavering is as likely as Mary to be the assassin, for all we
know, and possibly for all she knows.”

“You seem to be almost superstitious in your belief in Clavering’s
guilt.”

I recoiled. Was I? Could it be that Mr. Harwell’s fanciful conviction in
regard to this man had in any way influenced me to the detriment of my
better judgment?

“And you may be right,” Mr. Gryce went on. “I do not pretend to be set
in my notions. Future investigation may succeed in fixing something upon
him; though I hardly think it likely. His behavior as the secret husband
of a woman possessing motives for the commission of a crime has been too
consistent throughout.”

“All except his leaving her.”

“No exception at all; for he hasn’t left her.”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean that, instead of leaving the country, Mr. Clavering has only
made pretence of doing so. That, in place of dragging himself off to
Europe at her command, he has only changed his lodgings, and can now be
found, not only in a house opposite to hers, but in the window of that
house, where he sits day after day watching who goes in and out of her
front door.”

I remembered his parting injunction to me, in that memorable interview
we had in my office, and saw myself compelled to put a new construction
upon it.

“But I was assured at the Hoffman House that he had sailed for Europe,
and myself saw the man who professes to have driven him to the steamer.”

“Just so.”

“And Mr. Clavering returned to the city after that?”

“In another carriage, and to another house.”

“And you tell me that man is all right?”

“No; I only say there isn’t the shadow of evidence against him as the
person who shot Mr. Leavenworth.”

Rising, I paced the floor, and for a few minutes silence fell between
us. But the clock, striking, recalled me to the necessity of the hour,
and, turning, I asked Mr. Gryce what he proposed to do now.

“There is but one thing I can do,” said he.

“And that is?”

“To go upon such lights as I have, and cause the arrest of Miss
Leavenworth.”

I had by this time schooled myself to endurance, and was able to hear
this without uttering an exclamation. But I could not let it pass
without making one effort to combat his determination.

“But,” said I, “I do not see what evidence you have, positive enough in
its character, to warrant extreme measures. You have yourself intimated
that the existence of motive is not enough, even though taken with
the fact of the suspected party being in the house at the time of the
murder; and what more have you to urge against Miss Leavenworth?”

“Pardon me. I said ‘Miss Leavenworth’; I should have said ‘Eleanore
Leavenworth.’”

“Eleanore? What! when you and all unite in thinking that she alone of
all these parties to the crime is utterly guiltless of wrong?”

“And yet who is the only one against whom positive testimony of any kind
can be brought.”

I could but acknowledge that.

“Mr. Raymond,” he remarked very gravely; “the public is becoming
clamorous; something must be done to satisfy it, if only for the moment.
Eleanore has laid herself open to the suspicion of the police, and
must take the consequences of her action. I am sorry; she is a noble
creature; I admire her; but justice is justice, and though I think her
innocent, I shall be forced to put her under arrest unless----”

“But I cannot be reconciled to it. It is doing an irretrievable injury
to one whose only fault is an undue and mistaken devotion to an unworthy
cousin. If Mary is the----.”

“Unless something occurs between now and tomorrow morning,” Mr. Gryce
went on, as if I had not spoken.

“To-morrow morning?”

“Yes.”

I tried to realize it; tried to face the fact that all my efforts had
been for nothing, and failed.

“Will you not grant me one more day?” I asked in my desperation.

“What to do?”

Alas, I did not know. “To confront Mr. Clavering, and force from him the
truth.”

“To make a mess of the whole affair!” he growled. “No, sir; the die is
cast. Eleanore Leavenworth knows the one point which fixes this
crime upon her cousin, and she must tell us that point or suffer the
consequences of her refusal.”

I made one more effort.

“But why to-morrow? Having exhausted so much time already in our
inquiries, why not take a little more; especially as the trail is
constantly growing warmer? A little more moleing----”

“A little more folderol!” exclaimed Mr. Gryce, losing his temper. “No,
sir; the hour for moleing has passed; something decisive has got to be
done now; though, to be sure, if I could find the one missing link I
want----”

“Missing link? What is that?”

“The immediate motive of the tragedy; a bit of proof that Mr.
Leavenworth threatened his niece with his displeasure, or Mr. Clavering
with his revenge, would place me on the vantage-point at once; no
arresting of Eleanore then! No, my lady! I would walk right into your
own gilded parlors, and when you asked me if I had found the murderer
yet, say ‘yes,’ and show you a bit of paper which would surprise you!
But missing links are not so easily found. This has been moled for, and
moled for, as you are pleased to call our system of investigation, and
totally without result. Nothing but the confession of some one of these
several parties to the crime will give us what we want. I will tell you
what I will do,” he suddenly cried. “Miss Leavenworth has desired me to
report to her; she is very anxious for the detection of the murderer,
you know, and offers an immense reward. Well, I will gratify this desire
of hers. The suspicions I have, together with my reasons for them, will
make an interesting disclosure. I should not greatly wonder if they
produced an equally interesting confession.”

I could only jump to my feet in my horror.

“At all events, I propose to try it. Eleanore is worth that much risk
any way.”

“It will do no good,” said I. “If Mary is guilty, she will never confess
it. If not----”

“She will tell us who is.”

“Not if it is Clavering, her husband.”

“Yes; even if it is Clavering, her husband. She has not the devotion of
Eleanore.”

That I could but acknowledge. She would hide no keys for the sake of
shielding another: no, if Mary were accused, she would speak. The future
opening before us looked sombre enough. And yet when, in a short time
from that, I found myself alone in a busy street, the thought that
Eleanore was free rose above all others, filling and moving me till my
walk home in the rain that day has become a marked memory of my life.
It was only with nightfall that I began to realize the truly critical
position in which Mary stood if Mr. Gryce’s theory was correct. But,
once seized with this thought, nothing could drive it from my mind.
Shrink as I would, it was ever before me, haunting me with the direst
forebodings. Nor, though I retired early, could I succeed in getting
either sleep or rest. All night I tossed on my pillow, saying over to
myself with dreary iteration: “Something must happen, something will
happen, to prevent Mr. Gryce doing this dreadful thing.” Then I would
start up and ask what could happen; and my mind would run over various
contingencies, such as,--Mr. Clavering might confess; Hannah might come
back; Mary herself wake up to her position and speak the word I had more
than once seen trembling on her lips. But further thought showed me how
unlikely any of these things were to happen, and it was with a brain
utterly exhausted that I fell asleep in the early dawn, to dream I saw
Mary standing above Mr. Gryce with a pistol in her hand. I was awakened
from this pleasing vision by a heavy knock at the door. Hastily rising,
I asked who was there. The answer came in the shape of an envelope
thrust under the door. Raising it, I found it to be a note. It was from
Mr. Gryce, and ran thus:

“Come at once; Hannah Chester is found.”

“Hannah found?”

“So we have reason to think.”

“When? where? by whom?”

“Sit down, and I will tell you.”

Drawing up a chair in a flurry of hope and fear, I sat down by Mr.
Gryce’s side.

“She is not in the cupboard,” that person dryly assured me, noting
without doubt how my eyes went travelling about the room in my anxiety
and impatience. “We are not absolutely sure that she is anywhere. But
word has come to us that a girl’s face believed to be Hannah’s has been
seen at the upper window of a certain house in--don’t start--R----,
where a year ago she was in the habit of visiting while at the hotel
with the Misses Leavenworth. Now, as it has already been determined that
she left New York the night of the murder, by the ------ ----Railroad,
though for what point we have been unable to ascertain, we consider the
matter worth inquiring into.”

“But--”

“If she is there,” resumed Mr. Gryce, “she is secreted; kept very
close. No one except the informant has ever seen her, nor is there any
suspicion among the neighbors of her being in town.”

“Hannah secreted at a certain house in R----? Whose house?”

Mr. Gryce honored me with one of his grimmest smiles. “The name of
the lady she’s with is given in the communication as Belden; Mrs. Amy
Belden.”

“Amy Belden! the name found written on a torn envelope by Mr.
Clavering’s servant girl in London?”

“Yes.”

I made no attempt to conceal my satisfaction. “Then we are upon the
verge of some discovery; Providence has interfered, and Eleanore will be
saved! But when did you get this word?”

“Last night, or rather this morning; Q brought it.”

“It was a message, then, to Q?”

“Yes, the result of his moleings while in R----, I suppose.”

“Whom was it signed by?”

“A respectable tinsmith who lives next door to Mrs. B.”

“And is this the first you knew of an Amy Belden living in R----?”

“Yes.”

“Widow or wife?”

“Don’t know; don’t know anything about her but her name.”

“But you have already sent Q to make inquiries?”

“No; the affair is a little too serious for him to manage alone. He is
not equal to great occasions, and might fail just for the lack of a keen
mind to direct him.”

“In short----”

“I wish you to go. Since I cannot be there myself, I know of no one else
sufficiently up in the affair to conduct it to a successful issue.
You see, it is not enough to find and identify the girl. The present
condition of things demands that the arrest of so important a witness
should be kept secret. Now, for a man to walk into a strange house in a
distant village, find a girl who is secreted there, frighten her,
cajole her, force her, as the case may be, from her hiding-place to a
detective’s office in New York, and all without the knowledge of the
next-door neighbor, if possible, requires judgment, brains, genius. Then
the woman who conceals her! She must have her reasons for doing so; and
they must be known. Altogether, the affair is a delicate one. Do you
think you can manage it?”

“I should at least like to try.”

Mr. Gryce settled himself on the sofa. “To think what pleasure I am
losing on your account!” he grumbled, gazing reproachfully at his
helpless limbs. “But to business. How soon can you start?”

“Immediately.”

“Good! a train leaves the depot at 12.15. Take that. Once in R----,
it will be for you to decide upon the means of making Mrs. Belden’s
acquaintance without arousing her suspicions. Q, who will follow you,
will hold himself in readiness to render you any assistance you may
require. Only this thing is to be understood: as he will doubtless go in
disguise, you are not to recognize him, much less interfere with him
and his plans, till he gives you leave to do so, by some preconcerted
signal. You are to work in your way, and he in his, till circumstances
seem to call for mutual support and countenance. I cannot even say
whether you will see him or not; he may find it necessary to keep out of
the way; but you may be sure of one thing, that he will know where
you are, and that the display of, well, let us say a red silk
handkerchief--have you such a thing?”

“I will get one.”

“Will be regarded by him as a sign that you desire his presence or
assistance, whether it be shown about your person or at the window of
your room.”

“And these are all the instructions you can give me?” I said, as he
paused.

“Yes, I don’t know of anything else. You must depend largely upon your
own discretion, and the exigencies of the moment. I cannot tell you now
what to do. Your own wit will be the best guide. Only, if possible, let
me either hear from you or see you by to-morrow at this time.”

And he handed me a cipher in case I should wish to telegraph.



BOOK III. HANNAH



XXVII. AMY BELDEN


    “A merrier man
    Within the limits of becoming mirth,
    I never spent an hour’s talk withal.”
         --Love’s Labour’s Last.

I HAD a client in R---- by the name of Monell; and it was from him I
had planned to learn the best way of approaching Mrs. Belden. When,
therefore, I was so fortunate as to meet him, almost on my arrival,
driving on the long road behind his famous trotter Alfred, I regarded
the encounter as a most auspicious beginning of a very doubtful
enterprise.

“Well, and how goes the day?” was his exclamation as, the first
greetings passed, we drove rapidly into town.

“Your part in it goes pretty smoothly,” I returned; and thinking I could
never hope to win his attention to my own affairs till I had satisfied
him in regard to his, I told him all I could concerning the law-suit
then pending; a subject so prolific of question and answer, that we
had driven twice round the town before he remembered he had a letter to
post. As it was an important one, admitting of no delay, we hasted at
once to the post-office, where he went in, leaving me outside to watch
the rather meagre stream of goers and comers who at that time of day
make the post-office of a country town their place of rendezvous. Among
these, for some reason, I especially noted one middle-aged woman; why, I
cannot say; her appearance was anything but remarkable. And yet when
she came out, with two letters in her hand, one in a large and one in a
small envelope, and meeting my eye hastily drew them under her shawl,
I found myself wondering what was in her letters and who she could be,
that the casual glance of a stranger should unconsciously move her to an
action so suspicious. But Mr. Monell’s reappearance at the same moment,
diverted my attention, and in the interest of the conversation that
followed, I soon forgot both the woman and her letters. For determined
that he should have no opportunity to revert to that endless topic, a
law case, I exclaimed with the first crack of the whip,--“There, I knew
there was something I wanted to ask you. It is this: Are you acquainted
with any one is this town by the name of Belden?”

“There is a widow Belden in town; I don’t know of any other.”

“Is her first name Amy?”

“Yes, Mrs. Amy Belden.”

“That is the one,” said I. “Who is she, what is she, and what is the
extent of your acquaintance with her?”

“Well,” said he, “ I cannot conceive why you should be interested in
such an antiquated piece of commonplace goodness as she is, but seeing
you ask, I have no objection to telling you that she is the very
respectable relict of a deceased cabinetmaker of this town; that she
lives in a little house down the street there, and that if you have any
forlorn old tramp to be lodged over night, or any destitute family of
little ones to be looked after, she is the one to go to. As to knowing
her, I know her as I do a dozen other members of our church there up
over the hill. When I see her I speak to her, and that is all.”

“A respectable widow, you say. Any family?”

“No; lives alone, has a little income, I believe; must have, to put the
money on the plate she always does; but spends her time in plain sewing
and such deeds of charity, as one with small means but willing heart can
find the opportunity of doing in a town like this. But why in the name
of wonders do you ask?”

“Business,” said I, “business. Mrs. Belden--don’t mention it by the
way--has got mixed up in a case of mine, and I felt it due to my
curiosity if not to my purse, to find out something about her. And I am
not satisfied yet. The fact is I would give something, Monell, for the
opportunity of studying this woman’s character. Now couldn’t you manage
to get me introduced into her house in some way that would make it
possible and proper for me to converse with her at my leisure? Business
would thank you if you could.”

“Well, I don’t know; I suppose it could be done. She used to take
lodgers in the summer when the hotel was full, and might be induced
to give a bed to a friend of mine who is very anxious to be near the
post-office on account of a business telegram he is expecting, and which
when it comes will demand his immediate attention.” And Mr. Monell gave
me a sly wink of his eye, little imagining how near the mark he had
struck.

“You need not say that. Tell her I have a peculiar dislike to sleeping
in a public house, and that you know of no one better fitted to
accommodate me, for the short time I desire to be in town, than
herself.”

“And what will be said of my hospitality in allowing you under these
circumstances to remain in any other house than my own?”

“I don’t know; very hard things, no doubt; but I guess your hospitality
can stand it.”

“Well, if you persist, we will see what can be done.” And driving up to
a neat white cottage of homely, but sufficiently attractive appearance,
he stopped.

“This is her house,” said he, jumping to the ground; “let’s go in and
see what we can do.”

Glancing up at the windows, which were all closed save the two on the
veranda overlooking the street, I thought to myself, “If she has anybody
in hiding here, whose presence in the house she desires to keep secret,
it is folly to hope she will take me in, however well recommended I may
come.” But, yielding to the example of my friend, I alighted in my turn
and followed him up the short, grass-bordered walk to the front door.

“As she has no servant, she will come to the door herself, so be ready,”
 he remarked as he knocked.

I had barely time to observe that the curtains to the window at my left
suddenly dropped, when a hasty step made itself heard within, and a
quick hand drew open the door; and I saw before me the woman whom I
had observed at the post-office, and whose action with the letters had
struck me as peculiar. I recognized her at first glance, though she
was differently dressed, and had evidently passed through some worry or
excitement that had altered the expression of her countenance, and
made her manner what it was not at that time, strained and a trifle
uncertain. But I saw no reason for thinking she remembered me. On the
contrary, the look she directed towards me had nothing but inquiry in
it, and when Mr. Monell pushed me forward with the remark, “A friend
of mine; in fact my lawyer from New York,” she dropped a hurried
old-fashioned curtsey whose only expression was a manifest desire to
appear sensible of the honor conferred upon her, through the mist of a
certain trouble that confused everything about her.

“We have come to ask a favor, Mrs. Belden; but may we not come in? “said
my client in a round, hearty voice well calculated to recall a person’s
thoughts into their proper channel. “I have heard many times of your
cosy home, and am glad of this opportunity of seeing it.” And with a
blind disregard to the look of surprised resistance with which she met
his advance, he stepped gallantly into the little room whose cheery
red carpet and bright picture-hung walls showed invitingly through the
half-open door at our left.

Finding her premises thus invaded by a sort of French _coup d’etat,_
Mrs. Belden made the best of the situation, and pressing me to enter
also, devoted herself to hospitality. As for Mr. Monell, he quite
blossomed out in his endeavors to make himself agreeable; so much so,
that I shortly found myself laughing at his sallies, though my heart was
full of anxiety lest, after all, our efforts should fail of the success
they certainly merited. Meanwhile, Mrs. Belden softened more and more,
joining in the conversation with an ease hardly to be expected from one
in her humble circumstances. Indeed, I soon saw she was no common woman.
There was a refinement in her speech and manner, which, combined with
her motherly presence and gentle air, was very pleasing. The last woman
in the world to suspect of any underhanded proceeding, if she had not
shown a peculiar hesitation when Mr. Monell broached the subject of my
entertainment there.

“I don’t know, sir; I would be glad, but,” and she turned a very
scrutinizing look upon me, “the fact is, I have not taken lodgers of
late, and I have got out of the way of the whole thing, and am afraid I
cannot make him comfortable. In short, you will have to excuse me.”

“But we can’t,” returned Mr. Monell. “What, entice a fellow into a room
like this”--and he cast a hearty admiring glance round the apartment
which, for all its simplicity, both its warm coloring and general air of
cosiness amply merited, “and then turn a cold shoulder upon him when he
humbly entreats the honor of staying a single night in the enjoyment
of its attractions? No, no, Mrs. Belden; I know you too well for that.
Lazarus himself couldn’t come to your door and be turned away; much less
a good-hearted, clever-headed young gentleman like my friend here.”

“You are very good,” she began, an almost weak love of praise showing
itself for a moment in her eyes; “but I have no room prepared. I have
been house-cleaning, and everything is topsy-turvy Mrs. Wright, now,
over the way----”

“My young friend is going to stop here,” Mr. Mouell broke in, with frank
positiveness. “If I cannot have him at my own house,--and for certain
reasons it is not advisable,--I shall at least have the satisfaction of
knowing he is in the charge of the best housekeeper in R----.”

“Yes,” I put in, but without too great a show of interest; “I should be
sorry, once introduced here, to be obliged to go elsewhere.”

The troubled eye wavered away from us to the door.

“I was never called inhospitable,” she commenced; “but everything in
such disorder. What time would you like to come?”

“I was in hopes I might remain now,” I replied; “I have some letters
to write, and ask nothing better than for leave to sit here and write
them.”

At the word letters I saw her hand go to her pocket in a movement which
must have been involuntary, for her countenance did not change, and she
made the quick reply:

“Well, you may. If you can put up with such poor accommodations as I can
offer, it shall not be said I refused you what Mr. Monell is pleased to
call a favor.”

And, complete in her reception as she had been in her resistance, she
gave us a pleasant smile, and, ignoring my thanks, bustled out with Mr.
Monell to the buggy, where she received my bag and what was, doubtless,
more to her taste, the compliments he was now more than ever ready to
bestow upon her.

“I will see that a room is got ready for you in a very short space of
time,” she said, upon re-entering. “Meanwhile, make yourself at home
here; and if you wish to write, why I think you will find everything for
the purpose in these drawers.” And wheeling up a table to the easy chair
in which I sat, she pointed to the small compartments beneath, with
an air of such manifest desire to have me make use of anything and
everything she had, that I found myself wondering over my position with
a sort of startled embarrassment that was not remote from shame.

“Thank you; I have materials of my own,” said I, and hastened to open my
bag and bring out the writing-case, which I always carried with me.

“Then I will leave you,” said she; and with a quick bend and a short,
hurried look out of the window, she hastily quitted the room.

I could hear her steps cross the hall, go up two or three stairs, pause,
go up the rest of the flight, pause again, and then pass on. I was left
on the first floor alone.



XXVIII. A WEIRD EXPERIENCE


    “Flat burglary as ever was committed.”
         --Much Ado about Nothing.

THE first thing I did was to inspect with greater care the room in which
I sat.

It was a pleasant apartment, as I have already said; square, sunny, and
well furnished. On the floor was a crimson carpet, on the walls several
pictures, at the windows, cheerful curtains of white, tastefully
ornamented with ferns and autumn leaves; in one corner an old melodeon,
and in the centre of the room a table draped with a bright cloth, on
which were various little knick-knacks which, without being rich or
expensive, were both pretty and, to a certain extent, ornamental. But
it was not these things, which I had seen repeated in many other country
homes, that especially attracted my attention, or drew me forward in the
slow march which I now undertook around the room. It was the something
underlying all these, the evidences which I found, or sought to find,
not only in the general aspect of the room, but in each trivial object
I encountered, of the character, disposition, and history of the woman
with whom I now had to deal. It was for this reason I studied the
daguerreotypes on the mantel-piece, the books on the shelf, and the
music on the rack; for this and the still further purpose of noting if
any indications were to be found of there being in the house any such
person as Hannah.

First then, for the little library, which I was pleased to see occupied
one corner of the room. Composed of a few well-chosen books, poetical,
historical, and narrative, it was of itself sufficient to account
for the evidences of latent culture observable in Mrs. Belden’s
conversation. Taking out a well-worn copy of _Byron,_ I opened it. There
were many passages marked, and replacing the book with a mental comment
upon her evident impressibility to the softer emotions, I turned towards
the melodeon fronting me from the opposite wall. It was closed, but on
its neatly-covered top lay one or two hymn-books, a basket of russet
apples, and a piece of half-completed knitting work.

I took up the latter, but was forced to lay it down again without a
notion for what it was intended. Proceeding, I next stopped before
a window opening upon the small yard that ran about the house, and
separated it from the one adjoining. The scene without failed to attract
me, but the window itself drew my attention, for, written with a diamond
point on one of the panes, I perceived a row of letters which, as
nearly as I could make out, were meant for some word or words, but which
utterly failed in sense or apparent connection. Passing it by as the
work of some school-girl, I glanced down at the work-basket standing on
a table at my side. It was full of various kinds of work, among which I
spied a pair of stockings, which were much too small, as well as in too
great a state of disrepair, to belong to Mrs. Belden; and drawing them
carefully out, I examined them for any name on them. Do not start when I
say I saw the letter H plainly marked upon them. Thrusting them back,
I drew a deep breath of relief, gazing, as I did so, out of the window,
when those letters again attracted my attention.

What could they mean? Idly I began to read them backward, when--But try
for yourself, reader, and judge of my surprise! Elate at the discovery
thus made, I sat down to write my letters. I had barely finished them,
when Mrs. Belden came in with the announcement that supper was ready.
“As for your room,” said she, “I have prepared my own room for your use,
thinking you would like to remain on the first floor.” And, throwing
open a door at my side, she displayed a small, but comfortable room,
in which I could dimly see a bed, an immense bureau, and a shadowy
looking-glass in a dark, old-fashioned frame.

“I live in very primitive fashion,” she resumed, leading the way into
the dining-room; “but I mean to be comfortable and make others so.”

“I should say you amply succeeded,” I rejoined, with an appreciative
glance at her well-spread board.

She smiled, and I felt I had paved the way to her good graces in a way
that would yet redound to my advantage.

Shall I ever forget that supper! its dainties, its pleasant freedom, its
mysterious, pervading atmosphere of unreality, and the constant sense
which every bountiful dish she pressed upon me brought of the shame of
eating this woman’s food with such feelings of suspicion in my heart!
Shall I ever forget the emotion I experienced when I first perceived
she had something on her mind, which she longed, yet hesitated, to give
utterance to! Or how she started when a cat jumped from the sloping roof
of the kitchen on to the grass-plot at the back of the house; or how my
heart throbbed when I heard, or thought I heard, a board creak overhead!
We were in a long and narrow room which seemed, curiously enough, to run
crosswise of the house, opening on one side into the parlor, and on the
other into the small bedroom, which had been allotted to my use.

“You live in this house alone, without fear?” I asked, as Mrs. Belden,
contrary to my desire, put another bit of cold chicken on my plate.
“Have you no marauders in this town: no tramps, of whom a solitary woman
like you might reasonably be afraid?”

“No one will hurt me,” said she; “and no one ever came here for food or
shelter but got it.”

“I should think, then, that living as you do, upon a railroad, you would
be constantly overrun with worthless beings whose only trade is to take
all they can get without giving a return.”

“I cannot turn them away. It is the only luxury I have: to feed the
poor.”

“But the idle, restless ones, who neither will work, nor let others
work----”

“Are still the poor.”

Mentally remarking, here is the woman to shield an unfortunate who has
somehow become entangled in the meshes of a great crime, I drew back
from the table. As I did so, the thought crossed me that, in case
there was any such person in the house as Hannah, she would take the
opportunity of going up-stairs with something for her to eat; and that
she might not feel hampered by my presence, I stepped out on the veranda
with my cigar.

While smoking it, I looked about for Q. I felt that the least token
of his presence in town would be very encouraging at this time. But it
seemed I was not to be afforded even that small satisfaction. If Q was
anywhere near, he was lying very low.

Once again seated with Mrs. Belden (who I know came down-stairs with an
empty plate, for going into the kitchen for a drink, I caught her in
the act of setting it down on the table), I made up my mind to wait a
reasonable length of time for what she had to say; and then, if she did
not speak, make an endeavor on my own part to surprise her secret.

But her avowal was nearer and of a different nature from what I
expected, and brought its own train of consequences with it.

“You are a lawyer, I believe,” she began, taking down her knitting work,
with a forced display of industry.

“Yes,” I said; “that is my profession.”

She remained for a moment silent, creating great havoc in her work I am
sure, from the glance of surprise and vexation she afterwards threw it.
Then, in a hesitating voice, remarked:

“Perhaps you may be willing, then, to give me some advice. The truth is,
I am in a very curious predicament; one from which I don’t know how to
escape, and yet which demands immediate action. I should like to tell
you about it; may I?”

“You may; I shall be only too happy to give you any advice in my power.”

She drew in her breath with a sort of vague relief, though her forehead
did not lose its frown.

“It can all be said in a few words. I have in my possession a package of
papers which were intrusted to me by two ladies, with the understanding
that I should neither return nor destroy them without the full
cognizance and expressed desire of both parties, given in person or
writing. That they were to remain in my hands till then, and that
nothing or nobody should extort them from me.”

“That is easily understood,” said I; for she stopped.

“But, now comes word from one of the ladies, the one, too, most
interested in the matter, that, for certain reasons, the immediate
destruction of those papers is necessary to her peace and safety.”

“And do you want to know what your duty is in this case?”

“Yes,” she tremulously replied.

I rose. I could not help it: a flood of conjectures rushing in tumult
over me.

“It is to hold on to the papers like grim death till released from your
guardianship by the combined wish of both parties.”

“Is that your opinion as a lawyer?”

“Yes, and as a man. Once pledged in that way, you have no choice. It
would be a betrayal of trust to yield to the solicitations of one party
what you have undertaken to return to both. The fact that grief or loss
might follow your retention of these papers does not release you from
your bond. You have nothing to do with that; besides, you are by no
means sure that the representations of the so-called interested party
are true. You might be doing a greater wrong, by destroying in this way,
what is manifestly considered of value to them both, than by preserving
the papers intact, according to compact.”

“But the circumstances? Circumstances alter cases; and in short, it
seems to me that the wishes of the one most interested ought to be
regarded, especially as there is an estrangement between these ladies
which may hinder the other’s consent from ever being obtained.”

“No,” said I; “two wrongs never make a right; nor are we at liberty to
do an act of justice at the expense of an injustice. The papers must be
preserved, Mrs. Belden.”

Her head sank very despondingly; evidently it had been her wish to
please the interested party. “Law is very hard,” she said; “very hard.”

“This is not only law, but plain duty,” I remarked. “Suppose a case
different; suppose the honor and happiness of the other party depended
upon the preservation of the papers; where would your duty be then?”

“But----”

“A contract is a contract,” said I, “and cannot be tampered with. Having
accepted the trust and given your word, you are obliged to fulfil, to
the letter, all its conditions. It would be a breach of trust for you to
return or destroy the papers without the mutual consent necessary.”

An expression of great gloom settled slowly over her features. “I
suppose you are right,” said she, and became silent.

Watching her, I thought to myself, “If I were Mr. Gryce, or even Q, I
would never leave this seat till I had probed this matter to the bottom,
learned the names of the parties concerned, and where those precious
papers are hidden, which she declares to be of so much importance.” But
being neither, I could only keep her talking upon the subject until
she should let fall some word that might serve as a guide to my further
enlightenment; I therefore turned, with the intention of asking her
some question, when my attention was attracted by the figure of a woman
coming out of the back-door of the neighboring house, who, for general
dilapidation and uncouthness of bearing, was a perfect type of the style
of tramp of whom we had been talking at the supper table. Gnawing a
crust which she threw away as she reached the street, she trudged down
the path, her scanty dress, piteous in its rags and soil, flapping in
the keen spring wind, and revealing ragged shoes red with the mud of the
highway.

“There is a customer that may interest you,” said I.

Mrs. Belden seemed to awake from a trance. Rising slowly, she looked
out, and with a rapidly softening gaze surveyed the forlorn creature
before her.

“Poor thing!” she muttered; “but I cannot do much for her to-night. A
good supper is all I can give her.”

And, going to the front door, she bade her step round the house to the
kitchen, where, in another moment, I heard the rough creature’s voice
rise in one long “Bless you!” that could only have been produced by the
setting before her of the good things with which Mrs. Belden’s larder
seemed teeming.

But supper was not all she wanted. After a decent length of time,
employed as I should judge in mastication, I heard her voice rise once
more in a plea for shelter.

“The barn, ma’am, or the wood-house. Any place where I can lie out of
the wind.” And she commenced a long tale of want and disease, so piteous
to hear that I was not at all surprised when Mrs. Belden told me,
upon re-entering, that she had consented, notwithstanding her previous
determination, to allow the woman to lie before the kitchen fire for the
night.

“She has such an honest eye,” said she; “and charity is my only luxury.”

The interruption of this incident effectually broke up our conversation.
Mrs. Belden went up-stairs, and for some time I was left alone to ponder
over what I had heard, and determine upon my future course of action. I
had just reached the conclusion that she would be fully as liable to
be carried away by her feelings to the destruction of the papers in her
charge, as to be governed by the rules of equity I had laid down to her,
when I heard her stealthily descend the stairs and go out by the front
door. Distrustful of her intentions, I took up my hat and hastily
followed her. She was on her way down the main street, and my first
thought was, that she was bound for some neighbor’s house or perhaps for
the hotel itself; but the settled swing into which she soon altered her
restless pace satisfied me that she had some distant goal in prospect;
and before long I found myself passing the hotel with its appurtenances,
even the little schoolhouse, that was the last building at this end of
the village, and stepping out into the country beyond. What could it
mean?

But still her fluttering figure hasted on, the outlines of her form,
with its close shawl and neat bonnet, growing fainter and fainter in the
now settled darkness of an April night; and still I followed, walking on
the turf at the side of the road lest she should hear my footsteps and
look round. At last we reached a bridge. Over this I could hear her
pass, and then every sound ceased. She had paused, and was evidently
listening. It would not do for me to pause too, so gathering myself into
as awkward a shape as possible, I sauntered by her down the road, but
arrived at a certain point, stopped, and began retracing my steps with a
sharp lookout for her advancing figure, till I had arrived once more at
the bridge. She was not there.

Convinced now that she had discovered my motive for being in her house
and, by leading me from it, had undertaken to supply Hannah with an
opportunity for escape, I was about to hasten back to the charge I had
so incautiously left, when a strange sound heard at my left arrested me.
It came from the banks of the puny stream which ran under the bridge,
and was like the creaking of an old door on worn-out hinges.

Leaping the fence, I made my way as best I could down the sloping field
in the direction from which the sound came. It was quite dark, and my
progress was slow; so much so, that I began to fear I had ventured upon
a wild-goose chase, when an unexpected streak of lightning shot across
the sky, and by its glare I saw before me what seemed, in the momentary
glimpse I had of it, an old barn. From the rush of waters near at hand,
I judged it to be somewhere on the edge of the stream, and consequently
hesitated to advance, when I heard the sound of heavy breathing near me,
followed by a stir as of some one feeling his way over a pile of loose
boards; and presently, while I stood there, a faint blue light flashed
up from the interior of the barn, and I saw, through the tumbled-down
door that faced me, the form of Mrs. Belden standing with a lighted
match in her hand, gazing round on the four walls that encompassed her.
Hardly daring to breathe, lest I should alarm her, I watched her while
she turned and peered at the roof above her, which was so old as to be
more than half open to the sky, at the flooring beneath, which was in
a state of equal dilapidation, and finally at a small tin box which she
drew from under her shawl and laid on the ground at her feet. The sight
of that box at once satisfied me as to the nature of her errand. She was
going to hide what she dared not destroy; and, relieved upon this point,
I was about to take a step forward when the match went out in her hand.
While she was engaged in lighting another, I considered that perhaps it
would be better for me not to arouse her apprehensions by accosting her
at this time, and thus endanger the success of my main scheme; but
to wait till she was gone, before I endeavored to secure the box.
Accordingly I edged my way up to the side of the barn and waited till
she should leave it, knowing that if I attempted to peer in at the
door, I ran great risk of being seen, owing to the frequent streaks of
lightning which now flashed about us on every side. Minute after minute
went by, with its weird alternations of heavy darkness and sudden
glare; and still she did not come. At last, just as I was about to start
impatiently from my hiding-place, she reappeared, and began to withdraw
with faltering steps toward the bridge. When I thought her quite out of
hearing, I stole from my retreat and entered the barn. It was of course
as dark as Erebus, but thanks to being a smoker I was as well provided
with matches as she had been, and having struck one, I held it up; but
the light it gave was very feeble, and as I did not know just where to
look, it went out before I had obtained more than a cursory glimpse of
the spot where I was. I thereupon lit another; but though I confined my
attention to one place, namely, the floor at my feet, it too went out
before I could conjecture by means of any sign seen there where she had
hidden the box. I now for the first time realized the difficulty before
me. She had probably made up her mind, before she left home, in just
what portion of this old barn she would conceal her treasure; but I had
nothing to guide me: I could only waste matches. And I did waste them. A
dozen had been lit and extinguished before I was so much as sure the box
was not under a pile of debris that lay in one corner, and I had taken
the last in my hand before I became aware that one of the broken boards
of the floor was pushed a little out of its proper position. One match!
and that board was to be raised, the space beneath examined, and the
box, if there, lifted safely out. I concluded not to waste my resources,
so kneeling down in the darkness, I groped for the board, tried it, and
found it to be loose. Wrenching at it with all my strength, I tore it
free and cast it aside; then lighting my match looked into the hole thus
made. Something, I could not tell what, stone or box, met my eye, but
while I reached for it, the match flew out of my hand. Deploring my
carelessness, but determined at all hazards to secure what I had seen,
I dived down deep into the hole, and in another moment had the object of
my curiosity in my hands. It was the box!

Satisfied at this result of my efforts, I turned to depart, my one wish
now being to arrive home before Mrs. Belden. Was this possible? She had
several minutes the start of me; I would have to pass her on the road,
and in so doing might be recognized. Was the end worth the risk? I
decided that it was.

Regaining the highway, I started at a brisk pace. For some little
distance I kept it up, neither overtaking nor meeting any one. But
suddenly, at a turn in the road, I came unexpectedly upon Mrs. Belden,
standing in the middle of the path, looking back. Somewhat disconcerted,
I hastened swiftly by her, expecting her to make some effort to stop me.
But she let me pass without a word. Indeed, I doubt now if she even saw
or heard me. Astonished at this treatment, and still more surprised
that she made no attempt to follow me, I looked back, when I saw what
enchained her to the spot, and made her so unmindful of my presence. The
barn behind us was on fire!

Instantly I realized it was the work of my hands; I had dropped a
half-extinguished match, and it had fallen upon some inflammable
substance.

Aghast at the sight, I paused in my turn, and stood staring. Higher and
higher the red flames mounted, brighter and brighter glowed the clouds
above, the stream beneath; and in the fascination of watching it all,
I forgot Mrs. Belden. But a short, agitated gasp in my vicinity soon
recalled her presence to my mind, and drawing nearer, I heard her
exclaim like a person speaking in a dream, “Well, I didn’t mean to do
it”; then lower, and with a certain satisfaction in her tone, “But it’s
all right, any way; the thing is lost now for good, and Mary will be
satisfied without any one being to blame.”

I did not linger to hear more; if this was the conclusion she had come
to, she would not wait there long, especially as the sound of distant
shouts and running feet announced that a crowd of village boys was on
its way to the scene of the conflagration.

The first thing I did, upon my arrival at the house, was to assure
myself that no evil effects had followed my inconsiderate desertion of
it to the mercies of the tramp she had taken in; the next to retire to
my room, and take a peep at the box. I found it to be a neat tin coffer,
fastened with a lock. Satisfied from its weight that it contained
nothing heavier than the papers of which Mrs. Belden had spoken, I hid
it under the bed and returned to the sitting-room. I had barely taken a
seat and lifted a book when Mrs. Belden came in.

“Well!” cried she, taking off her bonnet and revealing a face much
flushed with exercise, but greatly relieved in expression; “this _is_
a night! It lightens, and there is a fire somewhere down street, and
altogether it is perfectly dreadful out. I hope you have not been
lonesome,” she continued, with a keen searching of my face which I
bore in the best way I could. “I had an errand to attend to, but didn’t
expect to stay so long.”

I returned some nonchalant reply, and she hastened from the room to
fasten up the house.

I waited, but she did not come back; fearful, perhaps, of betraying
herself, she had retired to her own apartment, leaving me to take care
of myself as best I might. I own that I was rather relieved at this. The
fact is, I did not feel equal to any more excitement that night, and was
glad to put off further action until the next day. As soon, then, as
the storm was over, I myself went to bed, and, after several ineffectual
efforts, succeeded in getting asleep.



XXIX. THE MISSING WITNESS


    “I fled and cried out death.”
         --Milton.

“MR. RAYMOND!”

The voice was low and searching; it reached me in my dreams, waked me,
and caused me to look up. Morning had begun to break, and by its light I
saw, standing in the open door leading into the dining-room, the forlorn
figure of the tramp who had been admitted into the house the night
before. Angry and perplexed, I was about to bid her be gone, when, to my
great surprise, she pulled out a red handkerchief from her pocket, and I
recognized Q.

“Read that,” said he, hastily advancing and putting a slip of paper into
my hand. And, without another word or look, left the room, closing the
door behind him.

Rising in considerable agitation, I took it to the window, and by the
rapidly increasing light, succeeded in making out the rudely scrawled
lines as follows:

“She is here; I have seen her; in the room marked with a cross in the
accompanying plan. Wait till eight o’clock, then go up. I will contrive
some means of getting Mrs. B---- out of the house.”

Sketched below this was the following plan of the upper floor:

Hannah, then, was in the small back room over the dining-room, and I had
not been deceived in thinking I had heard steps overhead, the evening
before. Greatly relieved, and yet at the same time much moved at the
near prospect of being brought face to face with one who we had every
reason to believe was acquainted with the dreadful secret involved in
the Leavenworth murder, I lay down once more, and endeavored to catch
another hour’s rest. But I soon gave up the effort in despair, and
contented myself with listening to the sounds of awakening life which
now began to make themselves heard in the house and neighborhood.

As Q had closed the door after him, I could only faintly hear Mrs.
Belden when she came down-stairs. But the short, surprised exclamation
which she uttered upon reaching the kitchen and finding the tramp gone
and the back-door wide open, came plainly enough to my ears, and for a
moment I was not sure but that Q had made a mistake in thus leaving so
unceremoniously. But he had not studied Mrs. Belden’s character in vain.
As she came, in the course of her preparations for breakfast, into the
room adjoining mine, I could hear her murmur to herself:

“Poor thing! She has lived so long in the fields and at the roadside,
she finds it unnatural to be cooped up in the house all night.”

The trial of that breakfast! The effort to eat and appear unconcerned,
to chat and make no mistake,--May I never be called upon to go through
such another! But at last it was over, and I was left free to await
in my own room the time for the dreaded though much-to-be-desired
interview. Slowly the minutes passed; eight o’clock struck, when, just
as the last vibration ceased, there came a loud knock at the backdoor,
and a little boy burst into the kitchen, crying at the top of his voice:
“Papa’s got a fit! Oh, Mrs. Belden! papa’s got a fit; do come!”

Rising, as was natural, I hastened towards the kitchen, meeting Mrs.
Belden’s anxious face in the doorway.

“A poor wood-chopper down the street has fallen in a fit,” she said.
“Will you please watch over the house while I see what I can do for him?
I won’t be absent any longer than I can help.”

And almost without waiting for my reply, she caught up a shawl, threw
it over her head, and followed the urchin, who was in a state of great
excitement, out into the street.

Instantly the silence of death seemed to fill the house, and a dread the
greatest I had ever experienced settled upon me. To leave the kitchen,
go up those stairs, and confront that girl seemed for the moment beyond
my power; but, once on the stair, I found myself relieved from the
especial dread which had overwhelmed me, and possessed, instead, of a
sort of combative curiosity that led me to throw open the door which
I saw at the top with a certain fierceness new to my nature, and not
altogether suitable, perhaps, to the occasion.

I found myself in a large bedroom, evidently the one occupied by Mrs.
Belden the night before. Barely stopping to note certain evidences of
her having passed a restless night, I passed on to the door leading into
the room marked with a cross in the plan drawn for me by Q. It was a
rough affair, made of pine boards rudely painted. Pausing before it, I
listened. All was still. Raising the latch, I endeavored to enter. The
door was locked. Pausing again, I bent my ear to the keyhole. Not a
sound came from within; the grave itself could not have been stiller.
Awe-struck and irresolute, I looked about me and questioned what I had
best do. Suddenly I remembered that, in the plan Q had given me, I had
seen intimation of another door leading into this same room from the one
on the opposite side of the hall. Going hastily around to it, I tried
it with my hand. But it was as fast as the other. Convinced at last that
nothing was left me but force, I spoke for the first time, and, calling
the girl by name, commanded her to open the door. Receiving no response,
I said aloud with an accent of severity:

“Hannah Chester, you are discovered; if you do not open the door, we
shall be obliged to break it down; save us the trouble, then, and open
immediately.”

Still no reply.

Going back a step, I threw my whole weight against the door. It creaked
ominously, but still resisted.

Stopping only long enough to be sure no movement had taken place within,
I pressed against it once more, this time with all my strength, when it
flew from its hinges, and I fell forward into a room so stifling, chill,
and dark that I paused for a moment to collect my scattered senses
before venturing to look around me. It was well I did so. In another
moment, the pallor and fixity of the pretty Irish face staring upon me
from amidst the tumbled clothes of a bed, drawn up against the wall at
my side, struck me with so deathlike a chill that, had it not been for
that one instant of preparation, I should have been seriously dismayed.
As it was, I could not prevent a feeling of sickly apprehension from
seizing me as I turned towards the silent figure stretched so near, and
observed with what marble-like repose it lay beneath the patchwork quilt
drawn across it, asking myself if sleep could be indeed so like death
in its appearance. For that it was a sleeping woman I beheld, I did not
seriously doubt. There were too many evidences of careless life in the
room for any other inference. The clothes, left just as she had stepped
from them in a circle on the floor; the liberal plate of food placed
in waiting for her on the chair by the door, --food amongst which I
recognized, even in this casual glance, the same dish which we had had
for breakfast --all and everything in the room spoke of robust life and
reckless belief in the morrow.

And yet so white was the brow turned up to the bare beams of the
unfinished wall above her, so glassy the look of the half-opened eyes,
so motionless the arm lying half under, half over, the edge of the
coverlid that it was impossible not to shrink from contact with a
creature so sunk in unconsciousness. But contact seemed to be necessary;
any cry which I could raise at that moment would be ineffectual enough
to pierce those dull ears. Nerving myself, therefore, I stooped and
lifted the hand which lay with its telltale scar mockingly uppermost,
intending to speak, call, do something, anything, to arouse her. But at
the first touch of her hand on mine an unspeakable horror thrilled me.
It was not only icy cold, but stiff. Dropping it in my agitation, I
started back and again surveyed the face. Great God! when did life ever
look like that? What sleep ever wore such pallid hues, such accusing
fixedness? Bending once more I listened at the lips. Not a breath, nor a
stir. Shocked to the core of my being, I made one final effort. Tearing
down the clothes, I laid my hand upon her heart. It was pulseless as
stone.



XXX. BURNED PAPER


    “I could have better spared a better man.”
         --Henry IV.

I DO not think I called immediately for help. The awful shock of this
discovery, coming as it did at the very moment life and hope were
strongest within me; the sudden downfall which it brought of all the
plans based upon this woman’s expected testimony; and, worst of all, the
dread coincidence between this sudden death and the exigency in which
the guilty party, whoever it was, was supposed to be at that hour were
much too appalling for instant action. I could only stand and stare at
the quiet face before me, smiling in its peaceful rest as if death
were pleasanter than we think, and marvel over the providence which
had brought us renewed fear instead of relief, complication instead of
enlightenment, disappointment instead of realization. For eloquent as is
death, even on the faces of those unknown and unloved by us, the causes
and consequences of this one were much too important to allow the mind
to dwell upon the pathos of the scene itself. Hannah, the girl, was lost
in Hannah the witness.

But gradually, as I gazed, the look of expectation which I perceived
hovering about the wistful mouth and half-open lids attracted me, and I
bent above her with a more personal interest, asking myself if she were
quite dead, and whether or not immediate medical assistance would be of
any avail. But the more closely I looked, the more certain I became
that she had been dead for some hours; and the dismay occasioned by this
thought, taken with the regrets which I must ever feel, that I had not
adopted the bold course the evening before, and, by forcing my way to
the hiding-place of this poor creature, interrupted, if not prevented
the consummation of her fate, startled me into a realization of my
present situation; and, leaving her side, I went into the next room,
threw up the window, and fastened to the blind the red handkerchief
which I had taken the precaution to bring with me.

Instantly a young man, whom I was fain to believe Q, though he bore
not the least resemblance, either in dress or facial expression to
any renderings of that youth which I had yet seen, emerged from the
tinsmith’s house, and approached the one I was in.

Observing him cast a hurried glance in my direction, I crossed the
floor, and stood awaiting him at the head of the stairs.

“Well?” he whispered, upon entering the house and meeting my glance from
below; “have you seen her?”

“Yes,” I returned bitterly, “I have seen her!”

He hurriedly mounted to my side. “And she has confessed?”

“No; I have had no talk with her.” Then, as I perceived him growing
alarmed at my voice and manner, I drew him into Mrs. Belden’s room and
hastily inquired: “What did you mean this morning when you informed me
you had seen this girl? that she was in a certain room where I might
find her?”

“What I said.”

“You have, then, been to her room?”

“No; I have only been on the outside of it. Seeing a light, I crawled up
on to the ledge of the slanting roof last night while both you and Mrs.
Belden were out, and, looking through the window, saw her moving round
the room.” He must have observed my countenance change, for he stopped.
“What is to pay?” he cried.

I could restrain myself no longer. “Come,” I said, “and see for
yourself!” And, leading him to the little room I had just left, I
pointed to the silent form lying within. “You told me I should
find Hannah here; but you did not tell me I should find her in this
condition.”

“Great heaven!” he cried with a start: “not dead?”

“Yes,” I said, “dead.”

It seemed as if he could not realize it. “But it is impossible!” he
returned. “She is in a heavy sleep, has taken a narcotic----”

“It is not sleep,” I said, “or if it is, she will never wake. Look!”
 And, taking the hand once more in mine, I let it fall in its stone
weight upon the bed.

The sight seemed to convince him. Calming down, he stood gazing at her
with a very strange expression upon his face. Suddenly he moved and
began quietly turning over the clothes that were lying on the floor.

“What are you doing?” I asked. “What are you looking for?”

“I am looking for the bit of paper from which I saw her take what I
supposed to be a dose of medicine last night. Oh, here it is!” he cried,
lifting a morsel of paper that, lying on the floor under the edge of the
bed, had hitherto escaped his notice.

“Let me see!” I anxiously exclaimed.

He handed me the paper, on the inner surface of which I could dimly
discern the traces of an impalpable white powder.

“This is important,” I declared, carefully folding the paper together.
“If there is enough of this powder remaining to show that the contents
of this paper were poisonous, the manner and means of the girl’s death
are accounted for, and a case of deliberate suicide made evident.”

“I am not so sure of that,” he retorted. “If I am any judge of
countenances, and I rather flatter myself I am, this girl had no more
idea she was taking poison than I had. She looked not only bright but
gay; and when she tipped up the paper, a smile of almost silly triumph
crossed her face. If Mrs. Belden gave her that dose to take, telling her
it was medicine----”

“That is something which yet remains to be learned; also whether the
dose, as you call it, was poisonous or not. It may be she died of heart
disease.”

He simply shrugged his shoulders, and pointed first at the plate of
breakfast left on the chair, and secondly at the broken-down door.

“Yes,” I said, answering his look, “Mrs. Belden has been in here this
morning, and Mrs. Belden locked the door when she went out; but that
proves nothing beyond her belief in the girl’s hearty condition.”

“A belief which that white face on its tumbled pillow did not seem to
shake?”

“Perhaps in her haste she may not have looked at the girl, but have set
the dishes down without more than a casual glance in her direction?”

“I don’t want to suspect anything wrong, but it is such a coincidence!”

This was touching me on a sore point, and I stepped back. “Well,”
 said I, “there is no use in our standing here busying ourselves with
conjectures. There is too much to be done. Come!” and I moved hurriedly
towards the door.

“What are you going to do?” he asked. “Have you forgotten this is but
an episode in the one great mystery we are sent here to unravel? If this
girl has come to her death by some foul play, it is our business to find
it out.”

“That must be left for the coroner. It has now passed out of our hands.”

“I know; but we can at least take full note of the room and everything
in it before throwing the affair into the hands of strangers. Mr. Gryce
will expect that much of us, I am sure.”

“I have looked at the room. The whole is photographed on my mind. I am
only afraid I can never forget it.”

“And the body? Have you noticed its position? the lay of the bed-clothes
around it? the lack there is of all signs of struggle or fear? the
repose of the countenance? the easy fall of the hands?”

“Yes, yes; don’t make me look at it any more.”

“Then the clothes hanging on the wall?”--rapidly pointing out each
object as he spoke. “Do you see? a calico dress, a shawl,--not the
one in which she was believed to have run away, but an old black
one, probably belonging to Mrs. Belden. Then this chest,”--opening
it,--“containing a few underclothes marked,--let us see, ah, with the
name of the lady of the house, but smaller than any she ever wore;
made for Hannah, you observe, and marked with her own name to prevent
suspicion. And then these other clothes lying on the floor, all new,
all marked in the same way. Then this--Halloo! look here!” he suddenly
cried.

Going over to where he stood I stooped down, when a wash-bowl half full
of burned paper met my eye.

“I saw her bending over something in this corner, and could not think
what it was. Can it be she is a suicide after all? She has evidently
destroyed something here which she didn’t wish any one to see.”

“I do not know,” I said. “I could almost hope so.”

“Not a scrap, not a morsel left to show what it was; how unfortunate!”

“Mrs. Belden must solve this riddle,” I cried.

“Mrs. Belden must solve the whole riddle,” he replied; “the secret
of the Leavenworth murder hangs upon it.” Then, with a lingering
look towards the mass of burned paper, “Who knows but what that was a
confession?”

The conjecture seemed only too probable.

“Whatever it was,” said I, “it is now ashes, and we have got to accept
the fact and make the best of it.”

“Yes,” said he with a deep sigh; “that’s so; but Mr. Gryce will never
forgive me for it, never. He will say I ought to have known it was a
suspicious circumstance for her to take a dose of medicine at the very
moment detection stood at her back.”

“But she did not know that; she did not see you.”

“We don’t know what she saw, nor what Mrs. Belden saw. Women are a
mystery; and though I flatter myself that ordinarily I am a match for
the keenest bit of female flesh that ever walked, I must say that in
this case I feel myself thoroughly and shamefully worsted.”

“Well, well,” I said, “the end has not come yet; who knows what a talk
with Mrs. Belden will bring out? And, by the way, she will be coming
back soon, and I must be ready to meet her. Everything depends upon
finding out, if I can, whether she is aware of this tragedy or not. It
is just possible she knows nothing about it.”

And, hurrying him from the room, I pulled the door to behind me, and led
the way down-stairs.

“Now,” said I, “there is one thing you must attend to at once. A
telegram must be sent Mr. Gryce acquainting him with this unlooked-for
occurrence.”

“All right, sir,” and Q started for the door.

“Wait one moment,” said I. “I may not have another opportunity to
mention it. Mrs. Belden received two letters from the postmaster
yesterday; one in a large and one in a small envelope; if you could find
out where they were postmarked----”

Q put his hand in his pocket. “I think I will not have to go far to
find out where one of them came from. Good George, I have lost it!” And
before I knew it, he had returned up-stairs.

That moment I heard the gate click.



XXXI. “THEREBY HANGS A TALE.”


    --Taming of the Shrew.

“IT was all a hoax; nobody was ill; I have been imposed upon, meanly
imposed upon!” And Mrs. Belden, flushed and panting, entered the room
where I was, and proceeded to take off her bonnet; but whilst doing so
paused, and suddenly exclaimed: “What is the matter? How you look at me!
Has anything happened?”

“Something very serious has occurred,” I replied; “you have been gone
but a little while, but in that time a discovery has been made--” I
purposely paused here that the suspense might elicit from her some
betrayal; but, though she turned pale, she manifested less emotion than
I expected, and I went on--“which is likely to produce very important
consequences.”

To my surprise she burst violently into tears. “I knew it, I knew it!”
 she murmured. “I always said it would be impossible to keep it secret
if I let anybody into the house; she is so restless. But I forget,” she
suddenly said, with a frightened look; “you haven’t told me what the
discovery was. Perhaps it isn’t what I thought; perhaps----”

I did not hesitate to interrupt her. “Mrs. Belden,” I said, “I shall not
try to mitigate the blow. A woman who, in the face of the most urgent
call from law and justice, can receive into her house and harbor there a
witness of such importance as Hannah, cannot stand in need of any great
preparation for hearing that her efforts, have been too successful, that
she has accomplished her design of suppressing valuable testimony, that
law and justice are outraged, and that the innocent woman whom this
girl’s evidence might have saved stands for ever compromised in the eyes
of the world, if not in those of the officers of the law.”

Her eyes, which had never left me during this address, flashed wide with
dismay.

“What do you mean?” she cried. “I have intended no wrong; I have only
tried to save people. I--I--But who are you? What have you got to do
with all this? What is it to you what I do or don’t do? You said you
were a lawyer. Can it be you are come from Mary Leavenworth to see how I
am fulfilling her commands, and----”

“Mrs. Belden,” I said, “it is of small importance now as to who I am, or
for what purpose I am here. But that my words may have the more effect,
I will say, that whereas I have not deceived you, either as to my name
or position, it is true that I am the friend of the Misses Leavenworth,
and that anything which is likely to affect them, is of interest to
me. When, therefore, I say that Eleanore Leavenworth is irretrievably
injured by this girl’s death----”

“Death? What do you mean? Death!”

The burst was too natural, the tone too horror-stricken for me to doubt
for another moment as to this woman’s ignorance of the true state of
affairs.

“Yes,” I repeated, “the girl you have been hiding so long and so well is
now beyond your control. Only her dead body remains, Mrs. Belden.”

I shall never lose from my ears the shriek which she uttered, nor the
wild, “I don’t believe it! I don’t believe it!” with which she dashed
from the room and rushed up-stairs.

Nor that after-scene when, in the presence of the dead, she stood
wringing her hands and protesting, amid sobs of the sincerest grief and
terror, that she knew nothing of it; that she had left the girl in the
best of spirits the night before; that it was true she had locked her
in, but this she always did when any one was in the house; and that if
she died of any sudden attack, it must have been quietly, for she had
heard no stir all night, though she had listened more than once, being
naturally anxious lest the girl should make some disturbance that would
arouse me.

“But you were in here this morning?” said I.

“Yes; but I didn’t notice. I was in a hurry, and thought she was asleep;
so I set the things down where she could get them and came right away,
locking the door as usual.”

“It is strange she should have died this night of all others. Was she
ill yesterday?”

“No, sir; she was even brighter than common; more lively. I never
thought of her being sick then or ever. If I had----”

“You never thought of her being sick?” a voice here interrupted. “Why,
then, did you take such pains to give her a dose of medicine last
night?” And Q entered from the room beyond.

“I didn’t!” she protested, evidently under the supposition it was I who
had spoken. “Did I, Hannah, did I, poor girl?” stroking the hand that
lay in hers with what appeared to be genuine sorrow and regret.

“How came she by it, then? Where she did she get it if you didn’t give
it to her?”

This time she seemed to be aware that some one besides myself was
talking to her, for, hurriedly rising, she looked at the man with a
wondering stare, before replying.

“I don’t know who you are, sir; but I can tell you this, the girl had no
medicine,--took no dose; she wasn’t sick last night that I know of.”

“Yet I saw her swallow a powder.”

“Saw her!--the world is crazy, or I am--saw her swallow a powder! How
could you see her do that or anything else? Hasn’t she been shut up in
this room for twenty-four hours?”

“Yes; but with a window like that in the roof, it isn’t so very
difficult to see into the room, madam.”

“Oh,” she cried, shrinking, “I have a spy in the house, have I? But I
deserve it; I kept her imprisoned in four close walls, and never came
to look at her once all night. I don’t complain; but what was it you say
you saw her take? medicine? poison?”

“I didn’t say poison.”

“But you meant it. You think she has poisoned herself, and that I had a
hand in it!”

“No,” I hastened to remark, “he does not think you had a hand in it. He
says he saw the girl herself swallow something which he believes to have
been the occasion of her death, and only asks you now where she obtained
it.”

“How can I tell? I never gave her anything; didn’t know she had
anything.”

Somehow, I believed her, and so felt unwilling to prolong the present
interview, especially as each moment delayed the action which I felt it
incumbent upon us to take. So, motioning Q to depart upon his errand, I
took Mrs. Belden by the hand and endeavored to lead her from the
room. But she resisted, sitting down by the side of the bed with the
expression, “I will not leave her again; do not ask it; here is my
place, and here I will stay,” while Q, obdurate for the first time,
stood staring severely upon us both, and would not move, though I urged
him again to make haste, saying that the morning was slipping away, and
that the telegram to Mr. Gryce ought to be sent.

“Till that woman leaves the room, I don’t; and unless you promise to
take my place in watching her, I don’t quit the house.”

Astonished, I left her side and crossed to him.

“You carry your suspicions too far,” I whispered, “and I think you are
too rude. We have seen nothing, I am sure, to warrant us in any such
action; besides, she can do no harm here; though, as for watching her, I
promise to do that much if it will relieve your mind.”

“I don’t want her watched here; take her below. I cannot leave while she
remains.”

“Are you not assuming a trifle the master?”

“Perhaps; I don’t know. If I am, it is because I have something in my
possession which excuses my conduct.”

“What is that? the letter?”

“Yes.”

Agitated now in my turn, I held out my hand. “Let me see,” I said.

“Not while that woman remains in the room.”

Seeing him implacable, I returned to Mrs. Belden.

“I must entreat you to come with me,” said I. “This is not a common
death; we shall be obliged to have the coroner here and others. You had
better leave the room and go below.”

“I don’t mind the coroner; he is a neighbor of mine; his coming won’t
prevent my watching over the poor girl until he arrives.”

“Mrs. Belden,” I said, “your position as the only one conscious of the
presence of this girl in your house makes it wiser for you not to invite
suspicion by lingering any longer than is necessary in the room where
her dead body lies.”

“As if my neglect of her now were the best surety of my good intentions
towards her in time past!”

“It will not be neglect for you to go below with me at my earnest
request. You can do no good here by staying; will, in fact, be doing
harm. So listen to me or I shall be obliged to leave you in charge of
this man and go myself to inform the authorities.”

This last argument seemed to affect her, for with one look of shuddering
abhorrence at Q she rose, saying, “You have me in your power,” and then,
without another word, threw her handkerchief over the girl’s face and
left the room. In two minutes more I had the letter of which Q had
spoken in my hands.

“It is the only one I could find, sir. It was in the pocket of the dress
Mrs. Belden had on last night. The other must be lying around somewhere,
but I haven’t had time to find it. This will do, though, I think. You
will not ask for the other.”

Scarcely noticing at the time with what deep significance he spoke, I
opened the letter. It was the smaller of the two I had seen her draw
under her shawl the day before at the post-office, and read as follows:


    “DEAR, DEAR FRIEND:

    “I am in awful trouble. You who love me must know it. I cannot
    explain, I can only make one prayer. Destroy what you have,
    to-day, instantly, without question or hesitation. The consent
    of any one else has nothing to do with it. You must obey. I am
    lost if you refuse. Do then what I ask, and save

    “ONE WHO LOVES YOU.”

It was addressed to Mrs. Belden; there was no signature or date,
only the postmark New York; but I knew the handwriting. It was Mary
Leavenworth’s.

“A damning letter!” came in the dry tones which Q seemed to think fit to
adopt on this occasion. “And a damning bit of evidence against the one
who wrote it, and the woman who received it!”

“A terrible piece of evidence, indeed,” said I, “if I did not happen to
know that this letter refers to the destruction of something radically
different from what you suspect. It alludes to some papers in Mrs.
Belden’s charge; nothing else.”

“Are you sure, sir?”

“Quite; but we will talk of this hereafter. It is time you sent your
telegram, and went for the coroner.”

“Very well, sir.” And with this we parted; he to perform his role and I
mine.

I found Mrs. Belden walking the floor below, bewailing her situation,
and uttering wild sentences as to what the neighbors would say of her;
what the minister would think; what Clara, whoever that was, would do,
and how she wished she had died before ever she had meddled with the
affair.

Succeeding in calming her after a while, I induced her to sit down and
listen to what I had to say. “You will only injure yourself by this
display of feeling,” I remarked, “besides unfitting yourself for what
you will presently be called upon to go through.” And, laying myself out
to comfort the unhappy woman, I first explained the necessities of the
case, and next inquired if she had no friend upon whom she could call in
this emergency.

To my great surprise she replied no; that while she had kind neighbors
and good friends, there was no one upon whom she could call in a case
like this, either for assistance or sympathy, and that, unless I would
take pity on her, she would have to meet it alone--“As I have met
everything,” she said, “from Mr. Belden’s death to the loss of most of
my little savings in a town fire last year.”

I was touched by this,--that she who, in spite of her weakness and
inconsistencies of character, possessed at least the one virtue of
sympathy with her kind, should feel any lack of friends. Unhesitatingly,
I offered to do what I could for her, providing she would treat me with
the perfect frankness which the case demanded. To my great relief, she
expressed not only her willingness, but her strong desire, to tell all
she knew. “I have had enough secrecy for my whole life,” she said.
And indeed I do believe she was so thoroughly frightened, that if a
police-officer had come into the house and asked her to reveal secrets
compromising the good name of her own son, she would have done so
without cavil or question. “I feel as if I wanted to take my stand out
on the common, and, in the face of the whole world, declare what I have
done for Mary Leavenworth. But first,” she whispered, “tell me, for
God’s sake, how those girls are situated. I have not dared to ask or
write. The papers say a good deal about Eleanore, but nothing about
Mary; and yet Mary writes of her own peril only, and of the danger she
would be in if certain facts were known. What is the truth? I don’t want
to injure them, only to take care of myself.”

“Mrs. Belden,” I said, “Eleanore Leavenworth has got into her
present difficulty by not telling all that was required of her. Mary
Leavenworth--but I cannot speak of her till I know what you have to
divulge. Her position, as well as that of her cousin, is too anomalous
for either you or me to discuss. What we want to learn from you is, how
you became connected with this affair, and what it was that Hannah knew
which caused her to leave New York and take refuge here.”

But Mrs. Belden, clasping and unclasping her hands, met my gaze with one
full of the most apprehensive doubt. “You will never believe me,” she
cried; “but I don’t know what Hannah knew. I am in utter ignorance of
what she saw or heard on that fatal night; she never told, and I never
asked. She merely said that Miss Leavenworth wished me to secrete her
for a short time; and I, because I loved Mary Leavenworth and admired
her beyond any one I ever saw, weakly consented, and----”

“Do you mean to say,” I interrupted, “that after you knew of the murder,
you, at the mere expression of Miss Leavenworth’s wishes, continued to
keep this girl concealed without asking her any questions or demanding
any explanations?”

“Yes, sir; you will never believe me, but it is so. I thought that,
since Mary had sent her here, she must have her reasons; and--and--I
cannot explain it now; it all looks so differently; but I did do as I
have said.”

“But that was very strange conduct. You must have had strong reason for
obeying Mary Leavenworth so blindly.”

“Oh, sir,” she gasped, “I thought I understood it all; that Mary, the
bright young creature, who had stooped from her lofty position to make
use of me and to love me, was in some way linked to the criminal, and
that it would be better for me to remain in ignorance, do as I was
bid, and trust all would come right. I did not reason about it; I only
followed my impulse. I couldn’t do otherwise; it isn’t my nature. When I
am requested to do anything for a person I love, I cannot refuse.”

“And you love Mary Leavenworth; a woman whom you yourself seem to
consider capable of a great crime?”

“Oh, I didn’t say that; I don’t know as I thought that. She might be in
some way connected with it, without being the actual perpetrator. She
could never be that; she is too dainty.”

“Mrs. Belden,” I said, “what do you know of Mary Leavenworth which makes
even that supposition possible?”

The white face of the woman before me flushed. “I scarcely know what to
reply,” she cried. “It is a long story, and----”

“Never mind the long story,” I interrupted. “Let me hear the one vital
reason.”

“Well,” said she, “it is this; that Mary was in an emergency from which
nothing but her uncle’s death could release her.”

“Ah, how’s that?”

But here we were interrupted by the sound of steps on the porch, and,
looking out, I saw Q entering the house alone. Leaving Mrs. Belden where
she was, I stepped into the hall.

“Well,” said I, “what is the matter? Haven’t you found the coroner?
Isn’t he at home?”

“No, gone away; off in a buggy to look after a man that was found some
ten miles from here, lying in a ditch beside a yoke of oxen.” Then, as
he saw my look of relief, for I was glad of this temporary delay, said,
with an expressive wink: “It would take a fellow a long time to go to
him--if he wasn’t in a hurry--hours, I think.”

“Indeed!” I returned, amused at his manner. “Rough road?”

“Very; no horse I could get could travel it faster than a walk.”

“Well,” said I, “so much the better for us. Mrs. Belden has a long story
to tell, and----”

“Doesn’t wish to be interrupted. I understand.”

I nodded and he turned towards the door.

“Have you telegraphed Mr. Gryce?” I asked.

“Yes, sir.”

“Do you think he will come?”

“Yes, sir; if he has to hobble on two sticks.”

“At what time do you look for him?”

“_You_ will look for him as early as three o’clock. I shall be among the
mountains, ruefully eying my broken-down team.” And leisurely donning
his hat he strolled away down the street like one who has the whole day
on his hands and does not know what to do with it.

An opportunity being thus given for Mrs. Belden’s story, she at once
composed herself to the task, with the following result.



XXXII. MRS. BELDEN’S NARRATIVE


    “Cursed, destructive Avarice,
     Thou everlasting foe to Love and Honor.”
         --Trap’s Abram.

    “Mischief never thrives
     Without the help of Woman.”
         --The Same.

IT will be a year next July since I first saw Mary Leavenworth. I
was living at that time a most monotonous existence. Loving what was
beautiful, hating what was sordid, drawn by nature towards all that
was romantic and uncommon, but doomed by my straitened position and the
loneliness of my widowhood to spend my days in the weary round of plain
sewing, I had begun to think that the shadow of a humdrum old age
was settling down upon me, when one morning, in the full tide of my
dissatisfaction, Mary Leavenworth stepped across the threshold of my
door and, with one smile, changed the whole tenor of my life.

This may seem exaggeration to you, especially when I say that her errand
was simply one of business, she having heard I was handy with my needle;
but if you could have seen her as she appeared that day, marked the look
with which she approached me, and the smile with which she left, you
would pardon the folly of a romantic old woman, who beheld a fairy queen
in this lovely young lady. The fact is, I was dazzled by her beauty and
her charms. And when, a few days after, she came again, and crouching
down on the stool at my feet, said she was so tired of the gossip and
tumult down at the hotel, that it was a relief to run away and hide with
some one who would let her act like the child she was, I experienced
for the moment, I believe, the truest happiness of my life. Meeting her
advances with all the warmth her manner invited, I found her ere long
listening eagerly while I told her, almost without my own volition, the
story of my past life, in the form of an amusing allegory.

The next day saw her in the same place; and the next; always with the
eager, laughing eyes, and the fluttering, uneasy hands, that grasped
everything they touched, and broke everything they grasped.

But the fourth day she was not there, nor the fifth, nor the sixth, and
I was beginning to feel the old shadow settling back upon me, when one
night, just as the dusk of twilight was merging into evening gloom, she
came stealing in at the front door, and, creeping up to my side, put her
hands over my eyes with such a low, ringing laugh, that I started.

“You don’t know what to make of me!” she cried, throwing aside her
cloak, and revealing herself in the full splendor of evening attire. “I
don’t know what to make of myself. Though it seems folly, I felt that
I must run away and tell some one that a certain pair of eyes have been
looking into mine, and that for the first time in my life I feel
myself a woman as well as a queen.” And with a glance in which coyness
struggled with pride, she gathered up her cloak around her, and
laughingly cried:

“Have you had a visit from a flying sprite? Has one little ray of
moonlight found its way into your prison for a wee moment, with Mary’s
laugh and Mary’s snowy silk and flashing diamonds? Say!” and she patted
my cheek, and smiled so bewilderingly, that even now, with all the
dull horror of these after-events crowding upon me, I cannot but feel
something like tears spring to my eyes at the thought of it.

“And so the Prince has come for you?” I whispered, alluding to a story I
had told her the last time she had visited me; a story in which a girl,
who had waited all her life in rags and degradation for the lordly
knight who was to raise her from a hovel to a throne, died just as her
one lover, an honest peasant-lad whom she had discarded in her pride,
arrived at her door with the fortune he had spent all his days in
amassing for her sake.

But at this she flushed, and drew back towards the door. “I don’t know;
I am afraid not. I--I don’t think anything about that. Princes are not
so easily won,” she murmured.

“What! are you going?” I said, “and alone? Let me accompany you.”

But she only shook her fairy head, and replied: “No, no; that would be
spoiling the romance, indeed. I have come upon you like a sprite, and
like a sprite I will go.” And, flashing like the moonbeam she was, she
glided out into the night, and floated away down the street.

When she next came, I observed a feverish excitement in her manner,
which assured me, even plainer than the coy sweetness displayed in
our last interview, that her heart had been touched by her lover’s
attentions. Indeed, she hinted as much before she left, saying in a
melancholy tone, when I had ended my story in the usual happy way, with
kisses and marriage, “I shall never marry!” finishing the exclamation
with a long-drawn sigh, that somehow emboldened me to say, perhaps
because I knew she had no mother:

“And why? What reason can there be for such rosy lips saying their
possessor will never marry?”

She gave me one quick look, and then dropped her eyes. I feared I had
offended her, and was feeling very humble, when she suddenly replied, in
an even but low tone, “I said I should never marry, because the one man
who pleases me can never be my husband.”

All the hidden romance in my nature started at once into life. “Why not?
What do you mean? Tell me.”

“There is nothing to tell,” said she; “only I have been so weak as
to”--she would not say, fall in love, she was a proud woman--“admire a
man whom my uncle will never allow me to marry.”

And she rose as if to go; but I drew her back. “Whom your uncle will not
allow you to marry!” I repeated. “Why? because he is poor?”

“No; uncle loves money, but not to such an extent as that. Besides, Mr.
Clavering is not poor. He is the owner of a beautiful place in his own
country----”

“Own country?” I interrupted. “Is he not an American?”

“No,” she returned; “he is an Englishman.”

I did not see why she need say that in just the way she did, but,
supposing she was aggravated by some secret memory, went on to inquire:
“Then what difficulty can there be? Isn’t he--” I was going to say
steady, but refrained.

“He is an Englishman,” she emphasized in the same bitter tone as
before. “In saying that, I say it all. Uncle will never let me marry an
Englishman.”

I looked at her in amazement. Such a puerile reason as this had never
entered my mind.

“He has an absolute mania on the subject,” resumed she. “I might as well
ask him to allow me to drown myself as to marry an Englishman.”

A woman of truer judgment than myself would have said: “Then, if that is
so, why not discard from your breast all thought of him? Why dance with
him, and talk to him, and let your admiration develop into love?” But
I was all romance then, and, angry at a prejudice I could neither
understand nor appreciate, I said:

“But that is mere tyranny! Why should he hate the English so? And why,
if he does, should you feel yourself obliged to gratify him in a whim so
unreasonable?”

“Why? Shall I tell you, auntie?” she said, flushing and looking away.

“Yes,” I returned; “tell me everything.”

“Well, then, if you want to know the worst of me, as you already know
the best, I hate to incur my uncle’s displeasure, because--because--I
have always been brought up to regard myself as his heiress, and I
know that if I were to marry contrary to his wishes, he would instantly
change his mind, and leave me penniless.”

“But,” I cried, my romance a little dampened by this admission, “you
tell me Mr. Clavering has enough to live upon, so you would not want;
and if you love--”

Her violet eyes fairly flashed in her amazement.

“You don’t understand,” she said; “Mr. Clavering is not poor; but uncle
is rich. I shall be a queen--” There she paused, trembling, and falling
on my breast. “Oh, it sounds mercenary, I know, but it is the fault of
my bringing up. I have been taught to worship money. I would be utterly
lost without it. And yet”--her whole face softening with the light of
another emotion, “I cannot say to Henry Clavering, ‘Go! my prospects are
dearer to me than you!’ I cannot, oh, I cannot!”

“You love him, then?” said I, determined to get at the truth of the
matter if possible.

She rose restlessly. “Isn’t that a proof of love? If you knew me, you
would say it was.” And, turning, she took her stand before a picture
that hung on the wall of my sitting-room.

“That looks like me,” she said.

It was one of a pair of good photographs I possessed.

“Yes,” I remarked, “that is why I prize it.”

She did not seem to hear me; she was absorbed in gazing at the exquisite
face before her. “That is a winning face,” I heard her say. “Sweeter
than mine. I wonder if she would ever hesitate between love and money. I
do not believe she would,” her own countenance growing gloomy and sad
as she said so; “she would think only of the happiness she would confer;
she is not hard like me. Eleanore herself would love this girl.”

I think she had forgotten my presence, for at the mention of her
cousin’s name she turned quickly round with a half suspicious look,
saying lightly:

“My dear old Mamma Hubbard looks horrified. She did not know she had
such a very unromantic little wretch for a listener, when she was
telling all those wonderful stories of Love slaying dragons, and living
in caves, and walking over burning ploughshares as if they were tufts of
spring grass?”

“No,” I said, taking her with an irresistible impulse of admiring
affection into my arms; “but if I had, it would have made no difference.
I should still have talked about love, and of all it can do to make this
weary workaday world sweet and delightful.”

“Would you? Then you do not think me such a wretch?”

What could I say? I thought her the winsomest being in the world, and
frankly told her so. Instantly she brightened into her very gayest self.
Not that I thought then, much less do I think now, she partially
cared for my good opinion; but her nature demanded admiration, and
unconsciously blossomed under it, as a flower under the sunshine.

“And you will still let me come and tell you how bad I am,--that is, if
I go on being bad, as I doubtless shall to the end of the chapter? You
will not turn me off?”

“I will never turn you off.”

“Not if I should do a dreadful thing? Not if I should run away with my
lover some fine night, and leave uncle to discover how his affectionate
partiality had been requited?”

It was lightly said, and lightly meant, for she did not even wait for my
reply. But its seed sank deep into our two hearts for all that. And for
the next few days I spent my time in planning how I should manage, if
it should ever fall to my lot to conduct to a successful issue so
enthralling a piece of business as an elopement. You may imagine, then,
how delighted I was, when one evening Hannah, this unhappy girl who
is now lying dead under my roof, and who was occupying the position of
lady’s maid to Miss Mary Leavenworth at that time, came to my door with
a note from her mistress, running thus:

    “Have the loveliest story of the season ready for me tomorrow; and
    let the prince be as handsome as--as some one you have heard of,
    and the princess as foolish as your little yielding pet,

    “MARY.”

Which short note could only mean that she was engaged. But the next day
did not bring me my Mary, nor the next, nor the next; and beyond hearing
that Mr. Leavenworth had returned from his trip I received neither word
nor token. Two more days dragged by, when, just as twilight set in, she
came. It had been a week since I had seen her, but it might have been
a year from the change I observed in her countenance and expression. I
could scarcely greet her with any show of pleasure, she was so unlike
her former self.

“You are disappointed, are you not?” said she, looking at me. “You
expected revelations, whispered hopes, and all manner of sweet
confidences; and you see, instead, a cold, bitter woman, who for
the first time in your presence feels inclined to be reserved and
uncommunicative.”

“That is because you have had more to trouble than encourage you in your
love,” I returned, though not without a certain shrinking, caused more
by her manner than words.

She did not reply to this, but rose and paced the floor, coldly at
first, but afterwards with a certain degree of excitement that proved
to be the prelude to a change in her manner; for, suddenly pausing, she
turned to me and said: “Mr. Clavering has left R----, Mrs. Belden.”

“Left!”

“Yes, my uncle commanded me to dismiss him, and I obeyed.”

The work dropped from my hands, in my heartfelt disappointment. “Ah!
then he knows of your engagement to Mr. Clavering?”

“Yes; he had not been in the house five minutes before Eleanore told
him.”

“Then _she_ knew?”

“Yes,” with a half sigh. “She could hardly help it. I was foolish enough
to give her the cue in my first moment of joy and weakness. I did
not think of the consequences; but I might have known. She is so
conscientious.”

“I do not call it conscientiousness to tell another’s secrets,” I
returned.

“That is because you are not Eleanore.”

Not having a reply for this, I said, “And so your uncle did not regard
your engagement with favor?”

“Favor! Did I not tell you he would never allow me to marry an
Englishman? He said he would sooner see me buried.”

“And you yielded? Made no struggle? Let the hard, cruel man have his
way?”

She was walking off to look again at that picture which had attracted
her attention the time before, but at this word gave me one little
sidelong look that was inexpressibly suggestive.

“I obeyed him when he commanded, if that is what you mean.”

“And dismissed Mr. Clavering after having given him your word of honor
to be his wife?”

“Why not, when I found I could not keep my word.”

“Then you have decided not to marry him?”

She did not reply at once, but lifted her face mechanically to the
picture.

“My uncle would tell you that I had decided to be governed wholly by
his wishes!” she responded at last with what I felt was self-scornful
bitterness.

Greatly disappointed, I burst into tears. “Oh, Mary!” I cried, “Oh,
Mary!” and instantly blushed, startled that I had called her by her
first name.

But she did not appear to notice.

“Have you any complaint to make?” she asked. “Is it not my manifest
duty to be governed by my uncle’s wishes? Has he not brought me up from
childhood? lavished every luxury upon me? made me all I am, even to the
love of riches which he has instilled into my soul with every gift he
has thrown into my lap, every word he has dropped into my ear, since I
was old enough to know what riches meant? Is it for me now to turn my
back upon fostering care so wise, beneficent, and free, just because
a man whom I have known some two weeks chances to offer me in exchange
what he pleases to call his love?”

“But,” I feebly essayed, convinced perhaps by the tone of sarcasm in
which this was uttered that she was not far from my way of thinking
after all, “if in two weeks you have learned to love this man more than
everything else, even the riches which make your uncle’s favor a thing
of such moment--”

“Well,” said she, “what then?”

“Why, then I would say, secure your happiness with the man of your
choice, if you have to marry him in secret, trusting to your influence
over your uncle to win the forgiveness he never can persistently deny.”

You should have seen the arch expression which stole across her face
at that. “Would it not be better,” she asked, creeping to my arms, and
laying her head on my shoulder, “would it not be better for me to make
sure of that uncle’s favor first, before undertaking the hazardous
experiment of running away with a too ardent lover?”

Struck by her manner, I lifted her face and looked at it. It was one
amused smile.

“Oh, my darling,” said I, “you have not, then dismissed Mr. Clavering?”

“I have sent him away,” she whispered demurely.

“But not without hope?”

She burst into a ringing laugh.

“Oh, you dear old Mamma Hubbard; what a matchmaker you are, to be sure!
You appear as much interested as if you were the lover yourself.”

“But tell me,” I urged.

In a moment her serious mood returned. “He will wait for me,” said she.

The next day I submitted to her the plan I had formed for her
clandestine intercourse with Mr. Clavering. It was for them both to
assume names, she taking mine, as one less liable to provoke conjecture
than a strange name, and he that of LeRoy Robbins. The plan pleased
her, and with the slight modification of a secret sign being used on the
envelope, to distinguish her letters from mine, was at once adopted.

And so it was I took the fatal step that has involved me in all this
trouble. With the gift of my name to this young girl to use as she
would and sign what she would, I seemed to part with what was left me of
judgment and discretion. Henceforth, I was only her scheming, planning,
devoted slave; now copying the letters which she brought me, and
enclosing them to the false name we had agreed upon, and now busying
myself in devising ways to forward to her those which I received from
him, without risk of discovery. Hannah was the medium we employed, as
Mary felt it would not be wise for her to come too often to my house.
To this girl’s charge, then, I gave such notes as I could not forward in
any other way, secure in the reticence of her nature, as well as in her
inability to read, that these letters addressed to Mrs. Amy Belden would
arrive at their proper destination without mishap. And I believe they
always did. At all events, no difficulty that I ever heard of arose out
of the use of this girl as a go-between.

But a change was at hand. Mr. Clavering, who had left an invalid mother
in England, was suddenly summoned home. He prepared to go, but, flushed
with love, distracted by doubts, smitten with the fear that, once
withdrawn from the neighborhood of a woman so universally courted as
Mary, he would stand small chance of retaining his position in her
regard, he wrote to her, telling his fears and asking her to marry him
before he went.

“Make me your husband, and I will follow your wishes in all things,”
 he wrote. “The certainty that you are mine will make parting possible;
without it, I cannot go; no, not if my mother should die without the
comfort of saying good-bye to her only child.”

By some chance she was in my house when I brought this letter from the
post-office, and I shall never forget how she started when she read it.
But, from looking as if she had received an insult, she speedily settled
down into a calm consideration of the subject, writing and delivering
into my charge for copying a few lines in which she promised to accede
to his request, if he would agree to leave the public declaration of the
marriage to her discretion, and consent to bid her farewell at the door
of the church or wherever the ceremony of marriage should take place,
never to come into her presence again till such declaration had been
made. Of course this brought in a couple of days the sure response:
“Anything, so you will be mine.”

And Amy Belden’s wits and powers of planning were all summoned into
requisition for the second time, to devise how this matter could be
arranged without subjecting the parties to the chance of detection. I
found the thing very difficult. In the first place, it was essential
that the marriage should come off within three days, Mr. Clavering
having, upon the receipt of her letter, secured his passage upon a
steamer that sailed on the following Saturday; and, next, both he and
Miss Leavenworth were too conspicuous in their personal appearance to
make it at all possible for them to be secretly married anywhere within
gossiping distance of this place. And yet it was desirable that the
scene of the ceremony should not be too far away, or the time occupied
in effecting the journey to and from the place would necessitate an
absence from the hotel on the part of Miss Leavenworth long enough to
arouse the suspicions of Eleanore; something which Mary felt it wiser
to avoid. Her uncle, I have forgotten to say, was not here--having gone
away again shortly after the apparent dismissal of Mr. Clavering.
F----, then, was the only town I could think of which combined the two
advantages of distance and accessibility. Although upon the railroad, it
was an insignificant place, and had, what was better yet, a very obscure
man for its clergyman, living, which was best of all, not ten rods from
the depot. If they could meet there? Making inquiries, I found that it
could be done, and, all alive to the romance of the occasion, proceeded
to plan the details.

And now I am coming to what might have caused the overthrow of the
whole scheme: I allude to the detection on the part of Eleanore of the
correspondence between Mary and Mr. Clavering. It happened thus. Hannah,
who, in her frequent visits to my house, had grown very fond of my
society, had come in to sit with me for a while one evening. She had not
been in the house, however, more than ten minutes, before there came a
knock at the front door; and going to it I saw Mary, as I supposed, from
the long cloak she wore, standing before me. Thinking she had come with
a letter for Mr. Clavering, I grasped her arm and drew her into the
hall, saying, “Have you got it? I must post it to-night, or he will not
receive it in time.”

There I paused, for, the panting creature I had by the arm turning upon
me, I saw myself confronted by a stranger.

“You have made a mistake,” she cried. “I am Eleanore Leavenworth, and I
have come for my girl Hannah. Is she here?”

I could only raise my hand in apprehension, and point to the girl
sitting in the corner of the room before her. Miss Leavenworth
immediately turned back.

“Hannah, I want you,” said she, and would have left the house without
another word, but I caught her by the arm.

“Oh, miss--” I began, but she gave me such a look, I dropped her arm.

“I have nothing to say to you!” she cried in a low, thrilling voice. “Do
not detain me.” And, with a glance to see if Hannah were following her,
she went out.

For an hour I sat crouched on the stair just where she had left me. Then
I went to bed, but I did not sleep a wink that night. You can imagine,
then, my wonder when, with the first glow of the early morning light,
Mary, looking more beautiful than ever, came running up the steps and
into the room where I was, with the letter for Mr. Clavering trembling
in her hand.

“Oh!” I cried in my joy and relief, “didn’t she understand me, then?”

The gay look on Mary’s face turned to one of reckless scorn. “If you
mean Eleanore, yes. She is duly initiated, Mamma Hubbard. Knows that I
love Mr. Clavering and write to him. I couldn’t keep it secret after the
mistake you made last evening; so I did the next best thing, told her
the truth.”

“Not that you were about to be married?”

“Certainly not. I don’t believe in unnecessary communications.”

“And you did not find her as angry as you expected?”

“I will not say that; she was angry enough. And yet,” continued Mary,
with a burst of self-scornful penitence, “I will not call Eleanore’s
lofty indignation anger. She was grieved, Mamma Hubbard, grieved.” And
with a laugh which I believe was rather the result of her own relief
than of any wish to reflect on her cousin, she threw her head on one
side and eyed me with a look which seemed to say, “Do I plague you so
very much, you dear old Mamma Hubbard?”

She did plague me, and I could not conceal it. “And will she not tell
her uncle?” I gasped.

The naive expression on Mary’s face quickly changed. “No,” said she.

I felt a heavy hand, hot with fever, lifted from my heart. “And we can
still go on?”

She held out the letter for reply.

The plan agreed upon between us for the carrying out of our intentions
was this. At the time appointed, Mary was to excuse herself to her
cousin upon the plea that she had promised to take me to see a friend
in the next town. She was then to enter a buggy previously ordered, and
drive here, where I was to join her. We were then to proceed immediately
to the minister’s house in F----, where we had reason to believe we
should find everything prepared for us. But in this plan, simple as it
was, one thing was forgotten, and that was the character of Eleanore’s
love for her cousin. That her suspicions would be aroused we did
not doubt; but that she would actually follow Mary up and demand an
explanation of her conduct, was what neither she, who knew her so well,
nor I, who knew her so little, ever imagined possible. And yet that was
just what occurred. But let me explain. Mary, who had followed out the
programme to the point of leaving a little note of excuse on Eleanore’s
dressing-table, had come to my house, and was just taking off her long
cloak to show me her dress, when there came a commanding knock at
the front door. Hastily pulling her cloak about her I ran to open it,
intending, you may be sure, to dismiss my visitor with short ceremony,
when I heard a voice behind me say, “Good heavens, it is Eleanore!” and,
glancing back, saw Mary looking through the window-blind upon the porch
without.

“What shall we do?” I cried, in very natural dismay.

“Do? why, open the door and let her in; I am not afraid of Eleanore.”

I immediately did so, and Eleanore Leavenworth, very pale, but with
a resolute countenance, walked into the house and into this room,
confronting Mary in very nearly the same spot where you are now sitting.
“I have come,” said she, lifting a face whose expression of mingled
sweetness and power I could not but admire, even in that moment of
apprehension, “to ask you without any excuse for my request, if you will
allow me to accompany you upon your drive this morning?”

Mary, who had drawn herself up to meet some word of accusation or
appeal, turned carelessly away to the glass. “I am very sorry,” she
said, “but the buggy holds only two, and I shall be obliged to refuse.”

“I will order a carriage.”

“But I do not wish your company, Eleanore. We are off on a pleasure
trip, and desire to have our fun by ourselves.”

“And you will not allow me to accompany you?”

“I cannot prevent your going in another carriage.”

Eleanore’s face grew yet more earnest in its expression. “Mary,” said
she, “we have been brought up together. I am your sister in affection
if not in blood, and I cannot see you start upon this adventure with no
other companion than this woman. Then tell me, shall I go with you, as a
sister, or on the road behind you as the enforced guardian of your honor
against your will?”

“My honor?”

“You are going to meet Mr. Clavering.”

“Well?”

“Twenty miles from home.”

“Well?”

“Now is it discreet or honorable in you to do this?”

Mary’s haughty lip took an ominous curve. “The same hand that raised you
has raised me,” she cried bitterly.

“This is no time to speak of that,” returned Eleanore.

Mary’s countenance flushed. All the antagonism of her nature was
aroused. She looked absolutely Juno-like in her wrath and reckless
menace. “Eleanore,” she cried, “I am going to F---- to marry Mr.
Clavering! _Now_ do you wish to accompany me?”

“I do.”

Mary’s whole manner changed. Leaping forward, she grasped her cousin’s
arm and shook it. “For what reason?” she cried. “What do you intend to
do?”

“To witness the marriage, if it be a true one; to step between you
and shame if any element of falsehood should come in to affect its
legality.”

Mary’s hand fell from her cousin’s arm. “I do not understand you,”
 said she. “I thought you never gave countenance to what you considered
wrong.”

“Nor do I. Any one who knows me will understand that I do not give my
approval to this marriage just because I attend its ceremonial in the
capacity of an unwilling witness.”

“Then why go?”

“Because I value your honor above my own peace. Because I love our
common benefactor, and know that he would never pardon me if I let his
darling be married, however contrary her union might be to his wishes,
without lending the support of my presence to make the transaction at
least a respectable one.”

“But in so doing you will be involved in a world of deception--which you
hate.”

“Any more so than now?”

“Mr. Clavering does not return with me, Eleanore.”

“No, I supposed not.”

“I leave him immediately after the ceremony.”

Eleanore bowed her head.

“He goes to Europe.” A pause.

“And I return home.”

“There to wait for what, Mary?”

Mary’s face crimsoned, and she turned slowly away.

“What every other girl does under such circumstances, I suppose. The
development of more reasonable feelings in an obdurate parent’s heart.”

Eleanore sighed, and a short silence ensued, broken by Eleanore’s
suddenly falling upon her knees, and clasping her cousin’s hand. “Oh,
Mary,” she sobbed, her haughtiness all disappearing in a gush of wild
entreaty, “consider what you are doing! Think, before it is too late, of
the consequences which must follow such an act as this. Marriage founded
upon deception can never lead to happiness. Love--but it is not that.
Love would have led you either to have dismissed Mr. Clavering at once,
or to have openly accepted the fate which a union with him would bring.
Only passion stoops to subterfuge like this. And you,” she continued,
rising and turning toward me in a sort of forlorn hope very touching
to see, “can you see this young motherless girl, driven by caprice, and
acknowledging no moral restraint, enter upon the dark and crooked path
she is planning for herself, without uttering one word of warning and
appeal? Tell me, mother of children dead and buried, what excuse you
will have for your own part in this day’s work, when she, with her
face marred by the sorrows which must follow this deception, comes to
you----”

“The same excuse, probably,” Mary’s voice broke in, chill and strained,
“which you will have when uncle inquires how you came to allow such an
act of disobedience to be perpetrated in his absence: that she could not
help herself, that Mary would gang her ain gait, and every one around
must accommodate themselves to it.”

It was like a draught of icy air suddenly poured into a room heated up
to fever point. Eleanore stiffened immediately, and drawing back, pale
and composed, turned upon her cousin with the remark:

“Then nothing can move you?”

The curling of Mary’s lips was her only reply.

Mr. Raymond, I do not wish to weary you with my feelings, but the first
great distrust I ever felt of my wisdom in pushing this matter so far
came with that curl of Mary’s lip. More plainly than Eleanore’s words it
showed me the temper with which she was entering upon this undertaking;
and, struck with momentary dismay, I advanced to speak when Mary stopped
me.

“There, now, Mamma Hubbard, don’t you go and acknowledge that you
are frightened, for I won’t hear it. I have promised to marry Henry
Clavering to-day, and I am going to keep my word--if I don’t love him,”
 she added with bitter emphasis. Then, smiling upon me in a way which
caused me to forget everything save the fact that she was going to her
bridal, she handed me her veil to fasten. As I was doing this, with very
trembling fingers, she said, looking straight at Eleanore:

“You have shown yourself more interested in my fate than I had any
reason to expect. Will you continue to display this concern all the way
to F----, or may I hope for a few moments of peace in which to dream
upon the step which, according to you, is about to hurl upon me such
dreadful consequences?”

“If I go with you to F----,” Eleanore returned, “it is as a witness, no
more. My sisterly duty is done.”

“Very well, then,” Mary said, dimpling with sudden gayety; “I suppose
I shall have to accept the situation. Mamma Hubbard, I am so sorry to
disappoint you, but the buggy _won’t_ hold three. If you are good you
shall be the first to congratulate me when I come home to-night.” And,
almost before I knew it, the two had taken their seats in the buggy that
was waiting at the door. “Good-by,” cried Mary, waving her hand from the
back; “wish me much joy--of my ride.”

I tried to do so, but the words wouldn’t come. I could only wave my hand
in response, and rush sobbing into the house.

Of that day, and its long hours of alternate remorse and anxiety, I
cannot trust myself to speak. Let me come at once to the time when,
seated alone in my lamp-lighted room, I waited and watched for the token
of their return which Mary had promised me. It came in the shape of Mary
herself, who, wrapped in her long cloak, and with her beautiful face
aglow with blushes, came stealing into the house just as I was beginning
to despair.

A strain of wild music from the hotel porch, where they were having a
dance, entered with her, producing such a weird effect upon my fancy
that I was not at all surprised when, in flinging off her cloak, she
displayed garments of bridal white and a head crowned with snowy roses.

“Oh, Mary!” I cried, bursting into tears; “you are then----”

“Mrs. Henry Clavering, at your service. I’m a bride, Auntie.”

“Without a bridal,” I murmured, taking her passionately into my embrace.

She was not insensible to my emotion. Nestling close to me, she gave
herself up for one wild moment to a genuine burst of tears, saying
between her sobs all manner of tender things; telling me how she loved
me, and how I was the only one in all the world to whom she dared come
on this, her wedding night, for comfort or congratulation, and of how
frightened she felt now it was all over, as if with her name she had
parted with something of inestimable value.

“And does not the thought of having made some one the proudest of men
solace you?” I asked, more than dismayed at this failure of mine to make
these lovers happy.

“I don’t know,” she sobbed. “What satisfaction can it be for him to
feel himself tied for life to a girl who, sooner than lose a prospective
fortune, subjected him to such a parting?”

“Tell me about it,” said I.

But she was not in the mood at that moment. The excitement of the day
had been too much for her. A thousand fears seemed to beset her mind.
Crouching down on the stool at my feet, she sat with her hands folded
and a glare on her face that lent an aspect of strange unreality to her
brilliant attire. “How shall I keep it secret! The thought haunts me
every moment; how can I keep it secret!”

“Why, is there any danger of its being known?” I inquired. “Were you
seen or followed?”

“No,” she murmured. “It all went off well, but----”

“Where is the danger, then?”

“I cannot say; but some deeds are like ghosts. They will not be laid;
they reappear; they gibber; they make themselves known whether we will
or not. I did not think of this before. I was mad, reckless, what you
will. But ever since the night has come, I have felt it crushing upon me
like a pall that smothers life and youth and love out of my heart. While
the sunlight remained I could endure it; but now--oh, Auntie, I have
done something that will keep me in constant fear. I have allied myself
to a living apprehension. I have destroyed my happiness.”

I was too aghast to speak.

“For two hours I have played at being gay. Dressed in my bridal white,
and crowned with roses, I have greeted my friends as if they were
wedding-guests, and made believe to myself that all the compliments
bestowed upon me--and they are only too numerous--were just so many
congratulations upon my marriage. But it was no use; Eleanore knew it
was no use. She has gone to her room to pray, while I--I have come here
for the first time, perhaps for the last, to fall at some one’s feet and
cry,--’ God have mercy upon me!’”

I looked at her in uncontrollable emotion. “Oh, Mary, have I only
succeeded, then, in making you miserable?”

She did not answer; she was engaged in picking up the crown of roses
which had fallen from her hair to the floor.

“If I had not been taught to love money so!” she said at length. “If,
like Eleanore, I could look upon the splendor which has been ours from
childhood as a mere accessory of life, easy to be dropped at the call of
duty or affection! If prestige, adulation, and elegant belongings were
not so much to me; or love, friendship, and domestic happiness more!
If only I could walk a step without dragging the chain of a thousand
luxurious longings after me. Eleanore can. Imperious as she often is in
her beautiful womanhood, haughty as she can be when the delicate quick
of her personality is touched too rudely, I have known her to sit by the
hour in a low, chilly, ill-lighted and ill-smelling garret, cradling a
dirty child on her knee, and feeding with her own hand an impatient old
woman whom no one else would consent to touch. Oh, oh! they talk about
repentance and a change of heart! If some one or something would only
change mine! But there is no hope of that! no hope of my ever being
anything else than what I am: a selfish, wilful, mercenary girl.”

Nor was this mood a mere transitory one. That same night she made a
discovery which increased her apprehension almost to terror. This was
nothing less than the fact that Eleanore had been keeping a diary of
the last few weeks. “Oh,” she cried in relating this to me the next day,
“what security shall I ever feel as long as this diary of hers remains
to confront me every time I go into her room? And she will not consent
to destroy it, though I have done my best to show her that it is a
betrayal of the trust I reposed in her. She says it is all she has to
show in the way of defence, if uncle should ever accuse her of treachery
to him and his happiness. She promises to keep it locked up; but what
good will that do! A thousand accidents might happen, any of them
sufficient to throw it into uncle’s hands. I shall never feel safe for a
moment while it exists.”

I endeavored to calm her by saying that if Eleanore was without malice,
such fears were groundless. But she would not be comforted, and seeing
her so wrought up, I suggested that Eleanore should be asked to trust it
into my keeping till such time as she should feel the necessity of using
it. The idea struck Mary favorably. “O yes,” she cried; “and I will
put my certificate with it, and so get rid of all my care at once.”
 And before the afternoon was over, she had seen Eleanore and made her
request.

It was acceded to with this proviso, that I was neither to destroy nor
give up all or any of the papers except upon their united demand. A
small tin box was accordingly procured, into which were put all the
proofs of Mary’s marriage then existing, viz.: the certificate, Mr.
Clavering’s letters, and such leaves from Eleanore’s diary as referred
to this matter. It was then handed over to me with the stipulation
I have already mentioned, and I stowed it away in a certain closet
upstairs, where it has lain undisturbed till last night.

Here Mrs. Belden paused, and, blushing painfully, raised her eyes to
mine with a look in which anxiety and entreaty were curiously blended.

“I don’t know what you will say,” she began, “but, led away by my
fears, I took that box out of its hiding-place last evening and,
notwithstanding your advice, carried it from the house, and it is
now----”

“In my possession,” I quietly finished.

I don’t think I ever saw her look more astounded, not even when I told
her of Hannah’s death. “Impossible!” she exclaimed. “I left it last
night in the old barn that was burned down. I merely meant to hide it
for the present, and could think of no better place in my hurry; for the
barn is said to be haunted--a man hung himself there once--and no one
ever goes there. I--I--you cannot have it!” she cried, “unless----”

“Unless I found and brought it away before the barn was destroyed,” I
suggested.

Her face flushed deeper. “Then you followed me?”

“Yes,” said I. Then, as I felt my own countenance redden, hastened to
add: “We have been playing strange and unaccustomed parts, you and I.
Some time, when all these dreadful events shall be a mere dream of the
past, we will ask each other’s pardon. But never mind all this now. The
box is safe, and I am anxious to hear the rest of your story.”

This seemed to compose her, and after a minute she continued:

Mary seemed more like herself after this. And though, on account of Mr.
Leavenworth’s return and their subsequent preparations for departure,
I saw but little more of her, what I did see was enough to make me
fear that, with the locking up of the proofs of her marriage, she was
indulging the idea that the marriage itself had become void. But I may
have wronged her in this.

The story of those few weeks is almost finished. On the eve of the day
before she left, Mary came to my house to bid me good-by. She had a
present in her hand the value of which I will not state, as I did not
take it, though she coaxed me with all her prettiest wiles. But she said
something that night that I have never been able to forget. It was this.
I had been speaking of my hope that before two months had elapsed she
would find herself in a position to send for Mr. Clavering, and that
when that day came I should wish to be advised of it; when she suddenly
interrupted me by saying:

“Uncle will never be won upon, as you call it, while he lives. If I was
convinced of it before, I am sure of it now. Nothing but his death will
ever make it possible for me to send for Mr. Clavering.” Then, seeing
me look aghast at the long period of separation which this seemed to
betoken, blushed a little and whispered: “The prospect looks somewhat
dubious, doesn’t it? But if Mr. Clavering loves me, he can wait.”

“But,” said I, “your uncle is only little past the prime of life and
appears to be in robust health; it will be years of waiting, Mary.”

“I don’t know,” she muttered, “I think not. Uncle is not as strong as he
looks and--” She did not say any more, horrified perhaps at the turn the
conversation was taking. But there was an expression on her countenance
that set me thinking at the time, and has kept me thinking ever since.

Not that any actual dread of such an occurrence as has since happened
came to oppress my solitude during the long months which now intervened.
I was as yet too much under the spell of her charm to allow anything
calculated to throw a shadow over her image to remain long in my
thoughts. But when, some time in the fall, a letter came to me
personally from Mr. Clavering, filled with a vivid appeal to tell
him something of the woman who, in spite of her vows, doomed him to a
suspense so cruel, and when, on the evening of the same day, a friend
of mine who had just returned from New York spoke of meeting Mary
Leavenworth at some gathering, surrounded by manifest admirers, I began
to realize the alarming features of the affair, and, sitting down, I
wrote her a letter. Not in the strain in which I had been accustomed to
talk to her,--I had not her pleading eyes and trembling, caressing hands
ever before me to beguile my judgment from its proper exercise,--but
honestly and earnestly, telling her how Mr. Clavering felt, and what a
risk she ran in keeping so ardent a lover from his rights. The reply she
sent rather startled me.

“I have put Mr. Robbins out of my calculations for the present, and
advise you to do the same. As for the gentleman himself, I have told him
that when I could receive him I would be careful to notify him. That day
has not yet come.

“But do not let him be discouraged,” she added in a postscript. “When he
does receive his happiness, it will be a satisfying one.”

_When, _I thought. Ah, it is that _when_ which is likely to ruin all!
But, intent only upon fulfilling her will, I sat down and wrote a letter
to Mr. Clavering, in which I stated what she had said, and begged him
to have patience, adding that I would surely let him know if any change
took place in Mary or her circumstances. And, having despatched it to
his address in London, awaited the development of events.

They were not slow in transpiring. In two weeks I heard of the sudden
death of Mr. Stebbins, the minister who had married them; and while
yet laboring under the agitation produced by this shock, was further
startled by seeing in a New York paper the name of Mr. Clavering among
the list of arrivals at the Hoffman House; showing that my letter to
him had failed in its intended effect, and that the patience Mary had
calculated upon so blindly was verging to its end. I was consequently
far from being surprised when, in a couple of weeks or so afterwards,
a letter came from him to my address, which, owing to the careless
omission of the private mark upon the envelope, I opened, and read
enough to learn that, driven to desperation by the constant failures
which he had experienced in all his endeavors to gain access to her in
public or private, a failure which he was not backward in ascribing
to her indisposition to see him, he had made up his mind to risk
everything, even her displeasure; and, by making an appeal to her uncle,
end the suspense under which he was laboring, definitely and at once. “I
want you,” he wrote; “dowered or dowerless, it makes little difference
to me. If you will not come of yourself, then I must follow the example
of the brave knights, my ancestors; storm the castle that holds you, and
carry you off by force of arms.”

Neither can I say I was much surprised, knowing Mary as I did, when, in
a few days from this, she forwarded to me for copying, this reply: “If
Mr. Robbins ever expects to be happy with Amy Belden, let him reconsider
the determination of which he speaks. Not only would he by such an
action succeed in destroying the happiness of her he professes to love,
but run the greater risk of effectually annulling the affection which
makes the tie between them endurable.”

To this there was neither date nor signature. It was the cry of warning
which a spirited, self-contained creature gives when brought to bay. It
made even me recoil, though I had known from the first that her pretty
wilfulness was but the tossing foam floating above the soundless depths
of cold resolve and most deliberate purpose.

What its real effect was upon him and her fate I can only conjecture.
All I know is that in two weeks thereafter Mr. Leavenworth was found
murdered in his room, and Hannah Chester, coming direct to my door from
the scene of violence, begged me to take her in and secrete her from
public inquiry, as I loved and desired to serve Mary Leavenworth.



XXXIII. UNEXPECTED TESTIMONY


    _Pol._ What do you read, my lord?
    _Ham._ Words, words, words.
        --Hamlet.

MRS. BELDEN paused, lost in the sombre shadow which these words were
calculated to evoke, and a short silence fell upon the room. It was
broken by my asking for some account of the occurrence she had just
mentioned, it being considered a mystery how Hannah could have found
entrance into her house without the knowledge of the neighbors.

“Well,” said she, “it was a chilly night, and I had gone to bed early
(I was sleeping then in the room off this) when, at about a quarter to
one--the last train goes through R---- at 12.50--there came a low knock
on the window-pane at the head of my bed. Thinking that some of the
neighbors were sick, I hurriedly rose on my elbow and asked who
was there. The answer came in low, muffled tones, ‘Hannah, Miss
Leavenworth’s girl! Please let me in at the kitchen door.’ Startled at
hearing the well-known voice, and fearing I knew not what, I caught up
a lamp and hurried round to the door. ‘Is any one with you?’ I asked.
‘No,’ she replied. ‘Then come in.’ But no sooner had she done so than
my strength failed me, and I had to sit down, for I saw she looked very
pale and strange, was without baggage, and altogether had the appearance
of some wandering spirit. ‘Hannah!’ I gasped, ‘what is it? what has
happened? what brings you here in this condition and at this time
of night?’ ‘Miss Leavenworth has sent me,’ she replied, in the low,
monotonous tone of one repeating a lesson by rote. ‘She told me to come
here; said you would keep me. I am not to go out of the house, and no
one is to know I am here.’ ‘But why?’ I asked, trembling with a thousand
undefined fears; ‘what has occurred?’ ‘I dare not say,’ she whispered;
‘I am forbid; I am just to stay here, and keep quiet.’ ‘But,’ I began,
helping her to take off her shawl,--the dingy blanket advertised for
in the papers--‘you must tell me. She surely did not forbid you to tell
_me?_’ ‘Yes she did; every one,’ the girl replied, growing white in her
persistence, ‘and I never break my word; fire couldn’t draw it out
of me.’ She looked so determined, so utterly unlike herself, as I
remembered her in the meek, unobtrusive days of our old acquaintance,
that I could do nothing but stare at her. ‘You will keep me,’ she said;
‘you will not turn me away?’ ‘No,’ I said, ‘I will not turn you away.’
‘And tell no one?’ she went on. ‘And tell no one,’ I repeated.

“This seemed to relieve her. Thanking me, she quietly followed me
up-stairs. I put her into the room in which you found her, because it
was the most secret one in the house; and there she has remained ever
since, satisfied and contented, as far as I could see, till this very
same horrible day.”

“And is that all?” I asked. “Did you have no explanation with her
afterwards? Did she never give you any information in regard to the
transactions which led to her flight?”

“No, sir. She kept a most persistent silence. Neither then nor when,
upon the next day, I confronted her with the papers in my hand, and the
awful question upon my lips as to whether her flight had been occasioned
by the murder which had taken place in Mr. Leavenworth’s household, did
she do more than acknowledge she had run away on this account. Some one
or something had sealed her lips, and, as she said, ‘Fire and torture
should never make her speak.’”

Another short pause followed this; then, with my mind still hovering
about the one point of intensest interest to me, I said:

“This story, then, this account which you have just given me of Mary
Leavenworth’s secret marriage and the great strait it put her
into--a strait from which nothing but her uncle’s death could relieve
her--together with this acknowledgment of Hannah’s that she had left
home and taken refuge here on the insistence of Mary Leavenworth, is the
groundwork you have for the suspicions you have mentioned?”

“Yes, sir; that and the proof of her interest in the matter which is
given by the letter I received from her yesterday, and which you say you
have now in your possession.”

Oh, that letter!

“I know,” Mrs. Belden went on in a broken voice, “that it is wrong, in a
serious case like this, to draw hasty conclusions; but, oh, sir, how can
I help it, knowing what I do?”

I did not answer; I was revolving in my mind the old question: was it
possible, in face of all these later developments, still to believe Mary
Leavenworth’s own hand guiltless of her uncle’s blood?

“It is dreadful to come to such conclusions,” proceeded Mrs. Belden,
“and nothing but her own words written in her own hand would ever have
driven me to them, but----”

“Pardon me,” I interrupted; “but you said in the beginning of this
interview that you did not believe Mary herself had any direct hand in
her uncle’s murder. Are you ready to repeat that assertion?”

“Yes, yes, indeed. Whatever I may think of her influence in inducing
it, I never could imagine her as having anything to do with its actual
performance. Oh, no! oh, no! whatever was done on that dreadful night,
Mary Leavenworth never put hand to pistol or ball, or even stood by
while they were used; that you may be sure of. Only the man who loved
her, longed for her, and felt the impossibility of obtaining her by any
other means, could have found nerve for an act so horrible.”

“Then you think----”

“Mr. Clavering is the man? I do: and oh, sir, when you consider that he
is her husband, is it not dreadful enough?”

“It is, indeed,” said I, rising to conceal how much I was affected by
this conclusion of hers.

Something in my tone or appearance seemed to startle her. “I hope and
trust I have not been indiscreet,” she cried, eying me with something
like an incipient distrust. “With this dead girl lying in my house, I
ought to be very careful, I know, but----”

“You have said nothing,” was my earnest assurance as I edged towards the
door in my anxiety to escape, if but for a moment, from an atmosphere
that was stifling me. “No one can blame you for anything you have
either said or done to-day. But”--and here I paused and walked hurriedly
back,--“I wish to ask one question more. Have you any reason, beyond
that of natural repugnance to believing a young and beautiful woman
guilty of a great crime, for saying what you have of Henry Clavering, a
gentleman who has hitherto been mentioned by you with respect?”

“No,” she whispered, with a touch of her old agitation.

I felt the reason insufficient, and turned away with something of the
same sense of suffocation with which I had heard that the missing key
had been found in Eleanore Leavenworth’s possession. “You must excuse
me,” I said; “I want to be a moment by myself, in order to ponder over
the facts which I have just heard; I will soon return “; and without
further ceremony, hurried from the room.

By some indefinable impulse, I went immediately up-stairs, and took my
stand at the western window of the large room directly over Mrs. Belden.
The blinds were closed; the room was shrouded in funereal gloom, but
its sombreness and horror were for the moment unfelt; I was engaged in
a fearful debate with myself. Was Mary Leavenworth the principal, or
merely the accessory, in this crime? Did the determined prejudice of Mr.
Gryce, the convictions of Eleanore, the circumstantial evidence even of
such facts as had come to our knowledge, preclude the possibility
that Mrs. Belden’s conclusions were correct? That all the detectives
interested in the affair would regard the question as settled, I did not
doubt; but need it be? Was it utterly impossible to find evidence yet
that Henry Clavering was, after all, the assassin of Mr. Leavenworth?

Filled with the thought, I looked across the room to the closet where
lay the body of the girl who, according to all probability, had known
the truth of the matter, and a great longing seized me. Oh, why could
not the dead be made to speak? Why should she lie there so silent, so
pulseless, so inert, when a word from her were enough to decide the
awful question? Was there no power to compel those pallid lips to move?

Carried away by the fervor of the moment, I made my way to her side. Ah,
God, how still! With what a mockery the closed lips and lids confronted
my demanding gaze! A stone could not have been more unresponsive.

With a feeling that was almost like anger, I stood there, when--what
was it I saw protruding from beneath her shoulders where they crushed
against the bed? An envelope? a letter? Yes.

Dizzy with the sudden surprise, overcome with the wild hopes this
discovery awakened, I stooped in great agitation and drew the letter
out. It was sealed but not directed. Breaking it hastily open, I took
a glance at its contents. Good heavens! it was the work of the girl
herself!--its very appearance was enough to make that evident! Feeling
as if a miracle had happened, I hastened with it into the other room,
and set myself to decipher the awkward scrawl.

This is what I saw, rudely printed in lead pencil on the inside of a
sheet of common writing-paper:

“I am a wicked girl. I have knone things all the time which I had ought
to have told but I didn’t dare to he said he would kill me if I did I
mene the tall splendud looking gentulman with the black mustash who I
met coming out of Mister Levenworth’s room with a key in his hand the
night Mr. Levenworth was murdered. He was so scared he gave me money and
made me go away and come here and keep every thing secret but I can’t do
so no longer. I seem to see Miss Elenor all the time crying and asking
me if I want her sent to prisun. God knows I’d rathur die. And this is
the truth and my last words and I pray every body’s forgivness and hope
nobody will blame me and that they wont bother Miss Elenor any more but
go and look after the handsome gentulman with the black mushtash.”



BOOK IV. THE PROBLEM SOLVED



XXXIV. MR. GRYCE RESUMES CONTROL


    “It out-herods Herod.”
         --Hamlet.

    “A thing devised by the enemy.”
         --Richard III

A HALF-HOUR had passed. The train upon which I had every reason to
expect Mr. Gryce had arrived, and I stood in the doorway awaiting with
indescribable agitation the slow and labored approach of the motley
group of men and women whom I had observed leave the depot at the
departure of the cars. Would he be among them? Was the telegram of a
nature peremptory enough to make his presence here, sick as he was, an
absolute certainty? The written confession of Hannah throbbing against
my heart, a heart all elation now, as but a short half-hour before it
had been all doubt and struggle, seemed to rustle distrust, and the
prospect of a long afternoon spent in impatience was rising before me,
when a portion of the advancing crowd turned off into a side street,
and I saw the form of Mr. Gryce hobbling, not on two sticks, but very
painfully on one, coming slowly down the street.

His face, as he approached, was a study.

“Well, well, well,” he exclaimed, as we met at the gate; “this is a
pretty how-dye-do, I must say. Hannah dead, eh? and everything turned
topsy-turvy! Humph, and what do you think of Mary Leavenworth now?”

It would therefore seem natural, in the conversation which followed his
introduction into the house and installment in Mrs. Belden’s parlor,
that I should begin my narration by showing him Hannah’s confession; but
it was not so. Whether it was that I felt anxious to have him go through
the same alternations of hope and fear it had been my lot to experience
since I came to R----; or whether, in the depravity of human nature,
there lingered within me sufficient resentment for the persistent
disregard he had always paid to my suspicions of Henry Clavering to make
it a matter of moment to me to spring this knowledge upon him just at
the instant his own convictions seemed to have reached the point of
absolute certainty, I cannot say. Enough that it was not till I had
given him a full account of every other matter connected with my stay in
this house; not till I saw his eye beaming, and his lip quivering with
the excitement incident upon the perusal of the letter from Mary, found
in Mrs. Belden’s pocket; not, indeed, until I became assured from such
expressions as “Tremendous! The deepest game of the season! Nothing
like it since the Lafarge affair!” that in another moment he would be
uttering some theory or belief that once heard would forever stand like
a barrier between us, did I allow myself to hand him the letter I had
taken from under the dead body of Hannah.

I shall never forget his expression as he received it; “Good heavens!”
 cried he, “what’s this?”

“A dying confession of the girl Hannah. I found it lying in her bed when
I went up, a half-hour ago, to take a second look at her.”

Opening it, he glanced over it with an incredulous air that speedily,
however, turned to one of the utmost astonishment, as he hastily perused
it, and then stood turning it over and over in his hand, examining it.

“A remarkable piece of evidence,” I observed, not without a certain
feeling of triumph; “quite changes the aspect of affairs!”

“Think so?” he sharply retorted; then, whilst I stood staring at him in
amazement, his manner was so different from what I expected, looked up
and said: “You tell me that you found this in her bed. Whereabouts in
her bed?”

“Under the body of the girl herself,” I returned. “I saw one corner of
it protruding from beneath her shoulders, and drew it out.”

He came and stood before me. “Was it folded or open, when you first
looked at it?”

“Folded; fastened up in this envelope,” showing it to him.

He took it, looked at it for a moment, and went on with his questions.

“This envelope has a very crumpled appearance, as well as the letter
itself. Were they so when you found them?”

“Yes, not only so, but doubled up as you see.”

“Doubled up? You are sure of that? Folded, sealed, and then doubled up
as if her body had rolled across it while alive?”

“Yes.”

“No trickery about it? No look as if the thing had been insinuated there
since her death?”

“Not at all. I should rather say that to every appearance she held it in
her hand when she lay down, but turning over, dropped it and then laid
upon it.”

Mr. Gryce’s eyes, which had been very bright, ominously clouded;
evidently he had been disappointed in my answers. Laying the letter
down, he stood musing, but suddenly lifted it again, scrutinized the
edges of the paper on which it was written, and, darting me a quick
look, vanished with it into the shade of the window curtain. His manner
was so peculiar, I involuntarily rose to follow; but he waved me back,
saying:

“Amuse yourself with that box on the table, which you had such an ado
over; see if it contains all we have a right to expect to find in it. I
want to be by myself for a moment.”

Subduing my astonishment, I proceeded to comply with his request, but
scarcely had I lifted the lid of the box before me when he came hurrying
back, flung the letter down on the table with an air of the greatest
excitement, and cried:

“Did I say there had never been anything like it since the Lafarge
affair? I tell you there has never been anything like it in any affair.
It is the rummest case on record! Mr. Raymond,” and his eyes, in his
excitement, actually met mine for the first time in my experience of
him, “prepare yourself for a disappointment. This pretended confession
of Hannah’s is a fraud!”

“A fraud?”

“Yes; fraud, forgery, what you will; the girl never wrote it.”

Amazed, outraged almost, I bounded from my chair. “How do you know
that?” I cried.

Bending forward, he put the letter into my hand. “Look at it,” said he;
“examine it closely. Now tell me what is the first thing you notice in
regard to it?”

“Why, the first thing that strikes me, is that the words are printed,
instead of written; something which might be expected from this girl,
according to all accounts.”

“Well?”

“That they are printed on the inside of a sheet of ordinary paper----”

“Ordinary paper?”

“Yes.”

“That is, a sheet of commercial note of the ordinary quality.”

“Of course.”

“But is it?”

“Why, yes; I should say so.”

“Look at the lines.”

“What of them? Oh, I see, they run up close to the top of the page;
evidently the scissors have been used here.”

“In short, it is a large sheet, trimmed down to the size of commercial
note?”

“Yes.”

“And is that all you see?”

“All but the words.”

“Don’t you perceive what has been lost by means of this trimming down?”

“No, unless you mean the manufacturer’s stamp in the corner.” Mr.
Gryce’s glance took meaning. “But I don’t see why the loss of that
should be deemed a matter of any importance.”

“Don’t you? Not when you consider that by it we seem to be deprived of
all opportunity of tracing this sheet back to the quire of paper from
which it was taken?”

“No.”

“Humph! then you are more of an amateur than I thought you. Don’t you
see that, as Hannah could have had no motive for concealing where the
paper came from on which she wrote her dying words, this sheet must have
been prepared by some one else?”

“No,” said I; “I cannot say that I see all that.”

“Can’t! Well then, answer me this. Why should Hannah, a girl about to
commit suicide, care whether any clue was furnished, in her confession,
to the actual desk, drawer, or quire of paper from which the sheet was
taken, on which she wrote it?”

“She wouldn’t.”

“Yet especial pains have been taken to destroy that clue.”

“But----”

“Then there is another thing. Read the confession itself, Mr. Raymond,
and tell me what you gather from it.”

“Why,” said I, after complying, “that the girl, worn out with constant
apprehension, has made up her mind to do away with herself, and that
Henry Clavering----”

“Henry Clavering?”

The interrogation was put with so much meaning, I looked up. “Yes,” said
I.

“Ah, I didn’t know that Mr. Clavering’s name was mentioned there; excuse
me.”

“His name is not mentioned, but a description is given so strikingly in
accordance----”

Here Mr. Gryce interrupted me. “Does it not seem a little surprising to
you that a girl like Hannah should have stopped to describe a man she
knew by name?”

I started; it was unnatural surely.

“You believe Mrs. Belden’s story, don’t you?”

“Yes.”

“Consider her accurate in her relation of what took place here a year
ago?”

“I do.”

“Must believe, then, that Hannah, the go-between, was acquainted with
Mr. Clavering and with his name?”

“Undoubtedly.”

“Then why didn’t she use it? If her intention was, as she here
professes, to save Eleanore Leavenworth from the false imputation which
had fallen upon her, she would naturally take the most direct method
of doing it. This description of a man whose identity she could have at
once put beyond a doubt by the mention of his name is the work, not of
a poor, ignorant girl, but of some person who, in attempting to play the
_role_ of one, has signally failed. But that is not all. Mrs. Belden,
according to you, maintains that Hannah told her, upon entering the
house, that Mary Leavenworth sent her here. But in this document, she
declares it to have been the work of Black Mustache.”

“I know; but could they not have both been parties to the transaction?”

“Yes,” said he; “yet it is always a suspicious circumstance, when there
is a discrepancy between the written and spoken declaration of a person.
But why do we stand here fooling, when a few words from this Mrs.
Belden, you talk so much about, will probably settle the whole matter!”

“A few words from Mrs. Belden,” I repeated. “I have had thousands
from her to-day, and find the matter no nearer settled than in the
beginning.”

“_You_ have had,” said he, “but I have not. Fetch her in, Mr. Raymond.”

I rose. “One thing,” said I, “before I go. What if Hannah had found the
sheet of paper, trimmed just as it is, and used it without any thought
of the suspicions it would occasion!”

“Ah!” said he, “that is just what we are going to find out.”

Mrs. Belden was in a flutter of impatience when I entered the
sitting-room. When did I think the coroner would come? and what did I
imagine this detective would do for us? It was dreadful waiting there
alone for something, she knew not what.

I calmed her as well as I could, telling her the detective had not yet
informed me what he could do, having some questions to ask her first.
Would she come in to see him? She rose with alacrity. Anything was
better than suspense.

Mr. Gryce, who in the short interim of my absence had altered his mood
from the severe to the beneficent, received Mrs. Belden with just that
show of respectful courtesy likely to impress a woman as dependent as
she upon the good opinion of others.

“Ah! and this is the lady in whose house this very disagreeable event
has occurred,” he exclaimed, partly rising in his enthusiasm to greet
her. “May I request you to sit,” he asked; “if a stranger may be allowed
to take the liberty of inviting a lady to sit in her own house.”

“It does not seem like my own house any longer,” said she, but in a sad,
rather than an aggressive tone; so much had his genial way imposed upon
her. “Little better than a prisoner here, go and come, keep silence or
speak, just as I am bidden; and all because an unhappy creature, whom
I took in for the most unselfish of motives, has chanced to die in my
house!”

“Just so!” exclaimed Mr. Gryce; “it is very unjust. But perhaps we can
right matters. I have every reason to believe we can. This sudden death
ought to be easily explained. You say you had no poison in the house?”

“No, sir.”

“And that the girl never went out?”

“Never, sir.”

“And that no one has ever been here to see her?”

“No one, sir.”

“So that she could not have procured any such thing if she had wished?”

“No, sir.”

“Unless,” he added suavely, “she had it with her when she came here?”

“That couldn’t have been, sir. She brought no baggage; and as for her
pocket, I know everything there was in it, for I looked.”

“And what did you find there?”

“Some money in bills, more than you would have expected such a girl to
have, some loose pennies, and a common handkerchief.”

“Well, then, it is proved the girl didn’t die of poison, there being
none in the house.”

He said this in so convinced a tone she was deceived.

“That is just what I have been telling Mr. Raymond,” giving me a
triumphant look.

“Must have been heart disease,” he went on, “You say she was well
yesterday?”

“Yes, sir; or seemed so.”

“Though not cheerful?”

“I did not say that; she was, sir, very.”

“What, ma’am, this girl?” giving me a look. “I don’t understand that. I
should think her anxiety about those she had left behind her in the city
would have been enough to keep her from being very cheerful.”

“So you would,” returned Mrs. Belden; “but it wasn’t so. On the
contrary, she never seemed to worry about them at all.”

“What! not about Miss Eleanore, who, according to the papers, stands
in so cruel a position before the world? But perhaps she didn’t know
anything about that--Miss Leavenworth’s position, I mean?”

“Yes, she did, for I told her. I was so astonished I could not keep
it to myself. You see, I had always considered Eleanore as one above
reproach, and it so shocked me to see her name mentioned in the
newspaper in such a connection, that I went to Hannah and read the
article aloud, and watched her face to see how she took it.”

“And how did she?”

“I can’t say. She looked as if she didn’t understand; asked me why I
read such things to her, and told me she didn’t want to hear any more;
that I had promised not to trouble her about this murder, and that if I
continued to do so she wouldn’t listen.”

“Humph! and what else?”

“Nothing else. She put her hand over her ears and frowned in such a
sullen way I left the room.”

“That was when?”

“About three weeks ago.”

“She has, however, mentioned the subject since?”

“No, sir; not once.”

“What! not asked what they were going to do with her mistress?”

“No, sir.”

“She has shown, however, that something was preying on her mind--fear,
remorse, or anxiety?”

“No, sir; on the contrary, she has oftener appeared like one secretly
elated.”

“But,” exclaimed Mr. Gryce, with another sidelong look at me, “that was
very strange and unnatural. I cannot account for it.”

“Nor I, sir. I used to try to explain it by thinking her sensibilities
had been blunted, or that she was too ignorant to comprehend the
seriousness of what had happened; but as I learned to know her better,
I gradually changed my mind. There was too much method in her gayety for
that. I could not help seeing she had some future before her for which
she was preparing herself. As, for instance, she asked me one day if I
thought she could learn to play on the piano. And I finally came to the
conclusion she had been promised money if she kept the secret intrusted
to her, and was so pleased with the prospect that she forgot the
dreadful past, and all connected with it. At all events, that was the
only explanation I could find for her general industry and desire to
improve herself, or for the complacent smiles I detected now and then
stealing over her face when she didn’t know I was looking.”

Not such a smile as crept over the countenance of Mr. Gryce at that
moment, I warrant.

“It was all this,” continued Mrs. Belden, “which made her death such a
shock to me. I couldn’t believe that so cheerful and healthy a creature
could die like that, all in one night, without anybody knowing anything
about it. But----”

“Wait one moment,” Mr. Gryce here broke in. “You speak of her endeavors
to improve herself. What do you mean by that?”

“Her desire to learn things she didn’t know; as, for instance, to write
and read writing. She could only clumsily print when she came here.”

I thought Mr. Gryce would take a piece out of my arm, he griped it so.

“When she came here! Do you mean to say that since she has been with you
she has learned to write?”

“Yes, sir; I used to set her copies and----”

“Where are these copies?” broke in Mr. Gryce, subduing his voice to its
most professional tone. “And where are her attempts at writing? I’d like
to see some of them. Can’t you get them for us?”

“I don’t know, sir. I always made it a point to destroy them as soon as
they had answered their purpose. I didn’t like to have such things lying
around. But I will go see.”

“Do,” said he; “and I will go with you. I want to take a look at things
upstairs, any way.” And, heedless of his rheumatic feet, he rose and
prepared to accompany her.

“This is getting very intense,” I whispered, as he passed me.

The smile he gave me in reply would have made the fortune of a Thespian
Mephistopheles.

Of the ten minutes of suspense which I endured in their absence, I say
nothing. At the end of that time they returned with their hands full of
paper boxes, which they flung down on the table.

“The writing-paper of the household,” observed Mr. Gryce; “every scrap
and half-sheet which could be found. But, before you examine it, look at
this.” And he held out a sheet of bluish foolscap, on which were written
some dozen imitations of that time-worn copy, “BE GOOD AND YOU WILL
BE HAPPY”; with an occasional “_Beauty soon fades,”_ and “_Evil
communications corrupt good manners.”_

“What do you think of that?”

“Very neat and very legible.”

“That is Hannah’s latest. The only specimens of her writing to be found.
Not much like some scrawls we have seen, eh?”

“No.”

“Mrs. Belden says this girl has known how to write as good as this for
more than a week. Took great pride in it, and was continually talking
about how smart she was.” Leaning over, he whispered in my ear, “This
thing you have in your hand must have been scrawled some time ago, if
she did it.” Then aloud: “But let us look at the paper she used to write
on.”

Dashing open the covers of the boxes on the table, he took out the loose
sheets lying inside, and scattered them out before me. One glance showed
they were all of an utterly different quality from that used in the
confession. “This is all the paper in the house,” said he.

“Are you sure of that?” I asked, looking at Mrs. Belden, who stood in
a sort of maze before us. “Wasn’t there one stray sheet lying around
somewhere, foolscap or something like that, which she might have got
hold of and used without your knowing it?”

“No, sir; I don’t think so. I had only these kinds; besides, Hannah had
a whole pile of paper like this in her room, and wouldn’t have been apt
to go hunting round after any stray sheets.”

“But you don’t know what a girl like that might do. Look at this one,”
 said I, showing her the blank side of the confession. “Couldn’t a sheet
like this have come from somewhere about the house? Examine it well; the
matter is important.”

“I have, and I say, no, I never had a sheet of paper like that in my
house.”

Mr. Gryce advanced and took the confession from my hand. As he did so,
he whispered: “What do you think now? Many chances that Hannah got up
this precious document?”

I shook my head, convinced at last; but in another moment turned to him
and whispered back: “But, if Hannah didn’t write it, who did? And how
came it to be found where it was?”

“That,” said he, “is just what is left for us to learn.” And, beginning
again, he put question after question concerning the girl’s life in the
house, receiving answers which only tended to show that she could not
have brought the confession with her, much less received it from a
secret messenger. Unless we doubted Mrs. Belden’s word, the mystery
seemed impenetrable, and I was beginning to despair of success, when Mr.
Gryce, with an askance look at me, leaned towards Mrs. Belden and said:

“You received a letter from Miss Mary Leavenworth yesterday, I hear.”

“Yes, sir.”

“_This_ letter?” he continued, showing it to her.

“Yes, sir.”

“Now I want to ask you a question. Was the letter, as you see it, the
only contents of the envelope in which it came? Wasn’t there one for
Hannah enclosed with it?”

“No, sir. There was nothing in my letter for her; but she had a letter
herself yesterday. It came in the same mail with mine.”

“Hannah had a letter!” we both exclaimed; “and in the mail?”

“Yes; but it was not directed to her. It was”--casting me a look full of
despair, “directed to me. It was only by a certain mark in the corner of
the envelope that I knew----”

“Good heaven!” I interrupted; “where is this letter? Why didn’t you
speak of it before? What do you mean by allowing us to flounder about
here in the dark, when a glimpse at this letter might have set us right
at once?”

“I didn’t think anything about it till this minute. I didn’t know it was
of importance. I----”

But I couldn’t restrain myself. “Mrs. Belden, where is this letter?” I
demanded. “Have you got it?”

“No,” said she; “I gave it to the girl yesterday; I haven’t seen it
since.”

“It must be upstairs, then. Let us take another look.” and I hastened
towards the door.

“You won’t find it,” said Mr. Gryce at my elbow. “I have looked. There
is nothing but a pile of burned paper in the corner. By the way, what
could that have been?” he asked of Mrs. Belden.

“I don’t know, sir. She hadn’t anything to burn unless it was the
letter.”

“We will see about that,” I muttered, hurrying upstairs and bringing
down the wash-bowl with its contents. “If the letter was the one I saw
in your hand at the post-office, it was in a yellow envelope.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Yellow envelopes burn differently from white paper. I ought to be able
to tell the tinder made by a yellow envelope when I see it. Ah, the
letter has been destroyed; here is a piece of the envelope,” and I drew
out of the heap of charred scraps a small bit less burnt than the rest,
and held it up.

“Then there is no use looking here for what the letter contained,” said
Mr. Gryce, putting the wash-bowl aside. “We will have to ask you, Mrs.
Belden.”

“But I don’t know. It was directed to me, to be sure; but Hannah told
me, when she first requested me to teach her how to write, that she
expected such a letter, so I didn’t open it when it came, but gave it to
her just as it was.”

“You, however, stayed by to see her read it?”

“No, sir; I was in too much of a flurry. Mr. Raymond had just come and I
had no time to think of her. My own letter, too, was troubling me.”

“But you surely asked her some questions about it before the day was
out?”

“Yes, sir, when I went up with her tea things; but she had nothing
to say. Hannah could be as reticent as any one I ever knew, when she
pleased. She didn’t even admit it was from her mistress.”

“Ah! then you thought it was from Miss Leavenworth?”

“Why, yes, sir; what else was I to think, seeing that mark in the
corner? Though, to be sure, it might have been put there by Mr.
Clavering,” she thoughtfully added.

“You say she was cheerful yesterday; was she so after receiving this
letter?”

“Yes, sir; as far as I could see. I wasn’t with her long; the necessity
I felt of doing something with the box in my charge--but perhaps Mr.
Raymond has told you?”

Mr. Gryce nodded.

“It was an exhausting evening, and quite put Hannah out of my head,
but----”

“Wait!” cried Mr. Gryce, and beckoning me into a corner, he whispered,
“Now comes in that experience of Q’s. While you are gone from the house,
and before Mrs. Belden sees Hannah again, he has a glimpse of the girl
bending over something in the corner of her room which may very fairly
be the wash-bowl we found there. After which, he sees her swallow, in
the most lively way, a dose of something from a bit of paper. Was there
anything more?”

“No,” said I.

“Very well, then,” he cried, going back to Mrs. Belden. “But----”

“But when I went upstairs to bed, I thought of the girl, and going to
her door opened it. The light was extinguished, and she seemed asleep,
so I closed it again and came out.”

“Without speaking?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Did you notice how she was lying?”

“Not particularly. I think on her back.”

“In something of the same position in which she was found this morning?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And that is all you can tell us, either of her letter or her mysterious
death?”

“All, sir.”

Mr. Gryce straightened himself up.

“Mrs. Belden,” said he, “you know Mr. Clavering’s handwriting when _you_
see it?”

“I do.”

“And Miss Leavenworth’s?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Now, which of the two was upon the envelope of the letter you gave
Hannah?”

“I couldn’t say. It was a disguised handwriting and might have been that
of either; but I think----”

“Well?”

“That it was more like hers than his, though it wasn’t like hers
either.”

With a smile, Mr. Gryce enclosed the confession in his hand in the
envelope in which it had been found. “You remember how large the letter
was which you gave her?”

“Oh, it was large, very large; one of the largest sort.”

“And thick?”

“O yes; thick enough for two letters.”

“Large enough and thick enough to contain this?” laying the confession,
folded and enveloped as it was, before her.

“Yes, sir,” giving it a look of startled amazement, “large enough and
thick enough to contain that.”

Mr. Gryce’s eyes, bright as diamonds, flashed around the room, and
finally settled upon a fly traversing my coat-sleeve. “Do you need to
ask now,” he whispered, in a low voice, “where, and from whom, this
so-called confession comes?”

He allowed himself one moment of silent triumph, then rising, began
folding the papers on the table and putting them in his pocket.

“What are you going to do?” I asked, hurriedly approaching.

He took me by the arm and led me across the hall into the sitting-room.
“I am going back to New York, I am going to pursue this matter. I am
going to find out from whom came the poison which killed this girl, and
by whose hand this vile forgery of a confession was written.”

“But,” said I, rather thrown off my balance by all this, “Q and the
coroner will be here presently, won’t you wait to see them?”

“No; clues such as are given here must be followed while the trail is
hot; I can’t afford to wait.”

“If I am not mistaken, they have already come,” I remarked, as a
tramping of feet without announced that some one stood at the door.

“That is so,” he assented, hastening to let them in.

Judging from common experience, we had every reason to fear that an
immediate stop would be put to all proceedings on our part, as soon as
the coroner was introduced upon the scene. But happily for us and the
interest at stake, Dr. Fink, of R ----, proved to be a very sensible
man. He had only to hear a true story of the affair to recognize at
once its importance and the necessity of the most cautious action in
the matter. Further, by a sort of sympathy with Mr. Gryce, all the more
remarkable that he had never seen him before, he expressed himself
as willing to enter into our plans, offering not only to allow us the
temporary use of such papers as we desired, but even undertaking to
conduct the necessary formalities of calling a jury and instituting
an inquest in such a way as to give us time for the investigations we
proposed to make.

The delay was therefore short. Mr. Gryce was enabled to take the 6:30
train for New York, and I to follow on the 10 p.m.,--the calling of a
jury, ordering of an autopsy, and final adjournment of the inquiry till
the following Tuesday, having all taken place in the interim.



XXXV. FINE WORK


    “No hinge nor loop
     To hang a doubt on!”
     “But yet the pity of it, Iago!
     Oh, Iago, the pity of it, Iago.”
         --Othello.

One sentence dropped by Mr. Gryce before leaving R---- prepared me for
his next move.

“The clue to this murder is supplied by the paper on which the
confession is written. Find from whose desk or portfolio this especial
sheet was taken, and you find the double murderer,” he had said.

Consequently, I was not surprised when, upon visiting his house, early
the next morning, I beheld him seated before a table on which lay
a lady’s writing-desk and a pile of paper, till told the desk was
Eleanore’s. Then I did show astonishment. “What,” said I, “are you not
satisfied yet of her innocence?”

“O yes; but one must be thorough. No conclusion is valuable which is not
preceded by a full and complete investigation. Why,” he cried, casting
his eyes complacently towards the fire-tongs, “I have even been
rummaging through Mr. Clavering’s effects, though the confession bears
the proof upon its face that it could not have been written by him. It
is not enough to look for evidence where you expect to find it. You must
sometimes search for it where you don’t. Now,” said he, drawing the desk
before him, “I don’t anticipate finding anything here of a criminating
character; but it is among the possibilities that I may; and that is
enough for a detective.”

“Did you see Miss Leavenworth this morning?” I asked, as he proceeded
to fulfil his intention by emptying the contents of the desk upon the
table.

“Yes; I was unable to procure what I desired without it. And she behaved
very handsomely, gave me the desk with her own hands, and never raised
an objection. To be sure, she had little idea what I was looking for;
thought, perhaps, I wanted to make sure it did not contain the letter
about which so much has been said. But it would have made but little
difference if she had known the truth. This desk contains nothing _we_
want.”

“Was she well; and had she heard of Hannah’s sudden death?” I asked, in
my irrepressible anxiety.

“Yes, and feels it, as you might expect her to. But let us see what we
have here,” said he, pushing aside the desk, and drawing towards him the
stack of paper I have already referred to. “I found this pile, just as
you see it, in a drawer of the library table at Miss Mary Leavenworth’s
house in Fifth Avenue. If I am not mistaken, it will supply us with the
clue we want.”

“But----”

“But this paper is square, while that of the confession is of the size
and shape of commercial note? I know; but you remember the sheet used in
the confession was trimmed down. Let us compare the quality.”

Taking the confession from his pocket and the sheet from the pile before
him, he carefully compared them, then held them out for my inspection. A
glance showed them to be alike in color.

“Hold them up to the light,” said he.

I did so; the appearance presented by both was precisely alike.

“Now let us compare the ruling.” And, laying them both down on the
table, he placed the edges of the two sheets together. The lines on the
one accommodated themselves to the lines on the other; and that question
was decided.

His triumph was assured. “I was convinced of it,” said he. “From the
moment I pulled open that drawer and saw this mass of paper, I knew the
end was come.”

“But,” I objected, in my old spirit of combativeness, “isn’t there any
room for doubt? This paper is of the commonest kind. Every family on the
block might easily have specimens of it in their library.”

“That isn’t so,” he said. “It is letter size, and that has gone out. Mr.
Leavenworth used it for his manuscript, or I doubt if it would have been
found in his library. But, if you are still incredulous, let us see what
can be done,” and jumping up, he carried the confession to the window,
looked at it this way and that, and, finally discovering what he wanted,
came back and, laying it before me, pointed out one of the lines of
ruling which was markedly heavier than the rest, and another which was
so faint as to be almost undistinguishable. “Defects like these often
run through a number of consecutive sheets,” said he. “If we could find
the identical half-quire from which this was taken, I might show you
proof that would dispel every doubt,” and taking up the one that lay on
top, he rapidly counted the sheets. There were but eight. “It might have
been taken from this one,” said he; but, upon looking closely at the
ruling, he found it to be uniformly distinct. “Humph! that won’t do!”
 came from his lips.

The remainder of the paper, some dozen or so half-quires, looked
undisturbed. Mr. Gryce tapped his fingers on the table and a frown
crossed his face. “Such a pretty thing, if it could have been done!” he
longingly exclaimed. Suddenly he took up the next half-quire. “Count the
sheets,” said he, thrusting it towards me, and himself lifting another.

I did as I was bid. “Twelve.”

He counted his and laid it down. “Go on with the rest,” he cried.

I counted the sheets in the next; twelve. He counted those in the one
following, and paused. “Eleven!”

“Count again,” I suggested.

He counted again, and quietly put them aside. “I made a mistake,” said
he.

But he was not to be discouraged. Taking another half-quire, he went
through with the same operation;--in vain. With a sigh of impatience he
flung it down on the table and looked up. “Halloo!” he cried, “what is
the matter?”

“There are but eleven sheets in this package,” I said, placing it in his
hand.

The excitement he immediately evinced was contagious. Oppressed as I
was, I could not resist his eagerness. “Oh, beautiful!” he exclaimed.
“Oh, beautiful! See! the light on the inside, the heavy one on the
outside, and both in positions precisely corresponding to those on
this sheet of Hannah’s. What do you think now? Is any further proof
necessary?”

“The veriest doubter must succumb before this,” returned I.

With something like a considerate regard for my emotion, he turned away.
“I am obliged to congratulate myself, notwithstanding the gravity of the
discovery that has been made,” said he. “It is so neat, so very neat,
and so conclusive. I declare I am myself astonished at the perfection
of the thing. But what a woman that is!” he suddenly cried, in a tone
of the greatest admiration. “What an intellect she has! what shrewdness!
what skill! I declare it is almost a pity to entrap a woman who has done
as well as this--taken a sheet from the very bottom of the pile, trimmed
it into another shape, and then, remembering the girl couldn’t write,
put what she had to say into coarse, awkward printing, Hannah-like.
_Splendid_! or would have been, if any other man than myself had
had this thing in charge.” And, all animated and glowing with his
enthusiasm, he eyed the chandelier above him as if it were the
embodiment of his own sagacity.

Sunk in despair, I let him go on.

“Could she have done any better?” he now asked. “Watched, circumscribed
as she was, could she have done any better? I hardly think so; the fact
of Hannah’s having learned to write after she left here was fatal. No,
she could not have provided against that contingency.”

“Mr. Gryce,” I here interposed, unable to endure this any longer; “did
you have an interview with Miss Mary Leavenworth this morning?”

“No,” said he; “it was not in the line of my present purpose to do so. I
doubt, indeed, if she knew I was in her house. A servant maid who has a
grievance is a very valuable assistant to a detective. With Molly at my
side, I didn’t need to pay my respects to the mistress.”

“Mr. Gryce,” I asked, after another moment of silent self-congratulation
on his part, and of desperate self-control on mine, “what do you propose
to do now? You have followed your clue to the end and are satisfied.
Such knowledge as this is the precursor of action.”

“Humph! we will see,” he returned, going to his private desk and
bringing out the box of papers which we had no opportunity of looking at
while in R----. “First let us examine these documents, and see if they
do not contain some hint which may be of service to us.” And taking out
the dozen or so loose sheets which had been torn from Eleanore’s Diary,
he began turning them over.

While he was doing this, I took occasion to examine the contents of
the box. I found them to be precisely what Mrs. Belden had led me to
expect,--a certificate of marriage between Mary and Mr. Clavering and
a half-dozen or more letters. While glancing over the former, a short
exclamation from Mr. Gryce startled me into looking up.

“What is it?” I cried.

He thrust into my hand the leaves of Eleanore’s Diary. “Read,” said he.
“Most of it is a repetition of what you have already heard from Mrs.
Belden, though given from a different standpoint; but there is one
passage in it which, if I am not mistaken, opens up the way to an
explanation of this murder such as we have not had yet. Begin at the
beginning; you won’t find it dull.”

Dull! Eleanore’s feelings and thoughts during that anxious time, dull!

Mustering up my self-possession, I spread out the leaves in their order
and commenced:

“R------, July 6,----”

“Two days after they got there, you perceive,” Mr. Gryce explained.

“--A gentleman was introduced to us to-day upon the _piazza_ whom
I cannot forbear mentioning; first, because he is the most perfect
specimen of manly beauty I ever beheld, and secondly, because Mary, who
is usually so voluble where gentlemen are concerned, had nothing to say
when, in the privacy of our own apartment, I questioned her as to the
effect his appearance and conversation had made upon her. The fact
that he is an Englishman may have something to do with this; Uncle’s
antipathy to every one of that nation being as well known to her as to
me. But somehow I cannot feel satisfied of this. Her experience with
Charlie Somerville has made me suspicious. What if the story of last
summer were to be repeated here, with an Englishman for the hero! But
I will not allow myself to contemplate such a possibility. Uncle will
return in a few days, and then all communication with one who, however
prepossessing, is of a family and race with whom it is impossible for
us to unite ourselves, must of necessity cease. I doubt if I should have
thought twice of all this if Mr. Clavering had not betrayed, upon his
introduction to Mary, such intense and unrestrained admiration.

“July 8. The old story is to be repeated. Mary not only submits to the
attentions of Mr. Clavering, but encourages them. To-day she sat
two hours at the piano singing over to him her favorite songs, and
to-night--But I will not put down every trivial circumstance that comes
under my observation; it is unworthy of me. And yet, how can I shut my
eyes when the happiness of so many I love is at stake!

“July 11. If Mr. Clavering is not absolutely in love with Mary, he is on
the verge of it. He is a very fine-looking man, and too honorable to be
trifled with in this reckless fashion.

“July 13. Mary’s beauty blossoms like the rose. She was absolutely
wonderful to-night in scarlet and silver. I think her smile the sweetest
I ever beheld, and in this I am sure Mr. Clavering passionately agrees
with me; he never looked away from her to-night. But it is not so easy
to read _her_ heart. To be sure, she appears anything but indifferent
to his fine appearance, strong sense, and devoted affection. But did she
not deceive us into believing she loved Charlie Somerville? In her case,
blush and smile go for little, I fear. Would it not be wiser under the
circumstances to say, I hope?

“July 17. Oh, my heart! Mary came into my room this evening, and
absolutely startled me by falling at my side and burying her face in my
lap. ‘Oh, Eleanore, Eleanore!’ she murmured, quivering with what seemed
to me very happy sobs. But when I strove to lift her head to my breast,
she slid from my arms, and drawing herself up into her old attitude of
reserved pride, raised her hand as if to impose silence, and haughtily
left the room. There is but one interpretation to put upon this. Mr.
Clavering has expressed his sentiments, and she is filled with that
reckless delight which in its first flush makes one insensible to the
existence of barriers which have hitherto been deemed impassable. When
will Uncle come?

“July 18. Little did I think when I wrote the above that Uncle was
already in the house. He arrived unexpectedly on the last train, and
came into my room just as I was putting away my diary. Looking a little
care-worn, he took me in his arms and then asked for Mary. I dropped my
head, and could not help stammering as I replied that she was in her own
room. Instantly his love took alarm, and leaving me, he hastened to
her apartment, where I afterwards learned he came upon her sitting
abstractedly before her dressing-table with Mr. Clavering’s family ring
on her finger. I do not know what followed. An unhappy scene, I fear,
for Mary is ill this morning, and Uncle exceedingly melancholy and
stern.

“Afternoon. We are an unhappy family! Uncle not only refuses to consider
for a moment the question of Mary’s alliance with Mr. Clavering, but
even goes so far as to demand his instant and unconditional dismissal.
The knowledge of this came to me in the most distressing way.
Recognizing the state of affairs, but secretly rebelling against a
prejudice which seemed destined to separate two persons otherwise fitted
for each other, I sought Uncle’s presence this morning after breakfast,
and attempted to plead their cause. But he almost instantly stopped me
with the remark, ‘You are the last one, Eleanore, who should seek to
promote this marriage.’ Trembling with apprehension, I asked him
why. ‘For the reason that by so doing you work entirely for your own
interest.’ More and more troubled, I begged him to explain himself. ‘I
mean,’ said he, ‘that if Mary disobeys me by marrying this Englishman,
I shall disinherit her, and substitute your name for hers in my will as
well as in my affection.’

“For a moment everything swam before my eyes. ‘You will never make me so
wretched!’ I entreated. ‘I will make you my heiress, if Mary persists
in her present determination,’ he declared, and without further word
sternly left the room. What could I do but fall on my knees and pray!
Of all in this miserable house, I am the most wretched. To supplant
her! But I shall not be called upon to do it; Mary will give up Mr.
Clavering.”

“There!” exclaimed Mr. Gryce. “What do you think of that? Isn’t it
becoming plain enough what was Mary’s motive for this murder? But go on;
let us hear what followed.”

With sinking heart, I continued. The next entry is dated July 19, and
runs thus:

“I was right. After a long struggle with Uncle’s invincible will, Mary
has consented to dismiss Mr. Clavering. I was in the room when she
made known her decision, and I shall never forget our Uncle’s look of
gratified pride as he clasped her in his arms and called her his own
True Heart. He has evidently been very much exercised over this matter,
and I cannot but feel greatly relieved that affairs have terminated
so satisfactorily. But Mary? What is there in her manner that vaguely
disappoints me? I cannot say. I only know that I felt a powerful
shrinking overwhelm me when she turned her face to me and asked if I
were satisfied now. But I conquered my feelings and held out my hand.
She did not take it.

“July 26. How long the days are! The shadow of our late trial is upon
me yet; I cannot shake it off. I seem to see Mr. Clavering’s despairing
face wherever I go. How is it that Mary preserves her cheerfulness? If
she does not love him, I should think the respect which she must feel
for his disappointment would keep her from levity at least.

“Uncle has gone away again. Nothing I could say sufficed to keep him.

“July 28. It has all come out. Mary has only nominally separated from
Mr. Clavering; she still cherishes the idea of one day uniting herself
to him in marriage. The fact was revealed to me in a strange way not
necessary to mention here; and has since been confirmed by Mary herself.
‘I admire the man,’ she declares, ‘and have no intention of giving him
up.’ ‘Then why not tell Uncle so?’ I asked. Her only answer was a bitter
smile and a short,--‘I leave that for you to do.’

“July 30. Midnight. Worn completely out, but before my blood cools let
me write. Mary is a wife. I have just returned from seeing her give her
hand to Henry Clavering. Strange that I can write it without quivering
when my whole soul is one flush of indignation and revolt. But let me
state the facts. Having left my room for a few minutes this morning,
I returned to find on my dressing-table a note from Mary in which she
informed me that she was going to take Mrs. Belden for a drive and would
not be back for some hours. Convinced, as I had every reason to be, that
she was on her way to meet Mr. Clavering, I only stopped to put on my
hat--”

There the Diary ceased.

“She was probably interrupted by Mary at this point,” explained Mr.
Gryce. “But we have come upon the one thing we wanted to know. Mr.
Leavenworth threatened to supplant Mary with Eleanore if she persisted
in marrying contrary to his wishes. She did so marry, and to avoid the
consequences of her act she----”

“Say no more,” I returned, convinced at last. “It is only too clear.”

Mr. Gryce rose.

“But the writer of these words is saved,” I went on, trying to grasp
the one comfort left me. “No one who reads this Diary will ever dare to
insinuate she is capable of committing a crime.”

“Assuredly not; the Diary settles that matter effectually.”

I tried to be man enough to think of that and nothing else. To rejoice
in her deliverance, and let every other consideration go; but in this I
did not succeed. “But Mary, her cousin, almost her sister, is lost,” I
muttered.

Mr. Gryce thrust his hands into his pockets and, for the first time,
showed some evidence of secret disturbance. “Yes, I am afraid she is;
I really am afraid she is.” Then after a pause, during which I felt a
certain thrill of vague hope: “Such an entrancing creature too! It is a
pity, it positively is a pity! I declare, now that the thing is worked
up, I begin to feel almost sorry we have succeeded so well. Strange,
but true. If there was the least loophole out of it,” he muttered. “But
there isn’t. The thing is clear as A, B, C.” Suddenly he rose, and began
pacing the floor very thoughtfully, casting his glances here, there, and
everywhere, except at me, though I believe now, as then, my face was all
he saw.

“Would it be a very great grief to you, Mr. Raymond, if Miss Mary
Leavenworth should be arrested on this charge of murder?” he asked,
pausing before a sort of tank in which two or three disconsolate-looking
fishes were slowly swimming about.

“Yes,” said I, “it would; a very great grief.”

“Yet it must be done,” said he, though with a strange lack of his usual
decision. “As an honest official, trusted to bring the murderer of Mr.
Leavenworth to the notice of the proper authorities, I have got to do
it.”

Again that strange thrill of hope at my heart induced by his peculiar
manner.

“Then my reputation as a detective! I ought surely to consider that.
I am not so rich or so famous that I can afford to forget all that a
success like this may bring me. No, lovely as she is, I have got to push
it through.” But even as he said this, he became still more thoughtful,
gazing down into the murky depths of the wretched tank before him with
such an intentness I half expected the fascinated fishes to rise from
the water and return his gaze. What was in his mind?

After a little while he turned, his indecision utterly gone. “Mr.
Raymond, come here again at three. I shall then have my report ready for
the Superintendent. I should like to show it to you first, so don’t fail
me.”

There was something so repressed in his expression, I could not prevent
myself from venturing one question. “Is your mind made up?” I asked.

“Yes,” he returned, but in a peculiar tone, and with a peculiar gesture.

“And you are going to make the arrest you speak of?”

“Come at three!”



XXXVI. GATHERED THREADS


    “This is the short and the long of it.”
         --Merry Wives of Windsor.

PROMPTLY at the hour named, I made my appearance at Mr. Gryce’s door. I
found him awaiting me on the threshold.

“I have met you,” said he gravely, “for the purpose of requesting you
not to speak during the coming interview. I am to do the talking; you
the listening. Neither are you to be surprised at anything I may do or
say. I am in a facetious mood”--he did not look so--“and may take it
into my head to address you by another name than your own. If I do,
don’t mind it. Above all, don’t talk: remember that.” And without
waiting to meet my look of doubtful astonishment, he led me softly
up-stairs.

The room in which I had been accustomed to meet him was at the top of
the first flight, but he took me past that into what appeared to be the
garret story, where, after many cautionary signs, he ushered me into
a room of singularly strange and unpromising appearance. In the first
place, it was darkly gloomy, being lighted simply by a very dim and
dirty skylight. Next, it was hideously empty; a pine table and two
hard-backed chairs, set face to face at each end of it, being the only
articles in the room. Lastly, it was surrounded by several closed doors
with blurred and ghostly ventilators over their tops which, being round,
looked like the blank eyes of a row of staring mummies. Altogether it
was a lugubrious spot, and in the present state of my mind made me
feel as if something unearthly and threatening lay crouched in the very
atmosphere. Nor, sitting there cold and desolate, could I imagine that
the sunshine glowed without, or that life, beauty, and pleasure paraded
the streets below.

Mr. Gryce’s expression, as he took a seat and beckoned me to do the
same, may have had something to do with this strange sensation, it was
so mysteriously and sombrely expectant.

“You’ll not mind the room,” said he, in so muffled a tone I scarcely
heard him. “It’s an awful lonesome spot, I know; but folks with such
matters before them mustn’t be too particular as to the places in which
they hold their consultations, if they don’t want all the world to know
as much as they do. Smith,” and he gave me an admonitory shake of his
finger, while his voice took a more distinct tone, “I have done the
business; the reward is mine; the assassin of Mr. Leavenworth is found,
and in two hours will be in custody. Do you want to know who it
is?” leaning forward with every appearance of eagerness in tone and
expression.

I stared at him in great amazement. Had anything new come to light? any
great change taken place in his conclusions? All this preparation could
not be for the purpose of acquainting me with what I already knew, yet--

He cut short my conjectures with a low, expressive chuckle. “It was a
long chase, I tell you,” raising his voice still more; “a tight go; a
woman in the business too; but all the women in the world can’t pull
the wool over the eyes of Ebenezer Gryce when he is on a trail; and the
assassin of Mr. Leavenworth and”--here his voice became actually shrill
in his excitement--“and of Hannah Chester is found.

“Hush!” he went on, though I had neither spoken nor made any move; “you
didn’t know Hannah Chester was murdered. Well, she wasn’t in one sense
of the word, but in another she was, and by the same hand that killed
the old gentleman. How do I know this? look here! This scrap of paper
was found on the floor of her room; it had a few particles of white
powder sticking to it; those particles were tested last night and found
to be poison. But you say the girl took it herself, that she was a
suicide. You are right, she did take it herself, and it was a suicide;
but who terrified her into this act of self-destruction? Why, the one
who had the most reason to fear her testimony, of course. But the proof,
you say. Well, sir, this girl left a confession behind her, throwing the
onus of the whole crime on a certain party believed to be innocent; this
confession was a forged one, known from three facts; first, that the
paper upon which it was written was unobtainable by the girl in the
place where she was; secondly, that the words used therein were printed
in coarse, awkward characters, whereas Hannah, thanks to the teaching of
the woman under whose care she has been since the murder, had learned to
write very well; thirdly, that the story told in the confession does not
agree with the one related by the girl herself. Now the fact of a forged
confession throwing the guilt upon an innocent party having been found
in the keeping of this ignorant girl, killed by a dose of poison, taken
with the fact here stated, that on the morning of the day on which she
killed herself the girl received from some one manifestly acquainted
with the customs of the Leavenworth family a letter large enough and
thick enough to contain the confession folded, as it was when found,
makes it almost certain to my mind that the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth
sent this powder and this so-called confession to the girl, meaning
her to use them precisely as she did: for the purpose of throwing off
suspicion from the right track and of destroying herself at the same
time; for, as you know, dead men tell no tales.”

He paused and looked at the dingy skylight above us. Why did the
air seem to grow heavier and heavier? Why did I shudder in vague
apprehension? I knew all this before; why did it strike me, then, as
something new?

“But who was this? you ask. Ah, that is the secret; that is the bit of
knowledge which is to bring me fame and fortune. But, secret or not,
I don’t mind telling you”; lowering his voice and rapidly raising it
again. “The fact is, _I_ can’t keep it to myself; it burns like a new
dollar in my pocket. Smith, my boy, the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth--but
stay, who does the world say it is? Whom do the papers point at and
shake their heads over? A woman! a young, beautiful, bewitching woman!
Ha, ha, ha! The papers are right; it is a woman; young, beautiful, and
bewitching too. But what one? Ah, that’s the question. There is more
than one woman in this affair. Since Hannah’s death I have heard it
openly advanced that she was the guilty party in the crime: bah! Others
cry it is the niece who was so unequally dealt with by her uncle in his
will: bah! again. But folks are not without some justification for this
latter assertion. Eleanore Leavenworth did know more of this matter than
appeared. Worse than that, Eleanore Leavenworth stands in a position of
positive peril to-day. If you don’t think so, let me show you what the
detectives have against her.

“First, there is the fact that a handkerchief, with her name on it, was
found stained with pistol grease upon the scene of murder; a place which
she explicitly denies having entered for twenty-four hours previous to
the discovery of the dead body.

“Secondly, the fact that she not only evinced terror when confronted
with this bit of circumstantial evidence, but manifested a decided
disposition, both at this time and others, to mislead inquiry, shirking
a direct answer to some questions and refusing all answer to others.

“Thirdly, that an attempt was made by her to destroy a certain letter
evidently relating to this crime.

“Fourthly, that the key to the library door was seen in her possession.

“All this, taken with the fact that the fragments of the letter which
this same lady attempted to destroy within an hour after the inquest
were afterwards put together, and were found to contain a bitter
denunciation of one of Mr. Leavenworth’s nieces, by a gentleman we will
call _X_ in other words, an unknown quantity--makes out a dark case
against _you,_ especially as after investigations revealed the fact that
a secret underlay the history of the Leavenworth family. That, unknown
to the world at large, and Mr. Leavenworth in particular, a marriage
ceremony had been performed a year before in a little town called F----
between a Miss Leavenworth and this same _X._ That, in other words, the
unknown gentleman who, in the letter partly destroyed by Miss Eleanore
Leavenworth, complained to Mr. Leavenworth of the treatment received
by him from one of his nieces, was in fact the secret husband of that
niece. And that, moreover, this same gentleman, under an assumed name,
called on the night of the murder at the house of Mr. Leavenworth and
asked for Miss Eleanore.

“Now you see, with all this against her, Eleanore Leavenworth is lost
if it cannot be proved, first that the articles testifying against her,
viz.: the handkerchief, letter, and key, passed after the murder through
other hands, before reaching hers; and secondly, that some one else had
even a stronger reason than she for desiring Mr. Leavenworth’s death at
this time.

“Smith, my boy, both of these hypotheses have been established by me.
By dint of moleing into old secrets, and following unpromising clues, I
have finally come to the conclusion that not Eleanore Leavenworth, dark
as are the appearances against her, but another woman, beautiful as
she, and fully as interesting, is the true criminal. In short, that her
cousin, the exquisite Mary, is the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth, and by
inference of Hannah Chester also.”

He brought this out with such force, and with such a look of triumph
and appearance of having led up to it, that I was for the moment
dumbfounded, and started as if I had not known what he was going to say.
The stir I made seemed to awake an echo. Something like a suppressed
cry was in the air about me. All the room appeared to breathe horror and
dismay. Yet when, in the excitement of this fancy, I half turned round
to look, I found nothing but the blank eyes of those dull ventilators
staring upon me.

“You are taken aback!” Mr. Gryce went on. “I don’t wonder. Every one
else is engaged in watching the movements of Eleanore Leavenworth; I
only know where to put my hand upon the real culprit. You shake your
head!” (Another fiction.) “You don’t believe me! Think I am deceived.
Ha, ha! Ebenezer Gryce deceived after a month of hard work! You are as
bad as Miss Leavenworth herself, who has so little faith in my sagacity
that she offered me, of all men, an enormous reward if I would find for
her the assassin of her uncle! But that is neither here nor there;
you have your doubts, and you are waiting for me to solve them. Well,
nothing is easier. Know first that on the morning of the inquest I made
one or two discoveries not to be found in the records, viz.: that the
handkerchief picked up, as I have said, in Mr. Leavenworth’s library,
had notwithstanding its stains of pistol grease, a decided perfume
lingering about it. Going to the dressing-table of the two ladies, I
sought for that perfume, and found it in Mary’s room, not Eleanore’s.
This led me to examine the pockets of the dresses respectively worn by
them the evening before. In that of Eleanore I found a handkerchief,
presumably the one she had carried at that time. But in Mary’s there was
none, nor did I see any lying about her room as if tossed down on
her retiring. The conclusion I drew from this was, that she, and
not Eleanore, had carried the handkerchief into her uncle’s room, a
conclusion emphasized by the fact privately communicated to me by one of
the servants, that Mary was in Eleanore’s room when the basket of clean
clothes was brought up with this handkerchief lying on top.

“But knowing the liability we are to mistake in such matters as these,
I made another search in the library, and came across a very curious
thing. Lying on the table was a penknife, and scattered on the floor
beneath, in close proximity to the chair, were two or three minute
portions of wood freshly chipped off from the leg of the table; all of
which looked as if some one of a nervous disposition had been sitting
there, whose hand in a moment of self-forgetfulness had caught up the
knife and unconsciously whittled the table. A little thing, you say;
but when the question is, which of two ladies, one of a calm and
self-possessed nature, the other restless in her ways and excitable in
her disposition, was in a certain spot at a certain time, it is these
little things that become almost deadly in their significance. No one
who has been with these two women an hour can hesitate as to whose
delicate hand made that cut in Mr. Leavenworth’s library table.

“But we are not done. I distinctly overheard Eleanore accuse her cousin
of this deed. Now such a woman as Eleanore Leavenworth has proved
herself to be never would accuse a relative of crime without the
strongest and most substantial reasons. First, she must have been sure
her cousin stood in a position of such emergency that nothing but
the death of her uncle could release her from it; secondly, that her
cousin’s character was of such a nature she would not hesitate to
relieve herself from a desperate emergency by the most desperate of
means; and lastly, been in possession of some circumstantial evidence
against her cousin, seriously corroborative of her suspicions. Smith,
all this was true of Eleanore Leavenworth. As to the character of her
cousin, she has had ample proof of her ambition, love of money, caprice
and deceit, it having been Mary Leavenworth, and not Eleanore, as was
first supposed, who had contracted the secret marriage already spoken
of. Of the critical position in which she stood, let the threat once
made by Mr. Leavenworth to substitute her cousin’s name for hers in
his will in case she had married this _x_ be remembered, as well as the
tenacity with which Mary clung to her hopes of future fortune; while for
the corroborative testimony of her guilt which Eleanore is supposed
to have had, remember that previous to the key having been found in
Eleanore’s possession, she had spent some time in her cousin’s room; and
that it was at Mary’s fireplace the half-burned fragments of that letter
were found,--and you have the outline of a report which in an hour’s
time from this will lead to the arrest of Mary Leavenworth as the
assassin of her uncle and benefactor.”

A silence ensued which, like the darkness of Egypt, could be felt;
then a great and terrible cry rang through the room, and a man’s form,
rushing from I knew not where, shot by me and fell at Mr. Gryce’s feet
shrieking out:

“It is a lie! a lie! Mary Leavenworth is innocent as a babe unborn. I am
the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth. I! I! I!”

It was Trueman Harwell.



XXXVII. CULMINATION


    “Saint seducing gold.”
         --Romeo and Juliet.

    “When our actions do not,
     Our fears do make us traitors.”
         --Macbeth.

I NEVER saw such a look of mortal triumph on the face of a man as that
which crossed the countenance of the detective.

“Well,” said he, “this is unexpected, but not wholly unwelcome. I am
truly glad to learn that Miss Leavenworth is innocent; but I must hear
some few more particulars before I shall be satisfied. Get up,
Mr. Harwell, and explain yourself. If you are the murderer of Mr.
Leavenworth, how comes it that things look so black against everybody
but yourself?”

But in the hot, feverish eyes which sought him from the writhing form at
his feet, there was mad anxiety and pain, but little explanation. Seeing
him making unavailing efforts to speak, I drew near.

“Lean on me,” said I, lifting him to his feet.

His face, relieved forever from its mask of repression, turned towards
me with the look of a despairing spirit. “Save! save!” he gasped. “Save
her--Mary--they are sending a report--stop it!”

“Yes,” broke in another voice. “If there is a man here who believes in
God and prizes woman’s honor, let him stop the issue of that report.”
 And Henry Clavering, dignified as ever, but in a state of extreme
agitation, stepped into our midst through an open door at our right.

But at the sight of his face, the man in our arms quivered, shrieked,
and gave one bound that would have overturned Mr. Clavering, herculean
of frame as he was, had not Mr. Gryce interposed.

“Wait!” he cried; and holding back the secretary with one hand--where
was his rheumatism now!--he put the other in his pocket and drew thence
a document which he held up before Mr. Clavering. “It has not gone
yet,” said he; “be easy. And you,” he went on, turning towards Trueman
Harwell, “be quiet, or----”

His sentence was cut short by the man springing from his grasp. “Let me
go!” he shrieked. “Let me have my revenge on him who, in face of all I
have done for Mary Leavenworth, dares to call her his wife! Let me--”
 But at this point he paused, his quivering frame stiffening into stone,
and his clutching hands, outstretched for his rival’s throat, falling
heavily back. “Hark!” said he, glaring over Mr. Clavering’s shoulder:
“it is she! I hear her! I feel her! She is on the stairs! she is at the
door! she--” a low, shuddering sigh of longing and despair finished the
sentence: the door opened, and Mary Leavenworth stood before us!

It was a moment to make young hairs turn gray. To see her face, so pale,
so haggard, so wild in its fixed horror, turned towards Henry Clavering,
to the utter ignoring of the real actor in this most horrible scene!
Trueman Harwell could not stand it.

“Ah, ah!” he cried; “look at her! cold, cold; not one glance for me,
though I have just drawn the halter from her neck and fastened it about
my own!”

And, breaking from the clasp of the man who in his jealous rage would
now have withheld him, he fell on his knees before Mary, clutching her
dress with frenzied hands. “You _shall_ look at me,” he cried; “you
_shall_ listen to me! I will not lose body and soul for nothing. Mary,
they said you were in peril! I could not endure that thought, so I
uttered the truth,--yes, though I knew what the consequence would
be,--and all I want now is for you to say you believe me, when I swear
that I only meant to secure to you the fortune you so much desired; that
I never dreamed it would come to this; that it was because I loved you,
and hoped to win your love in return that I----”

But she did not seem to see him, did not seem to hear him. Her eyes were
fixed upon Henry Clavering with an awful inquiry in their depths, and
none but he could move her.

“You do not hear me!” shrieked the poor wretch. “Ice that you are, you
would not turn your head if I should call to you from the depths of
hell!”

But even this cry fell unheeded. Pushing her hands down upon his
shoulders as though she would sweep some impediment from her path, she
endeavored to advance. “Why is that man here?” she cried, indicating
her husband with one quivering hand. “What has he done that he should be
brought here to confront me at this awful time?”

‘“I told her to come here to meet her uncle’s murderer,” whispered Mr.
Gryce into my ear.

But before I could reply to her, before Mr. Clavering himself could
murmur a word, the guilty wretch before her had started to his feet.

“Don’t you know? then I will tell you. It is because these gentlemen,
chivalrous and honorable as they consider themselves, think that you,
the beauty and the Sybarite, committed with your own white hand the
deed of blood which has brought you freedom and fortune. Yes, yes, this
man”--turning and pointing at me--“friend as he has made himself out to
be, kindly and honorable as you have doubtless believed him, but who in
every look he has bestowed upon you, every word he has uttered in your
hearing during all these four horrible weeks, has been weaving a cord
for your neck--thinks you the assassin of your uncle, unknowing that a
man stood at your side ready to sweep half the world from your path if
that same white hand rose in bidding. That I----”

“You?” Ah! now she could see him: now she could hear him!

“Yes,” clutching her robe again as she hastily recoiled; “didn’t you
know it? When in that dreadful hour of your rejection by your uncle, you
cried aloud for some one to help you, didn’t you know----”

“Don’t!” she shrieked, bursting from him with a look of unspeakable
horror. “Don’t say that! Oh!” she gasped, “is the mad cry of a stricken
woman for aid and sympathy the call for a murderer?” And turning away
in horror, she moaned: “Who that ever looks at me now will forget that
a man--such a man!--dared to think that, because I was in mortal
perplexity, I would accept the murder of my best friend as a relief from
it!” Her horror was unbounded. “Oh, what a chastisement for folly!” she
murmured. “What a punishment for the love of money which has always been
my curse!”

Henry Clavering could no longer restrain himself, leaping to her side,
he bent over her. “Was it nothing but folly, Mary? Are you guiltless of
any deeper wrong? Is there no link of complicity between you two? Have
you nothing on your soul but an inordinate desire to preserve your place
in your uncle’s will, even at the risk of breaking my heart and wronging
your noble cousin? Are you innocent in this matter? Tell me!” placing
his hand on her head, he pressed it slowly back and gazed into her eyes;
then, without a word, took her to his breast and looked calmly around
him.

“She is innocent!” said he.

It was the uplifting of a stifling pall. No one in the room, unless it
was the wretched criminal shivering before us, but felt a sudden influx
of hope. Even Mary’s own countenance caught a glow. “Oh!” she whispered,
withdrawing from his arms to look better into his face, “and is this the
man I have trifled with, injured, and tortured, till the very name of
Mary Leavenworth might well make him shudder? Is this he whom I married
in a fit of caprice, only to forsake and deny? Henry, do you declare
me innocent in face of all you have seen and heard; in face of that
moaning, chattering wretch before us, and my own quaking flesh and
evident terror; with the remembrance on your heart and in your mind of
the letter I wrote you the morning after the murder, in which I prayed
you to keep away from me, as I was in such deadly danger the least hint
given to the world that I had a secret to conceal would destroy me? Do
you, can you, will you, declare me innocent before God and the world?”

“I do,” said he.

A light such as had never visited her face before passed slowly over it.
“Then God forgive me the wrong I have done this noble heart, for I can
never forgive myself! Wait!” said she, as he opened his lips. “Before I
accept any further tokens of your generous confidence, let me show you
what I am. You shall know the worst of the woman you have taken to your
heart. Mr. Raymond,” she cried, turning towards me for the first time,
“in those days when, with such an earnest desire for my welfare (you see
I do not believe this man’s insinuations), you sought to induce me to
speak out and tell all I knew concerning this dreadful deed, I did not
do it because of my selfish fears. I knew the case looked dark against
me. Eleanore had told me so. Eleanore herself--and it was the keenest
pang I had to endure--believed me guilty. She had her reasons. She knew
first, from the directed envelope she had found lying underneath my
uncle’s dead body on the library table, that he had been engaged at the
moment of death in summoning his lawyer to make that change in his will
which would transfer my claims to her; secondly, that notwithstanding
my denial of the same, I had been down to his room the night before, for
she had heard my door open and my dress rustle as I passed out. But that
was not all; the key that every one felt to be a positive proof of guilt
wherever found, had been picked up by her from the floor of my room; the
letter written by Mr. Clavering to my uncle was found in my fire; and
the handkerchief which she had seen me take from the basket of clean
clothes, was produced at the inquest stained with pistol grease. I could
not account for these things. A web seemed tangled about my feet.
I could not stir without encountering some new toil. I knew I was
innocent; but if I failed to satisfy my cousin of this, how could I
hope to convince the general public, if once called upon to do so. Worse
still, if Eleanore, with every apparent motive for desiring long life
to our uncle, was held in such suspicion because of a few circumstantial
evidences against her, what would I not have to fear if these evidences
were turned against me, the heiress! The tone and manner of the juryman
at the inquest that asked who would be most benefited by my uncle’s will
showed but too plainly. When, therefore, Eleanore, true to her heart’s
generous instincts, closed her lips and refused to speak when speech
would have been my ruin, I let her do it, justifying myself with the
thought that she had deemed me capable of crime, and so must bear the
consequences. Nor, when I saw how dreadful these were likely to
prove, did I relent. Fear of the ignominy, suspense, and danger which
confession would entail sealed my lips. Only once did I hesitate. That
was when, in the last conversation we had, I saw that, notwithstanding
appearances, you believed in Eleanore’s innocence, and the thought
crossed me you might be induced to believe in mine if I threw myself
upon your mercy. But just then Mr. Clavering came; and as in a flash I
seemed to realize what my future life would be, stained by suspicion,
and, instead of yielding to my impulse, went so far in the other
direction as to threaten Mr. Clavering with a denial of our marriage if
he approached me again till all danger was over.

“Yes, he will tell you that was my welcome to him when, with heart
and brain racked by long suspense, he came to my door for one word of
assurance that the peril I was in was not of my own making. That was the
greeting I gave him after a year of silence every moment of which was
torture to him. But he forgives me; I see it in his eyes; I hear it in
his accents; and you--oh, if in the long years to come you can forget
what I have made Eleanore suffer by my selfish fears; if with the shadow
of her wrong before you, you can by the grace of some sweet hope think
a little less hardly of me, do. As for this man--torture could not be
worse to me than this standing with him in the same room--let him
come forward and declare if I by look or word have given him reason to
believe I understood his passion, much less returned it.”

“Why ask!” he gasped. “Don’t you see it was your indifference which
drove me mad? To stand before you, to agonize after you, to follow you
with thoughts in every move you made; to know my soul was welded to
yours with bands of steel no fire could melt, no force destroy, no
strain dissever; to sleep under the same roof, sit at the same table,
and yet meet not so much as one look to show me you understood! It was
that which made my life a hell. I was determined you should understand.
If I had to leap into a pit of flame, you should know what I was, and
what my passion for you was. And you do. You comprehend it all now.
Shrink as you will from my presence, cower as you may to the weak man
you call husband, you can never forget the love of Trueman Harwell;
never forget that love, love, love, was the force which led me down into
your uncle’s room that night, and lent me will to pull the trigger which
poured all the wealth you hold this day into your lap. Yes,” he went on,
towering in his preternatural despair till even the noble form of Henry
Clavering looked dwarfed beside him, “every dollar that chinks from
your purse shall talk of me. Every gew-gaw which flashes on that haughty
head, too haughty to bend to me, shall shriek my name into your ears.
Fashion, pomp, luxury,--you will have them all; but till gold loses its
glitter and ease its attraction you will never forget the hand that gave
them to you!”

With a look whose evil triumph I cannot describe, he put his hand into
the arm of the waiting detective, and in another moment would have been
led from the room; when Mary, crushing down the swell of emotions that
was seething in her breast, lifted her head and said:

“No, Trueman Harwell; I cannot give you even that thought for your
comfort. Wealth so laden would bring nothing but torture. I cannot
accept the torture, so must release the wealth. From this day, Mary
Clavering owns nothing but what comes to her from the husband she has so
long and so basely wronged.” And raising her hands to her ears, she tore
out the diamonds which hung there, and flung them at the feet of the
unfortunate man.

It was the final wrench of the rack. With a yell such as I never thought
to listen to from the lips of a man, he flung up his arms, while all the
lurid light of madness glared on his face. “And I have given my soul to
hell for a shadow!” he moaned, “for a shadow!”

“Well, that is the best day’s work I ever did! Your congratulations,
Mr. Raymond, upon the success of the most daring game ever played in a
detective’s office.”

I looked at the triumphant countenance of Mr. Gryce in amazement. “What
do you mean?” I cried; “did you plan all this?”

“Did I plan it?” he repeated. “Could I stand here, seeing how things
have turned out, if I had not? Mr. Raymond, let us be comfortable. You
are a gentleman, but we can well shake hands over this. I have never
known such a satisfactory conclusion to a bad piece of business in all
my professional career.”

We did shake hands, long and fervently, and then I asked him to explain
himself.

“Well,” said he, “there has always been one thing that plagued me, even
in the very moment of my strongest suspicion against this woman, and
that was, the pistol-cleaning business. I could not reconcile it with
what I knew of womankind. I could not make it seem the act of a woman.
Did you ever know a woman who cleaned a pistol? No. They can fire them,
and do; but after firing them, they do not clean them. Now it is a
principle which every detective recognizes, that if of a hundred leading
circumstances connected with a crime, ninety-nine of these are acts
pointing to the suspected party with unerring certainty, but the
hundredth equally important act one which that person could not have
performed, the whole fabric of suspicion is destroyed. Recognizing this
principle, then, as I have said, I hesitated when it came to the point
of arrest. The chain was complete; the links were fastened; but one link
was of a different size and material from the rest; and in this argued a
break in the chain. I resolved to give her a final chance. Summoning Mr.
Clavering, and Mr. Harwell, two persons whom I had no reason to suspect,
but who were the only persons beside herself who could have committed
this crime, being the only persons of intellect who were in the house
or believed to be, at the time of the murder, I notified them separately
that the assassin of Mr. Leavenworth was not only found, but was
about to be arrested in my house, and that if they wished to hear
the confession which would be sure to follow, they might have the
opportunity of doing so by coming here at such an hour. They were both
too much interested, though for very different reasons, to refuse; and
I succeeded in inducing them to conceal themselves in the two rooms from
which you saw them issue, knowing that if either of them had committed
this deed, he had done it for the love of Mary Leavenworth, and
consequently could not hear her charged with crime, and threatened
with arrest, without betraying himself. I did not hope much from the
experiment; least of all did I anticipate that Mr. Harwell would prove
to be the guilty man--but live and learn, Mr. Raymond, live and learn.”



XXXVIII. A FULL CONFESSION


    “Between the acting of a dreadful thing,
    And the first motion, all the interim is
    Like a phantasma or a hideous dream;
    The genius and the mortal instruments
    Are then in council; and the state of a man,
    Like to a little Kingdom, suffers then
    The nature of an insurrection.”
         --Julius Caesar.

I AM not a bad man; I am only an intense one. Ambition, love, jealousy,
hatred, revenge--transitory emotions with some, are terrific passions
with me. To be sure, they are quiet and concealed ones, coiled serpents
that make no stir till aroused; but then, deadly in their spring and
relentless in their action. Those who have known me best have not known
this. My own mother was ignorant of it. Often and often have I heard
her say: “If Trueman only had more sensibility! If Trueman were not so
indifferent to everything! In short, if Trueman had more power in him!”

It was the same at school. No one understood me. They thought me meek;
called me Dough-face. For three years they called me this, then I turned
upon them. Choosing out their ringleader, I felled him to the ground,
laid him on his back, and stamped upon him. He was handsome before
my foot came down; afterwards--Well, it is enough he never called me
Dough-face again. In the store I entered soon after, I met with even
less appreciation. Regular at my work and exact in my performance of it,
they thought me a good machine and nothing more. What heart, soul, and
feeling could a man have who never sported, never smoked, and never
laughed? I could reckon up figures correctly, but one scarcely needed
heart or soul for that. I could even write day by day and month by month
without showing a flaw in my copy; but that only argued I was no more
than they intimated, a regular automaton. I let them think so, with the
certainty before me that they would one day change their minds as others
had done. The fact was, I loved nobody well enough, not even myself,
to care for any man’s opinion. Life was well-nigh a blank to me; a dead
level plain that had to be traversed whether I would or not. And such
it might have continued to this day if I had never met Mary Leavenworth.
But when, some nine months since, I left my desk in the counting-house
for a seat in Mr. Leavenworth’s library, a blazing torch fell into
my soul whose flame has never gone out, and never will, till the doom
before me is accomplished.

She was so beautiful! When, on that first evening, I followed my new
employer into the parlor, and saw this woman standing up before me
in her half-alluring, half-appalling charm, I knew, as by a lightning
flash, what my future would be if I remained in that house. She was
in one of her haughty moods, and bestowed upon me little more than a
passing glance. But her indifference made slight impression upon me
then. It was enough that I was allowed to stand in her presence and look
unrebuked upon her loveliness. To be sure, it was like gazing into the
flower-wreathed crater of an awakening volcano. Fear and fascination
were in each moment I lingered there; but fear and fascination made the
moment what it was, and I could not have withdrawn if I would.

And so it was always. Unspeakable pain as well as pleasure was in the
emotion with which I regarded her. Yet for all that I did not cease to
study her hour by hour and day by day; her smiles, her movement, her way
of turning her head or lifting her eyelids. I had a purpose in this. I
wished to knit her beauty so firmly into the warp and woof of my being
that nothing could ever serve to tear it away. For I saw then as plainly
as now that, coquette though she was, she would never stoop to me. No;
I might lie down at her feet and let her trample over me; she would not
even turn to see what it was she had stepped upon. I might spend days,
months, years, learning the alphabet of her wishes; she would not thank
me for my pains or even raise the lashes from her cheek to look at me as
I passed. I was nothing to her, could not be anything unless--and this
thought came slowly--I could in some way become her master.

Meantime I wrote at Mr. Leavenworth’s dictation and pleased him. My
methodical ways were just to his taste. As for the other member of the
family, Miss Eleanore Leavenworth--she treated me just as one of her
proud but sympathetic nature might be expected to do. Not familiarly,
but kindly; not as a friend, but as a member of the household whom she
met every day at table, and who, as she or any one else could see, was
none too happy or hopeful.

Six months went by. I had learned two things; first, that Mary
Leavenworth loved her position as prospective heiress to a large fortune
above every other earthly consideration; and secondly, that she was in
the possession of a secret which endangered that position. What this
was, I had for some time no means of knowing. But when later I became
convinced it was one of love, I grew hopeful, strange as it may seem.
For by this time I had learned Mr. Leavenworth’s disposition almost as
perfectly as that of his niece, and knew that in a matter of this kind
he would be uncompromising; and that in the clashing of these two wills
something might occur which would give me a hold upon her. The only
thing that troubled me was the fact that I did not know the name of the
man in whom she was interested. But chance soon favored me here. One
day--a month ago now--I sat down to open Mr. Leavenworth’s mail as
usual. One letter--shall I ever forget it? ran thus:

“HOFFMAN HOUSE,

“March 1, 1876.”

MR. HORATIO LEAVENWORTH:

“DEAR SIR,--You have a niece whom you love and trust, one, too, who
seems worthy of all the love and trust that you or any other man can
give her; so beautiful, so charming, so tender is she in face, form,
manner, and conversation. But, dear sir, every rose has its thorn, and
your rose is no exception to this rule. Lovely as she is, charming as
she is, tender as she is, she is not only capable of trampling on the
rights of one who trusted her, but of bruising the heart and breaking
the spirit of him to whom she owes all duty, honor, and observance.

“If you don’t believe this, ask her to her cruel, bewitching face, who
and what is her humble servant, and yours.

“Henry Ritchie Clavering.”

If a bombshell had exploded at my feet, or the evil one himself appeared
at my call, I would not have been more astounded. Not only was the name
signed to these remarkable words unknown to me, but the epistle itself
was that of one who felt himself to be her master: a position which, as
you know, I was myself aspiring to occupy. For a few minutes, then, I
stood a prey to feelings of the bitterest wrath and despair; then I grew
calm, realizing that with this letter in my possession I was virtually
the arbitrator of her destiny. Some men would have sought her there and
then and, by threatening to place it in her uncle’s hand, won from her
a look of entreaty, if no more; but I--well, my plans went deeper than
that. I knew she would have to be in extremity before I could hope to
win her. She must feel herself slipping over the edge of the precipice
before she would clutch at the first thing offering succor. I decided
to allow the letter to pass into my employer’s hands. But it had been
opened! How could I manage to give it to him in this condition without
exciting his suspicion? I knew of but one way; to let him see me open it
for what he would consider the first time. So, waiting till he came into
the room, I approached him with the letter, tearing off the end of the
envelope as I came. Opening it, I gave a cursory glance at its contents
and tossed it down on the table before him.

“That appears to be of a private character,” said I, “though there is no
sign to that effect on the envelope.”

He took it up while I stood there. At the first word he started, looked
at me, seemed satisfied from my expression that I had not read far
enough to realize its nature, and, whirling slowly around in his chair,
devoured the remainder in silence. I waited a moment, then withdrew to
my own desk. One minute, two minutes passed in silence; he was evidently
rereading the letter; then he hurriedly rose and left the room. As he
passed me I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror. The expression I
saw there did not tend to lessen the hope that was rising in my breast.

By following him almost immediately up-stairs I ascertained that he
went directly to Mary’s room, and when in a few hours later the family
collected around the dinner table, I perceived, almost without looking
up, that a great and insurmountable barrier had been raised between him
and his favorite niece.

Two days passed; days that were for me one long and unrelieved suspense.
Had Mr. Leavenworth answered that letter? Would it all end as it had
begun, without the appearance of the mysterious Clavering on the scene?
I could not tell.

Meanwhile my monotonous work went on, grinding my heart beneath its
relentless wheel. I wrote and wrote and wrote, till it seemed as if my
life blood went from me with every drop of ink I used. Always alert
and listening, I dared not lift my head or turn my eyes at any unusual
sound, lest I should seem to be watching. The third night I had a dream;
I have already told Mr. Raymond what it was, and hence will not repeat
it here. One correction, however, I wish to make in regard to it. In my
statement to him I declared that the face of the man whom I saw lift his
hand against my employer was that of Mr. Clavering. I lied when I said
this. The face seen by me in my dream was my own. It was that fact
which made it so horrible to me. In the crouching figure stealing warily
down-stairs, I saw as in a glass the vision of my own form. Otherwise my
account of the matter was true.

This vision had a tremendous effect upon me. Was it a premonition? a
forewarning of the way in which I was to win this coveted creature for
my own? Was the death of her uncle the bridge by which the impassable
gulf between us might be spanned? I began to think it might be; to
consider the possibilities which could make this the only path to
my elysium; even went so far as to picture her lovely face bending
gratefully towards me through the glare of a sudden release from some
emergency in which she stood. One thing was sure; if that was the way I
must go, I had at least been taught how to tread it; and all through the
dizzy, blurred day that followed, I saw, as I sat at my work, repeated
visions of that stealthy, purposeful figure stealing down the stairs
and entering with uplifted pistol into the unconscious presence of my
employer. I even found myself a dozen times that day turning my eyes
upon the door through which it was to come, wondering how long it would
be before my actual form would pause there. That the moment was at hand
I did not imagine. Even when I left him that night after drinking with
him the glass of sherry mentioned at the inquest, I had no idea the hour
of action was so near. But when, not three minutes after going upstairs,
I caught the sound of a lady’s dress rustling through the hall, and
listening, heard Mary Leavenworth pass my door on her way to the
library, I realized that the fatal hour was come; that something
was going to be said or done in that room which would make this deed
necessary. What? I determined to ascertain. Casting about in my mind
for the means of doing so, I remembered that the ventilator running
up through the house opened first into the passage-way connecting Mr.
Leavenworth’s bedroom and library, and, secondly, into the closet of
the large spare room adjoining mine. Hastily unlocking the door of
the communication between the rooms, I took my position in the closet.
Instantly the sound of voices reached my ears; all was open below, and
standing there, I was as much an auditor of what went on between Mary
and her uncle as if I were in the library itself. And what did I hear?
Enough to assure me my suspicions were correct; that it was a moment of
vital interest to her; that Mr. Leavenworth, in pursuance of a threat
evidently made some time since, was in the act of taking steps to change
his will, and that she had come to make an appeal to be forgiven her
fault and restored to his favor. What that fault was, I did not learn.
No mention was made of Mr. Clavering as her husband. I only heard her
declare that her action had been the result of impulse, rather than
love; that she regretted it, and desired nothing more than to be free
from all obligations to one she would fain forget, and be again to her
uncle what she was before she ever saw this man. I thought, fool that I
was, it was a mere engagement she was alluding to, and took the insanest
hope from these words; and when, in a moment later I heard her uncle
reply, in his sternest tone, that she had irreparably forfeited her
claims to his regard and favor, I did not need her short and bitter cry
of shame and disappointment, or that low moan for some one to help her,
for me to sound his death-knell in my heart. Creeping back to my own
room, I waited till I heard her reascend, then I stole forth. Calm as
I had ever been in my life, I went down the stairs just as I had seen
myself do in my dream, and knocking lightly at the library door, went
in. Mr. Leavenworth was sitting in his usual place writing.

“Excuse me,” said I as he looked up, “I have lost my memorandum-book,
and think it possible I may have dropped it in the passage-way when I
went for the wine.” He bowed, and I hurried past him into the closet.
Once there, I proceeded rapidly into the room beyond, procured the
pistol, returned, and almost before I realized what I was doing, had
taken up my position behind him, aimed, and fired. The result was what
you know. Without a groan his head fell forward on his hands, and Mary
Leavenworth was the virtual possessor of the thousands she coveted.

My first thought was to procure the letter he was writing. Approaching
the table, I tore it out from under his hands, looked at it, saw that
it was, as I expected, a summons to his lawyer, and thrust it into my
pocket, together with the letter from Mr. Clavering, which I perceived
lying spattered with blood on the table before me. Not till this was
done did I think of myself, or remember the echo which that low, sharp
report must have made in the house. Dropping the pistol at the side of
the murdered man, I stood ready to shriek to any one who entered that
Mr. Leavenworth had killed himself. But I was saved from committing such
a folly. The report had not been heard, or if so, had evidently failed
to create an alarm. No one came, and I was left to contemplate my
work undisturbed and decide upon the best course to be taken to avoid
detection. A moment’s study of the wound made in his head by the
bullet convinced me of the impossibility of passing the affair off as
a suicide, or even the work of a burglar. To any one versed in such
matters it was manifestly a murder, and a most deliberate one. My one
hope, then, lay in making it as mysterious as it was deliberate, by
destroying all clue to the motive and manner of the deed. Picking up the
pistol, I carried it into the other room with the intention of
cleaning it, but finding nothing there to do it with, came back for the
handkerchief I had seen lying on the floor at Mr. Leavenworth’s feet. It
was Miss Eleanore’s, but I did not know it till I had used it to clean
the barrel; then the sight of her initials in one corner so shocked me
I forgot to clean the cylinder, and only thought of how I could do
away with this evidence of her handkerchief having been employed for a
purpose so suspicious. Not daring to carry it from the room, I sought
for means to destroy it; but finding none, compromised the matter by
thrusting it deep down behind the cushion of one of the chairs, in the
hope of being able to recover and burn it the next day. This done, I
reloaded the pistol, locked it up, and prepared to leave the room.
But here the horror which usually follows such deeds struck me like a
thunderbolt and made me for the first time uncertain in my action. I
locked the door on going out, something I should never have done. Not
till I reached the top of the stairs did I realize my folly; and then it
was too late, for there before me, candle in hand, and surprise written
on every feature of her face, stood Hannah, one of the servants, looking
at me.

“Lor, sir, where have you been?” she cried, but strange to say, in a
low tone. “You look as if you had seen a ghost.” And her eyes turned
suspiciously to the key which I held in my hand.

I felt as if some one had clutched me round the throat. Thrusting the
key into my pocket, I took a step towards her. “I will tell you what I
have seen if you will come down-stairs,” I whispered; “the ladies will
be disturbed if we talk here,” and smoothing my brow as best I could,
I put out my hand and drew her towards me. What my motive was I hardly
knew; the action was probably instinctive; but when I saw the look which
came into her face as I touched her, and the alacrity with which she
prepared to follow me, I took courage, remembering the one or two
previous tokens I had had of this girl’s unreasonable susceptibility to
my influence; a susceptibility which I now felt could be utilized and
made to serve my purpose.

Taking her down to the parlor floor, I drew her into the depths of
the great drawing-room, and there told her in the least alarming
way possible what had happened to Mr. Leavenworth. She was of course
intensely agitated, but she did not scream;--the novelty of her position
evidently bewildering her--and, greatly relieved, I went on to say that
I did not know who committed the deed, but that folks would declare it
was I if they knew I had been seen by her on the stairs with the library
key in my hand. “But I won’t tell,” she whispered, trembling violently
in her fright and eagerness. “I will keep it to myself. I will say I
didn’t see anybody.” But I soon convinced her that she could never keep
her secret if the police once began to question her, and, following
up my argument with a little cajolery, succeeded after a long while in
winning her consent to leave the house till the storm should be blown
over. But that given, it was some little time before I could make her
comprehend that she must depart at once and without going back after her
things. Not till I brightened up her wits by a promise to marry her some
day if she only obeyed me now, did she begin to look the thing in
the face and show any evidence of the real mother wit she evidently
possessed. “Mrs. Belden would take me in,” said she, “if I could only
get to R----. She takes everybody in who asks, her; and she would
keep me, too, if I told her Miss Mary sent me. But I can’t get there
to-night.”

I immediately set to work to convince her that she could. The midnight
train did not leave the city for a half-hour yet, and the distance to
the depot could be easily walked by her in fifteen minutes. But she had
no money! I easily supplied that. And she was afraid she couldn’t find
her way! I entered into minutest directions. She still hesitated, but
at length consented to go, and with some further understanding of the
method I was to employ in communicating with her, we went down-stairs.
There we found a hat and shawl of the cook’s which I put on her, and in
another moment we were in the carriage yard. “Remember, you are to say
nothing of what has occurred, no matter what happens,” I whispered in
parting injunction as she turned to leave me. “Remember, you are to come
and marry me some day,” she murmured in reply, throwing her arms about
my neck. The movement was sudden, and it was probably at this time she
dropped the candle she had unconsciously held clenched in her hand till
now. I promised her, and she glided out of the gate.

Of the dreadful agitation that followed the disappearance of this girl
I can give no better idea than by saying I not only committed the
additional error of locking up the house on my re-entrance, but omitted
to dispose of the key then in my pocket by flinging it into the street
or dropping it in the hall as I went up. The fact is, I was so absorbed
by the thought of the danger I stood in from this girl, I forgot
everything else. Hannah’s pale face, Hannah’s look of terror, as she
turned from my side and flitted down the street, were continually before
me. I could not escape them; the form of the dead man lying below was
less vivid. It was as though I were tied in fancy to this woman of the
white face fluttering down the midnight streets. That she would fail in
something--come back or be brought back--that I should find her standing
white and horror-stricken on the front steps when I went down in the
morning, was like a nightmare to me. I began to think no other result
possible; that she never would or could win her way unchallenged to that
little cottage in a distant village; that I had but sent a trailing flag
of danger out into the world with this wretched girl;--danger that would
come back to me with the first burst of morning light!

But even those thoughts faded after a while before the realization
of the peril I was in as long as the key and papers remained in my
possession. How to get rid of them! I dared not leave my room again,
or open my window. Some one might see me and remember it. Indeed I was
afraid to move about in my room. Mr. Leavenworth might hear me. Yes, my
morbid terror had reached that point--I was fearful of one whose ears I
myself had forever closed, imagined him in his bed beneath and wakeful
to the least sound.

But the necessity of doing something with these evidences of guilt
finally overcame this morbid anxiety, and drawing the two letters from
my pocket--I had not yet undressed--I chose out the most dangerous of
the two, that written by Mr. Leavenworth himself, and, chewing it till
it was mere pulp, threw it into a corner; but the other had blood on it,
and nothing, not even the hope of safety, could induce me to put it
to my lips. I was forced to lie with it clenched in my hand, and the
flitting image of Hannah before my eyes, till the slow morning broke. I
have heard it said that a year in heaven seems like a day; I can easily
believe it. I know that an hour in hell seems an eternity!

But with daylight came hope. Whether it was that the sunshine glancing
on the wall made me think of Mary and all I was ready to do for her
sake, or whether it was the mere return of my natural stoicism in the
presence of actual necessity, I cannot say. I only know that I arose
calm and master of myself. The problem of the letter and key had solved
itself also. Hide them? I would not try to! Instead of that I would
put them in plain sight, trusting to that very fact for their being
overlooked. Making the letter up into lighters, I carried them into the
spare room and placed them in a vase. Then, taking the key in my hand,
went down-stairs, intending to insert it in the lock of the library door
as I went by. But Miss Eleanore descending almost immediately behind me
made this impossible. I succeeded, however, in thrusting it, without
her knowledge, among the filagree work of the gas-fixture in the
second hall, and thus relieved, went down into the breakfast room as
self-possessed a man as ever crossed its threshold. Mary was there,
looking exceedingly pale and disheartened, and as I met her eye, which
for a wonder turned upon me as I entered, I could almost have laughed,
thinking of the deliverance that had come to her, and of the time when I
should proclaim myself to be the man who had accomplished it.

Of the alarm that speedily followed, and my action at that time and
afterwards, I need not speak in detail. I behaved just as I would have
done if I had had no hand in the murder. I even forbore to touch the key
or go to the spare room, or make any movement which I was not willing
all the world should see. For as things stood, there was not a shadow
of evidence against me in the house; neither was I, a hard-working,
uncomplaining secretary, whose passion for one of his employer’s nieces
was not even mistrusted by the lady herself, a person to be suspected
of the crime which threw him out of a fair situation. So I performed
all the duties of my position, summoning the police, and going for Mr.
Veeley, just as I would have done if those hours between me leaving
Mr. Leavenworth for the first time and going down to breakfast in the
morning had been blotted from my consciousness.

And this was the principle upon which I based my action at the inquest.
Leaving that half-hour and its occurrences out of the question, I
resolved to answer such questions as might be put me as truthfully as
I could; the great fault with men situated as I was usually being that
they lied too much, thus committing themselves on unessential matters.
But alas, in thus planning for my own safety, I forgot one thing,
and that was the dangerous position in which I should thus place Mary
Leavenworth as the one benefited by the crime. Not till the inference
was drawn by a juror, from the amount of wine found in Mr. Leavenworth’s
glass in the morning, that he had come to his death shortly after my
leaving him, did I realize what an opening I had made for suspicion in
her direction by admitting that I had heard a rustle on the stair a few
minutes after going up. That all present believed it to have been made
by Eleanore, did not reassure me. She was so completely disconnected
with the crime I could not imagine suspicion holding to her for an
instant. But Mary--If a curtain had been let down before me, pictured
with the future as it has since developed, I could not have seen more
plainly what her position would be, if attention were once directed
towards her. So, in the vain endeavor to cover up my blunder, I began
to lie. Forced to admit that a shadow of disagreement had been lately
visible between Mr. Leavenworth and one of his nieces, I threw the
burden of it upon Eleanore, as the one best able to bear it. The
consequences were more serious than I anticipated. Direction had been
given to suspicion which every additional evidence that now came up
seemed by some strange fatality to strengthen. Not only was it proved
that Mr. Leavenworth’s own pistol had been used in the assassination,
and that too by a person then in the house, but I myself was brought
to acknowledge that Eleanore had learned from me, only a little while
before, how to load, aim, and fire this very pistol--a coincidence
mischievous enough to have been of the devil’s own making.

Seeing all this, my fear of what the ladies would admit when questioned
became very great. Let them in their innocence acknowledge that, upon my
ascent, Mary had gone to her uncle’s room for the purpose of persuading
him not to carry into effect the action he contemplated, and what
consequences might not ensue! I was in a torment of apprehension.
But events of which I had at that time no knowledge had occurred to
influence them. Eleanore, with some show of reason, as it seems, not
only suspected her cousin of the crime, but had informed her of the
fact, and Mary, overcome with terror at finding there was more or
less circumstantial evidence supporting the suspicion, decided to deny
whatever told against herself, trusting to Eleanore’s generosity not to
be contradicted. Nor was her confidence misplaced. Though, by the course
she took, Eleanore was forced to deepen the prejudice already rife
against herself, she not only forbore to contradict her cousin, but when
a true answer would have injured her, actually refused to return any,
a lie being something she could not utter, even to save one especially
endeared to her.

This conduct of hers had one effect upon me. It aroused my admiration
and made me feel that here was a woman worth helping if assistance could
be given without danger to myself. Yet I doubt if my sympathy would have
led me into doing anything, if I had not perceived, by the stress laid
upon certain well-known matters, that actual danger hovered about us
all while the letter and key remained in the house. Even before the
handkerchief was produced, I had made up my mind to attempt their
destruction; but when that was brought up and shown, I became so alarmed
I immediately rose and, making my way under some pretence or other to
the floors above, snatched the key from the gas-fixture, the
lighters from the vase, and hastening with them down the hall to Mary
Leavenworth’s room, went in under the expectation of finding a fire
there in which to destroy them. But, to my heavy disappointment, there
were only a few smoldering ashes in the grate, and, thwarted in my
design, I stood hesitating what to do, when I heard some one coming
up-stairs. Alive to the consequences of being found in that room at that
time, I cast the lighters into the grate and started for the door. But
in the quick move I made, the key flew from my hand and slid under a
chair. Aghast at the mischance, I paused, but the sound of approaching
steps increasing, I lost all control over myself and fled from the room.
And indeed I had no time to lose. I had barely reached my own door when
Eleanore Leavenworth, followed by two servants, appeared at the top of
the staircase and proceeded towards the room I had just left. The sight
reassured me; she would see the key, and take some means of disposing
of it; and indeed I always supposed her to have done so, for no further
word of key or letter ever came to my ears. This may explain why the
questionable position in which Eleanore soon found herself awakened in
me no greater anxiety. I thought the suspicions of the police rested
upon nothing more tangible than the peculiarity of her manner at the
inquest and the discovery of her handkerchief on the scene of the
tragedy. I did not know they possessed what might be called absolute
proof of her connection with the crime. But if I had, I doubt if my
course would have been any different. Mary’s peril was the one thing
capable of influencing me, and she did not appear to be in peril. On the
contrary, every one, by common consent, seemed to ignore all appearance
of guilt on her part. If Mr. Gryce, whom I soon learned to fear, had
given one sign of suspicion, or Mr. Raymond, whom I speedily recognized
as my most persistent though unconscious foe, had betrayed the least
distrust of her, I should have taken warning. But they did not, and,
lulled into a false security by their manner, I let the days go by
without suffering any fears on her account. But not without many
anxieties for myself. Hannah’s existence precluded all sense of personal
security. Knowing the determination of the police to find her, I trod
the verge of an awful suspense continually.

Meantime the wretched certainty was forcing itself upon me that I had
lost, instead of gained, a hold on Mary Leavenworth. Not only did she
evince the utmost horror of the deed which had made her mistress of
her uncle’s wealth, but, owing, as I believed, to the influence of Mr.
Raymond, soon gave evidence that she was losing, to a certain extent,
the characteristics of mind and heart which had made me hopeful of
winning her by this deed of blood. This revelation drove me almost
insane. Under the terrible restraint forced upon me, I walked my weary
round in a state of mind bordering on frenzy. Many and many a time have
I stopped in my work, wiped my pen and laid it down with the idea that
I could not repress myself another moment, but I have always taken it
up again and gone on with my task. Mr. Raymond has sometimes shown his
wonder at my sitting in my dead employer’s chair. Great heaven! it was
my only safeguard. By keeping the murder constantly before my mind, I
was enabled to restrain myself from any inconsiderate action.

At last there came a time when my agony could be no longer suppressed.
Going down the stairs one evening with Mr. Raymond, I saw a strange
gentleman standing in the reception room, looking at Mary Leavenworth
in a way that would have made my blood boil, even if I had not heard him
whisper these words: “But you are my wife, and know it, whatever you may
say or do!”

It was the lightning-stroke of my life. After what I had done to make
her mine, to hear another claim her as already his own, was stunning,
maddening! It forced a demonstration from me. I had either to yell in
my fury or deal the man beneath some tremendous blow in my hatred. I did
not dare to shriek, so I struck the blow. Demanding his name from Mr.
Raymond, and hearing that it was, as I expected, Clavering, I flung
caution, reason, common sense, all to the winds, and in a moment of fury
denounced him as the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth.

The next instant I would have given worlds to recall my words. What had
I done but drawn attention to myself in thus accusing a man against whom
nothing could of course be proved! But recall now was impossible.
So, after a night of thought, I did the next best thing: gave a
superstitious reason for my action, and so restored myself to my former
position without eradicating from the mind of Mr. Raymond that vague
doubt of the man which my own safety demanded. But I had no intention of
going any further, nor should I have done so if I had not observed that
for some reason Mr. Raymond was willing to suspect Mr. Clavering. But
that once seen, revenge took possession of me, and I asked myself if the
burden of this crime could be thrown on this man. Still I do not believe
that any active results would have followed this self-questioning if I
had not overheard a whispered conversation between two of the servants,
in which I learned that Mr. Clavering had been seen to enter the
house on the night of the murder, but was not seen to leave it. That
determined me. With such a fact for a starting-point, what might I not
hope to accomplish? Hannah alone stood in my way. While she remained
alive I saw nothing but ruin before me. I made up my mind to destroy
her and satisfy my hatred of Mr. Clavering at one blow. But how? By what
means could I reach her without deserting my post, or make away with
her without exciting fresh suspicion? The problem seemed insolvable;
but Trueman Harwell had not played the part of a machine so long without
result. Before I had studied the question a day, light broke upon it,
and I saw that the only way to accomplish my plans was to inveigle her
into destroying herself.

No sooner had this thought matured than I hastened to act upon it.
Knowing the tremendous risk I ran, I took every precaution. Locking
myself up in my room, I wrote her a letter in printed characters--she
having distinctly told me she could not read writing--in which I played
upon her ignorance, foolish fondness, and Irish superstition, by telling
her I dreamed of her every night and wondered if she did of me; was
afraid she didn’t, so enclosed her a little charm, which, if she would
use according to directions, would give her the most beautiful visions.
These directions were for her first to destroy my letter by burning it,
next to take in her hand the packet I was careful to enclose, swallow
the powder accompanying it, and go to bed. The powder was a deadly dose
of poison and the packet was, as you know, a forged confession falsely
criminating Henry Clavering. Enclosing all these in an envelope in
the corner of which I had marked a cross, I directed it, according to
agreement, to Mrs. Belden, and sent it.

Then followed the greatest period of suspense I had yet endured. Though
I had purposely refrained from putting my name to the letter, I felt
that the chances of detection were very great. Let her depart in the
least particular from the course I had marked out for her, and fatal
results must ensue. If she opened the enclosed packet, mistrusted the
powder, took Mrs. Belden into her confidence, or even failed to burn my
letter, all would be lost. I could not be sure of her or know the result
of my scheme except through the newspapers. Do you think I kept watch
of the countenances about me? devoured the telegraphic news, or started
when the bell rang? And when, a few days since, I read that short
paragraph in the paper which assured me that my efforts had at least
produced the death of the woman I feared, do you think I experienced any
sense of relief?

But of that why speak? In six hours had come the summons from Mr. Gryce,
and--let these prison walls, this confession itself, tell the rest. I am
no longer capable of speech or action.



XXXIX. THE OUTCOME OF A GREAT CRIME


    “Leave her to Heaven
    And to those thorns that
    In her bosom lodge
    To prick and sting her.”
         --Hamlet

    “For she is wise, if I can judge of her;
    And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true;
    And true she is, as she has proved herself;
    And therefore like herself, wise, fair, and true,
    Shall she be placed in my constant soul.”
         --Merchant of Venice.

“OH, ELEANORE!” I cried, as I made my way into her presence, “are you
prepared for very good news? News that will brighten these pale cheeks
and give the light back to these eyes, and make life hopeful and sweet
to you once more? Tell me,” I urged, stooping over her where she sat,
for she looked ready to faint.

“I don’t know,” she faltered; “I fear your idea of good news and mine
may differ. No news can be good but----”

“What?” I asked, taking her hands in mine with a smile that ought to
have reassured her, it was one of such profound happiness. “Tell me; do
not be afraid.”

But she was. Her dreadful burden had lain upon her so long it had become
a part of her being. How could she realize it was founded on a mistake;
that she had no cause to fear the past, present, or future?

But when the truth was made known to her; when, with all the fervor and
gentle tact of which I was capable, I showed her that her suspicions had
been groundless, and that Trueman Harwell, and not Mary, was accountable
for the evidences of crime which had led her into attributing to her
cousin the guilt of her uncle’s death, her first words were a prayer to
be taken to the one she had so wronged. “Take me to her! Oh, take me to
her! I cannot breathe or think till I have begged pardon of her on my
knees. Oh, my unjust accusation! My unjust accusation!”

Seeing the state she was in, I deemed it wise to humor her. So,
procuring a carriage, I drove with her to her cousin’s home.

“Mary will spurn me; she will not even look at me; and she will be
right!” she cried, as we rolled away up the avenue. “An outrage like
this can never be forgiven. But God knows I thought myself justified in
my suspicions. If you knew--”

“I do know,” I interposed. “Mary acknowledges that the circumstantial
evidence against her was so overwhelming, she was almost staggered
herself, asking if she could be guiltless with such proofs against her.
But----”

“Wait, oh, wait; did Mary say that?”

“Yes.”

“To-day?”

“Yes.”

“Mary must be changed.”

I did not answer; I wanted her to see for herself the extent of that
change. But when, in a few minutes later, the carriage stopped and I
hurried with her into the house which had been the scene of so much
misery, I was hardly prepared for the difference in her own countenance
which the hall light revealed. Her eyes were bright, her cheeks were
brilliant, her brow lifted and free from shadow; so quickly does the ice
of despair melt in the sunshine of hope.

Thomas, who had opened the door, was sombrely glad to see his mistress
again. “Miss Leavenworth is in the drawing-room,” said he.

I nodded, then seeing that Eleanore could scarcely move for agitation,
asked her whether she would go in at once, or wait till she was more
composed.

“I will go in at once; I cannot wait.” And slipping from my grasp, she
crossed the hall and laid her hand upon the drawing-room curtain, when
it was suddenly lifted from within and Mary stepped out.

“Mary!”

“Eleanore!”

The ring of those voices told everything. I did not need to glance their
way to know that Eleanore had fallen at her cousin’s feet, and that
her cousin had affrightedly lifted her. I did not need to hear: “My sin
against you is too great; you cannot forgive me!” followed by the low:
“My shame is great enough to lead me to forgive anything!” to know that
the lifelong shadow between these two had dissolved like a cloud, and
that, for the future, bright days of mutual confidence and sympathy were
in store.

Yet when, a half-hour or so later, I heard the door of the reception
room, into which I had retired, softly open, and looking up, saw Mary
standing on the threshold, with the light of true humility on her face,
I own that I was surprised at the softening which had taken place in
her haughty beauty. “Blessed is the shame that purifies,” I inwardly
murmured, and advancing, held out my hand with a respect and sympathy I
never thought to feel for her again.

The action seemed to touch her. Blushing deeply, she came and stood by
my side. “I thank you,” said she. “I have much to be grateful for; how
much I never realized till to-night; but I cannot speak of it now. What
I wish is for you to come in and help me persuade Eleanore to accept
this fortune from my hands. It is hers, you know; was willed to her, or
would have been if--”

“Wait,” said I, in the trepidation which this appeal to me on such a
subject somehow awakened. “Have you weighed this matter well? Is it your
determined purpose to transfer your fortune into your cousin’s hands?”

Her look was enough without the low, “Ah, how can you ask me?” that
followed it.

Mr. Clavering was sitting by the side of Eleanore when we entered the
drawing-room. He immediately rose, and drawing me to one side, earnestly
said:

“Before the courtesies of the hour pass between us, Mr. Raymond, allow
me to tender you my apology. You have in your possession a document
which ought never to have been forced upon you. Founded upon a mistake,
the act was an insult which I bitterly regret. If, in consideration of
my mental misery at that time, you can pardon it, I shall feel forever
indebted to you; if not----”

“Mr. Clavering, say no more. The occurrences of that day belong to
a past which I, for one, have made up my mind to forget as soon as
possible. The future promises too richly for us to dwell on bygone
miseries.”

And with a look of mutual understanding and friendship we hastened to
rejoin the ladies.

Of the conversation that followed, it is only necessary to state the
result. Eleanore, remaining firm in her refusal to accept property so
stained by guilt, it was finally agreed upon that it should be devoted
to the erection and sustainment of some charitable institution of
magnitude sufficient to be a recognized benefit to the city and its
unfortunate poor. This settled, our thoughts returned to our friends,
especially to Mr. Veeley.

“He ought to know,” said Mary. “He has grieved like a father over us.”
 And, in her spirit of penitence, she would have undertaken the unhappy
task of telling him the truth.

But Eleanore, with her accustomed generosity, would not hear of this.
“No, Mary,” said she; “you have suffered enough. Mr. Raymond and I will
go.”

And leaving them there, with the light of growing hope and confidence on
their faces, we went out again into the night, and so into a dream from
which I have never waked, though the shine of her dear eyes have been
now the load-star of my life for many happy, happy months.




I

"LET SOME ONE SPEAK!"


The hour of noon had just struck, and the few visitors still lingering
among the curiosities of the great museum were suddenly startled by the
sight of one of the attendants running down the broad, central staircase,
loudly shouting:

"Close the doors! Let no one out! An accident has occurred, and nobody's
to leave the building."

There was but one person near either of the doors, and as he chanced to
be a man closely connected with the museum,--being, in fact, one of its
most active directors,--he immediately turned about and in obedience to a
gesture made by the attendant, ran up the marble steps, followed by some
dozen others.

At the top they all turned, as by common consent, toward the left-hand
gallery, where in the section marked II, a tableau greeted them which few
of them will ever forget.

I say "tableau" because the few persons concerned in it stood as in a
picture, absolutely motionless and silent as the dead. Sense, if not
feeling, was benumbed in them all, as in another moment it was benumbed
in the breasts of these new arrivals. Tragedy was there in its most
terrible, its most pathetic, aspect. The pathos was given by the
victim,--a young and pretty girl lying face upward on the tessellated
floor with an arrow in her breast and death stamped unmistakably on every
feature,--the terror by the look and attitude of the woman they saw
kneeling over her--a remarkable woman, no longer young, but of a presence
to hold the attention, even if the circumstances had been of a far less
tragic nature. Her hand was on the arrow but she had made no movement to
withdraw it, and her eyes, fixed upon space, showed depths of horror
hardly to be explained even by the suddenness and startling character
of the untoward fatality of which she had just been made the unhappy
witness.

The director, whose name was Roberts, thought as he paused on the edge of
the crowd that he had never seen a countenance upon which woe had stamped
so deep a mark; and greatly moved by it, he was about to seek some
explanation of a scene to which appearances gave so little clue, when the
tall but stooping figure of the Curator entered, and he found himself
relieved from a task whose seriousness he had no difficulty in measuring.

To those who knew William Jewett well, it was evident that he had been
called from some task which still occupied his thoughts and for the
moment somewhat bewildered his understanding. But as he was a
conscientious man and quite capable of taking the lead when once roused
to the exigencies of an occasion, Mr. Roberts felt a certain interest in
watching the slow awakening of this self-absorbed man to the awful
circumstances which in one instant had clouded the museum in an
atmosphere of mysterious horror.

When the full realization came,--which was not till a way had been made
for him to the side of the stricken woman crouching over the dead
child,--the energy which transformed his countenance and gave character
to his usually bent and inconspicuous figure was all if not more than the
anxious director expected.

Finding that his attempts to meet the older woman's eye only prolonged
the suspense, the Curator addressed her quietly, and in sympathetic tones
inquired whose child this was and how so dreadful a thing had happened.

She did not answer. She did not even look his way. With a rapid glance
into the faces about him, ending in one of deep compassion directed
toward herself, he repeated his question.

Still no response--still that heavy silence, that absolute immobility of
face and limb. If her faculty of hearing was dulled, possibly she would
yield to that of touch. Stooping, he laid his hand on her arm.

This roused her. Slowly her eyes lost their fixed stare and took on a
more human light. A shudder shook her frame, and gazing down into the
countenance of the young girl lying at her feet, she broke into moans of
such fathomless despair as wrung the hearts of all about her.

It was a scene to test the nerve of any man. To one of the Curator's
sympathetic temperament it was well-nigh unendurable. Turning to those
nearest, he begged for an explanation of what they saw before them:

"Some one here must be able to tell me. Let that some one speak."

At this the quietest and least conspicuous person present, a young man
heavily spectacled and of student-like appearance, advanced a step and
said:

"I was the first person to come in here after this poor young lady fell.
I was looking at coins just beyond the partition there, when I heard a
gasping cry. I had not heard her fall--I fear I was very much preoccupied
in my search for an especial coin I had been told I should find here--but
I did hear the cry she gave, and startled by the sound, left the section
where I was and entered this one, only to see just what you are seeing
now."

The Curator pointed at the two women.

"This? The one woman kneeling over the other with her hand on the arrow?"

"Yes, sir."

A change took place in the Curator's expression. Involuntarily his eyes
rose to the walls hung closely with Indian relics, among which was a
quiver in which all could see arrows similar to the one now in the breast
of the young girl lying dead before them.

"This woman must be made to speak," he said in answer to the low murmur
which followed this discovery. "If there is a doctor present----"

Waiting, but receiving no response, he withdrew his hand from the woman's
arm and laid it on the arrow.

This roused her completely. Loosing her own grasp upon the shaft, she
cried, with sudden realization of the people pressing about her:

"I could not draw it. That causes death, they say. Wait! she may still be
alive. She may have a word to speak."

She was bending to listen. It was hardly a favorable moment for further
questioning, but the Curator in his anxiety could not refrain from
saying:

"Who is she? What is her name and what is yours?"

"Her name?" repeated the woman, rising to face him again. "How should I
know? I was passing through this gallery and had just stopped to take a
look into the court when this young girl bounded by me from behind and
flinging up her arms, fell with a deep sigh to the floor. I saw an arrow
in her breast, and----"

Emotion choked her, and when some one asked if the girl was a stranger to
her, she simply bowed her head; then, letting her gaze pass from face to
face till it had completed the circle of those about her, she said in her
former mechanical way:

"My name is Ermentrude Taylor. I came to look at the bronzes. I should
like to go now."

But the crowd which had formed about her was too compact to allow her to
pass. Besides, the director, Mr. Roberts, had something to say first.
Working his way forward, he waited till he had attracted her attention
and then remarked in his most considerate manner:

"You will pardon these importunities, Mrs. Taylor. I am a director of
this museum, and if Mr. Jewett will excuse me,"--here he bowed to the
Curator,--"I should like to inquire from what direction the arrow came
which ended this young girl's life?"

For a moment she stood aghast, fixing him with her eye as though to ask
whither this inquiry tended. Then with an air of intention which was not
without some strange element of fear, she allowed her glance to travel
across the court till it rested upon the row of connected arches facing
them from the opposite gallery.

"Ah," said he, putting her look into words, "you think the arrow came
from the other side of the building. Did you see anyone over there,--in
the gallery, I mean,--at or before the instant of this young girl's
fall?"

She shook her head.

"Did any of _you_?" he urged, with his eyes on the crowd. "Some one must
have been looking that way."

But no answer came, and the silence was fast becoming oppressive when
these words, whispered by one woman to another, roused them anew and
sent every glance again to the walls--even hers for whose benefit this
remark had possibly been made:

"But there are no arrows over there. All the arrows are here."

She was right. They were here, quiver after quiver of them; nor were they
all beyond reach. As the woman thus significantly assailed noted this and
saw with what suspicion others noted it also, a decided change took place
in her aspect.

"I should like to sit down," she murmured. Possibly she was afraid she
might fall.

As some one brought a chair, she spoke, but very tremulously, to the
director:

"Are there no arrows in the rooms over there?"

"I am quite sure not."

"And no bows?"

"None."

"If--if anyone had been seen in the gallery----"

"No one was."

"You are sure of that?"

"You heard the question asked. It brought no answer."

"But--but these galleries are visible from below. Some one may have been
looking up from the court and----"

"If there was any such person in the building, he would have been here by
this time. People don't hold back such information."

"Then--then--" she stammered, her eyes taking on a hunted look, "you
conclude--these people conclude _what_?"

"Madam,"--the word came coldly, stinging her into drawing herself to her
full height,--"it is not for me to conclude in a case like this. That is
the business of the police."

At this word, with its suggestion of crime, her air of conscious power
vanished in sudden collapse. Possibly she had seen the significant
gesture with which the Curator pointed out a quiver from which one of the
arrows was missing. That this was so, was shown by her next question:

"But where is the bow? Look about on the floor. You will find none. How
can an arrow be shot without a bow?"

"It cannot be," came from some one at her back. "But it can be driven
home like a dagger if the hand wielding it is sufficiently powerful."

A cry left her lips; she seemed to listen as for some echo; then in a
wild abandonment which ignored person and place she flung herself again
at the dead girl's side, and before the astonished people surrounding her
could intervene, she had caught up the body in her arms, and bending over
it, whispered word after word into the poor child's closed ear.




II

IN ROOM B


Five minutes later the Curator was at the 'phone calling up Police
Headquarters. A death had occurred at the museum. Would they send over
a capable detective?

"What kind of death?" was the harsh reply. "We don't send detectives in
cases of heart-failure or simple accident. Is it an accident?"

"No--no--hardly. It looks more like an insane woman's attack upon a
harmless stranger. It's the oddest sort of an affair, and we feel very
helpless. No common officer will do. We have one of that kind in the
building. What we want is a man of brains; he will need them."

A muffled sound at the other end--then a different voice asking some
half-dozen comprehensive questions--which, having been answered to the
best of the Curator's ability, were followed by the welcome assurance
that a man on whose experience he could rely would be at the museum doors
within five minutes.

With an air of relief Mr. Jewett stepped again into the court, and
repelling with hasty gestures the importunities of the small group of men
and women who had lacked the courage to follow the more adventurous ones
upstairs, crossed to where the door-man stood on guard over the main
entrance.

"Locked?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. Such were the orders. Didn't you give them?"

"No, but I should have done so, had I known. No one's to go out, and no
one's to come in but the detective whom I am expecting any moment."

They had not long to wait. Before their suspense had reached fever-point,
a tap was heard on the great door. It was opened, and a young man stepped
in.

"Coast clear?" he sang out with a humorous twist of his jaw as he noted
the Curator's evident chagrin at his meager and unsatisfactory
appearance. "Oh, I'm not your man," he added as his eye ran over the
whole place with a look which seemed to take in every detail in an
instant. "Mr. Gryce is in the automobile. Wait till I help him up."

He was gone before the Curator could utter a word, only to reappear in a
few minutes with a man in his wake whom the former at first blush thought
to be as much past the age where experience makes for efficiency as the
other seemed to be short of it.

But this impression, if impression it were, was of short duration. No
sooner had this physically weak but extremely wise old man entered upon
the scene than his mental power became evident to every person there.
Timorous hearts regained their composure, and the Curator--who in his ten
years of service had never felt the burden of his position so acutely as
in the last ten minutes--showed his relief by a volubility quite
unnatural to him under ordinary conditions. As he conducted the
detectives across the court, he talked not of the victim, as might
reasonably be expected, but of the woman who had been found leaning over
her with her hand on the arrow.

"We think her some escaped lunatic," he remarked. "Only a demented woman
would act as she does. First she denied all knowledge of the girl. Then
when she was made to see that the arrow sticking in the girl's breast had
been taken from a quiver hanging within arm's reach on the wall and used
as lances are used, she fell a-moaning and crying, and began to whisper
in the poor child's senseless ear."

"A common woman? One of a low-down type?"

"Not at all. A lady, and an impressive one, at that. You seldom see her
equal. That's what has upset us so. The crime and the criminal do not
seem to fit."

The detective blinked. Then suddenly he seemed to grow an inch taller.

"Where is she now?" he asked.

"In Room B, away from the crowd. She is not alone. A young lady detained
with the rest of the people here is keeping her company, to say nothing
of an officer we have put on guard."

"And the victim?"

"Lies where she fell, in Section II on the upper floor. There was no call
to move her. She was dead when we came upon the scene. She does not look
to be more than sixteen years old."

"Let's go up. But wait--can we see that section from here?"

They were standing at the foot of the great staircase connecting the two
floors. Above them, stretching away on either side, ran the two famous,
highly ornamented galleries, with their row of long, low arches
indicating the five compartments into which they were severally divided.
Pointing to the second one on the southern side, the Curator replied:

"That's it--the one where you see the Apache relics hanging high on the
rear wall. We shall have to shift those to some other place just as soon
as we can recover from this horror. I don't want the finest spot in the
whole museum made a Mecca for the morbid and the curious."

The remark fell upon unheeding ears. Detective Gryce was looking, not in
the direction named, but in the one directly opposite to it.

"I see," he quietly observed, "that there is a clear view across. Was
there no one in the right-hand gallery to see what went on in the left?"

"Not that I have heard of. It's the dullest hour of the day, and not only
this gallery but many of the rooms were entirely empty."

"I see. And now, what about the persons who were here? How many of them
have you let go?"

"Not one; the doors have been opened twice only--once to admit the
officer you will find on guard, and the other to let in yourself."

"Good! And how many have you here, all told?"

"I have not had time to count them, but I should say less than thirty.
This includes myself, as well as two attendants."

With a thoughtful air Mr. Gryce turned in the direction of the few
persons he could see huddled together around one of the central statues.

"Where are the others?" he asked.

"Upstairs--in and about the place where the poor child lies."

"They must be got out of there. Sweetwater!"

The young man who had entered with him was at his side in an instant.

"Clear the galleries. Then take down the name and address of every person
in the building."

"Yes, sir."

Before the last word had left his lips, the busy fellow was halfway up
the marble steps. "Lightning," some of his pals called him, perhaps
because he was as noiseless as he was quick. Meanwhile the senior
detective had drawn the Curator to one side.

"We'll take a look at these people as they come down. I have been said to
be able to spot a witness with my eyes shut. Let's see what I can do with
my eyes open."

"Young and old, rich and poor," murmured the Curator as some dozen
persons appeared at the top of the staircase.

"Yes," sighed the detective, noting each one carefully as he or she filed
down, "we sha'n't make much out of this experiment. Not one of them
avoids our looks. Emotion enough, but not of the right sort. Well, we'll
leave them to Sweetwater. Our business is above."

The Curator offered his arm. The old man made a move to take it--then
drew himself up with an air of quiet confidence.

"Many thanks," said he, "but I can go alone. Rheumatism is my trouble,
but these mild days loosen its grip upon my poor old muscles." He did
not say that the prospect of an interesting inquiry had much the same
effect, but the Curator suspected it, possibly because he was feeling
just a little bit spry himself.

Steeled as such experienced officers necessarily are to death in all its
phases, it was with no common emotion that the aged detective entered the
presence of the dead girl and took his first look at this latest victim
of mental or moral aberration. So young! so innocent! so fair! A
schoolgirl, or little more, of a class certainly above the average,
whether judged from the contour of her features or the niceties of her
dress. With no evidences of great wealth about her, there was yet
something in the cut of her garments and the careful attention to each
detail which bespoke not only natural but cultivated taste. On her breast
just above the spot where the cruel dart had entered, a fresh and
blooming nosegay still exhaled its perfume--a tragic detail accentuating
the pathos of a death so sudden that the joy with which she had pinned on
this simple adornment seemed to linger about her yet.

The detective, with no words for this touching spectacle, stretched out
his hand and with a reverent and fatherly touch pressed down the lids
over the unseeing eyes. This office done to the innocent dead, he asked
if anything had been found to establish the young girl's identity.

"Surely," he observed, "she was not without a purse or handbag. All young
ladies carry them."

For answer the officer on guard thrust his hand into one of his capacious
pockets, and drawing out a neat little bag of knitted beads, passed it
over to the detective with the laconic remark:

"Nothing doing."

And so it proved. It held only a pocket handkerchief--embroidered but
without a monogram--and a memorandum-book without an entry.

"A blind alley, if ever there was one," muttered Mr. Gryce; and ordering
the policeman to replace the bag as nearly as possible on the spot from
which it had been taken, he proceeded with the Curator to Room B.

Prepared to encounter a woman of disordered mind, the appearance
presented by Mrs. Taylor at his entrance greatly astonished Mr. Gryce.
There was a calmness in her attitude which one would scarcely expect to
see in a woman whom mania had just driven into crime. Surely lunacy does
not show such self-restraint; nor does lunacy awaken any such feelings of
awe as followed a prolonged scrutiny of her set but determined features.
Only grief of the most intense and sacred character could account for the
aspect she presented, and as the man to whom the tragedies of life were
of daily occurrence took in this mystery with all its incongruities, he
realized, not without a sense of professional pleasure, no doubt, that he
had before him an affair calling for the old-time judgment which, for
forty or more years, had made his record famous in the police annals of
the metropolis.

She was seated with no one near her but a young lady whom sympathetic
interest had drawn to her side. Mr. Roberts stood in one of the windows,
and not far from him a man in the museum uniform.

At the authoritative advance of the old detective, the woman, whose eye
he had caught, attempted to struggle to her feet, but desisted after a
moment of hopeless effort, and sank back in her chair. There was no
pretense in this. Though gifted with a strong frame, emotion had so
weakened her that she was simply unable to stand. Quite convinced of
this, and affected in spite of himself by her look of lofty patience, Mr.
Gryce prefaced his questions with an apology--quite an unusual proceeding
for him.

Whether or no she heard it, he could not tell; but she was quite ready to
answer when he asked her name and then her place of residence--saying in
response to the latter query:

"I live at the Calderon, a family hotel in Sixty-seventh Street.
My name"--here she paused for a second to moisten her lips--"is
Taylor--Ermentrude Taylor.... Nothing else," she speedily added in
a tone which drew every eye her way. Then more evenly: "You will find
the name on the hotel's books."

"Wife or widow?"

"Widow."

What a voice! how it reached every heart, waking strange sympathies
there! As the word fell, not a person in the room but stirred uneasily.
Even she herself started at its sound; and moved, perhaps, by the depth
of silence which followed, she added in suppressed tones:

"A widow within the hour. That's why you see me still in colors, but
crushed as you behold--killed! killed!"

That settled it. There was no mistaking her condition after an expression
of this kind. The Curator and Mr. Gryce exchanged glances, and Mr.
Roberts, stepping from his corner, betrayed the effect which her words
had produced on him, by whispering in the detective's ear:

"What you need is an alienist."

Had she heard? It would seem so from the quick way she roused and
exclaimed with indignant emphasis:

"You do not understand me! I see that I must drink my bitter cup to the
dregs. This is what I mean: My husband was living this morning--living
up to the hour when the clock in this building struck twelve. I knew it
from the joyous hopes with which my breast was filled. But with the
stroke of noon the blow fell. I was bending above the poor child who had
fallen so suddenly at my feet, when the vision came, and I saw him gazing
at me from a distance so remote--across a desert so immeasurable--that
nothing but death could create such a removal or make of him the ghastly
silhouette I saw. He is dead. At that moment I felt his soul pass; and so
I say that I am a widow."

Ravings? No, the calm certainty of her tone, the grief, touching depths
so profound it had no need of words, showed the confidence she felt in
the warning she believed herself to have received. Though probably not
a single person present put any faith in occultism in any of its forms,
there was a general movement of sympathy which led Mr. Gryce to pass the
matter by without any attempt at controversy, and return to the question
in hand. With a decided modification of manner, he therefore asked her to
relate how she came to be kneeling over the injured girl with her hand
upon the arrow.

"Let me have a moment in which to recover myself," she prayed, covering
her eyes with her hand. Then, while all waited, she gave a low cry, "I
suffer; I suffer!" and leaped to her feet, only to sink back again inert
and powerless. But only for an instant: with that one burst of extreme
feeling she recovered her self-control, answering with apparent calmness
the detective's question:

"I was passing through the gallery as any other visitor might, when a
young lady rushed by me--stopped short--threw up her arms and fell
backward to the floor, pierced to the heart by an arrow. In a moment
I was on my knees at her side with hand outstretched to withdraw this
dreadful arrow. But I was afraid--I had heard that this sometimes causes
death, and while I was hesitating, that vision came, engulfing
everything. I could think of nothing else."

She was near collapsing again; but being a woman of great nerve, she
fought her weakness and waited patiently for the next question. It was
different, without doubt, from any she had expected.

"Then you positively deny any active connection with the strange death of
this young girl?"

A pause, as if to take in what he meant. Then slowly, impressively, came
the answer:

"I do."

"Did you see the person who shot the arrow?"

"No."

"From what direction would it have had to come to strike her as it did?"

"From the opposite balcony."

"Did you see anyone there?"

"No."

"But you heard the arrow?"

"Heard?"

"An arrow shot from a bow makes a whizzing sound as it flies. Didn't you
hear that?"

"I don't know." She looked troubled and uncertain. "I don't remember. I
was expecting no such thing--I was not prepared. The sight of an arrow--a
killing arrow--in that innocent breast overcame me with inexpressible
grief and horror. If the vision of my husband had not followed, I might
remember more. As it is, I have told all I can. Won't you excuse me? I
should like to go. I am not fit to remain. I want to return home--to
hear from my husband--to learn by letter or telegram whether he is indeed
dead."

Mr. Gryce had let her finish. An inquiry so unofficial might easily await
the moods of such a witness. Not till the last word had been followed by
what some there afterward called a hungry silence, did he make use of his
prerogative to say:

"I shall be pleased to release you and will do so just as soon as I can.
But I must put one or two more questions. Were you interested in the
Indian relics you had come among? Did you handle any of them in passing?"

"No. I had no interest. I like glass, bronzes, china--I hate weapons. I
shall hate them eternally after this." And she began to shudder.

The detective, with a quick bend of his head, approached her ear with the
whispered remark:

"I am told that when your attention was drawn to these weapons, you fell
on your knees and murmured something into the dead girl's ears. How do
you explain that?"

"I was giving her messages to my husband. I felt--strange as it may seem
to you--that they had fled the earth together--and I wanted him to know
that I would be constant, and other foolish things you will not wish me
to repeat here. Is that all you wish to know?"

Mr. Gryce bowed, and cast a quizzical glance in the direction of the
Curator. Certainly for oddity this case transcended any he had had in
years. With this woman eliminated from the situation, what explanation
was there of the curious death he was there to investigate? As he was
meditating how he could best convey to her the necessity of detaining
her further, he heard a muttered exclamation from the young woman
standing near her, and following the direction of her pointing finger,
saw that the strange silence which had fallen upon the room had a cause.
Mrs. Taylor had fainted away in her chair.




III

"I HAVE SOMETHING TO SHOW YOU"


Mr. Gryce took advantage of the momentary disturbance to slip from the
room. He was followed by the Curator, who seemed more than ever anxious
to talk.

"You see! Mad as a March hare!" was his hurried exclamation as the door
closed behind them. "I declare I do not know which I pity more, her
victim or herself. The one is freed from all her troubles; the other--Do
you think we ought to have a doctor to look after her? Shall I
telephone?"

"Not yet. We have much to learn before taking any decided steps." Then as
he caught the look of amazement with which this unexpected suggestion of
difficulties was met, he paused on his way to the stair-head to ask in a
tentative way peculiarly his own: "Then you still think the girl died
from a thrust given by this woman?"

"Of course. What else is there to think? You saw where the arrow came
from. You saw that the only bow the place contained was hanging high and
unstrung upon the wall, and you are witness to this woman's irresponsible
condition of mind. The sight of those arrows well within her reach
evidently aroused the homicidal mania often latent in one of her highly
emotional nature; and when this fresh young girl came by, the natural
result followed. I only hope I shall not be called upon to face the poor
child's parents. What can I say to them? What can anybody say? Yet I do
not see how we can be held responsible for so unprecedented an attack as
this, do you?"

Mr. Gryce made no answer. He had turned his back toward the stair-head
and was wondering if this easy explanation of a tragedy so peculiar as to
have no prototype in all of the hundreds of cases he had been called upon
to investigate in a long life of detective activity would satisfy all the
other persons then in the building. It was his present business to find
out--to search and probe among the dozen or two people he saw collected
below, for the witness who had seen or had heard some slight thing as yet
unrevealed which would throw a different light upon this matter. For his
mind--or shall we say the almost unerring instinct of this ancient delver
into human hearts?--would not accept without question this theory of
sudden madness in one of Mrs. Taylor's appearance, strange and
inexplicable as her conduct seemed. Though it was quite among the
possibilities that she had struck the fatal blow and in the manner
mentioned, it was equally clear to his mind that she had not done it in
an access of frenzy. He knew a mad eye and he knew a despairing one.
Fantastic as her story certainly was, he found himself more ready to
believe it than to accept any explanation of this crime which ascribed
its peculiar features to the irresponsibilities of lunacy.

However, he kept his impressions to himself and in his anxiety to pursue
his inquiries among the people below, was on the point of descending
thither, when he found his attention arrested, and that of the Curator's
as well, by the sight of a young man hastening toward them through the
northern gallery. (The tragedy, as you will remember, had occurred in the
southern one.) He was dressed in the uniform of the museum, and moved so
quickly and in such an evident flurry of spirits that the detective
instinctively asked:

"Who's that? One of your own men?"

"Yes, that's Correy, our best-informed and most-trusted attendant. Looks
as if he had something to tell us. Well, Correy, what is it?" he queried
as the man emerged upon the landing where they stood. "Anything new? If
there is, speak out plainly. Mr. Gryce is anxious for all the evidence he
can get."

With an ingenuousness rather pleasing than otherwise to the man thus
presented to his notice, the young fellow stopped short and subjected the
famous detective to a keen and close scrutiny before venturing to give
the required information.

Was it because of the importance of what he had to communicate? It would
seem so, from the suppressed excitement of his tone, as after his brief
but exceedingly satisfactory survey, he jerked his finger over his
shoulder in the direction from which he had come, with the short remark:

"I have something to show you."

Something! Mr. Gryce had been asking for this something only a moment
before. We can imagine, then, the celerity with which he followed this
new guide into the one spot of all others which possessed for him the
greatest interest. For if by any chance the arrow which had done such
deadly work had been sped from a bow instead of having been used as a
dart, then it was from this gallery and from no other quarter of the
building that it had been so sped. Any proof of this could have but the
one effect of exonerating from all blame the woman who had so impressed
him. He had traversed the first section and had entered the second, when
the Curator joined him; together they passed into the third.

For those who have not visited this museum, a more detailed description
of these galleries may be welcome. Acting as a means of communication
between the row of front rooms and those at the back, they also serve to
exhibit certain choice articles which call for little space, and are of a
nature more or less ornamental. For this purpose they are each divided
into five sections connected by arches narrower but not less decorative
than those which open in a direct row upon the court. Of these sections
the middle one on either side is much larger than the rest; otherwise
they do not differ.

It was in the midst of this larger section that Correy now stood,
awaiting their approach. There had been show-cases filled with rare
exhibits in the two through which they had just passed, but in this one
there was nothing to be seen but a gorgeous hanging, covering very nearly
the whole wall, flanked at either end by a pedestal upholding a vase of
inestimable value and corresponding ugliness. A highly decorative
arrangement, it is true, but in what lay its interest for the criminal
investigator?

Correy was soon to show them. With a significant gesture toward the
tapestry, he eagerly exclaimed:

"You see that? I've run by it several times since the accident sent me
flying all over the building at everybody's call. But only just now, when
I had a moment to myself, did I remember the door hid behind it. It's a
door we no longer use, and I'd no reason for thinking it had anything to
do with the killing of the young lady in the opposite gallery. But for
all that I felt it would do no harm to give it a look, and running from
the front, where I happened to be, I pulled out the tapestry and saw--but
supposing I wait and let you see for yourselves. That will be better."

Leaving them where they stood face to face with the great hanging, he
made a dive for the pedestal towering aloft at the farther end, and
edging himself in behind it, drew out the tapestry from the wall, calling
on them as he did so to come and look behind it. The Curator did not
hesitate. He was there almost as soon as the young man himself.

But the detective was not so hasty. With a thousand things in mind, he
stopped to peer along the gallery and down into the court before giving
himself away to any prying eye. Satisfied that he might make the desired
move with impunity, Mr. Gryce was about to turn in the desired direction
when, struck by a new fact, he again stopped short.

He had noticed how the heavy tapestry shivered under Correy's clutch. Had
this been observed by anyone besides himself? If by chance some person
wandering about the court had been looking up--but no, the few people
gathered there stood too far forward to see what was going on in this
part of the gallery; and relieved from all further anxiety on this score,
he joined Correy at the pedestal and at a word from him succeeded in
squeezing himself around it into the small space they had left for him
between the pushed-out hanging and the wall. An exclamation from the
Curator, who had only waited for his coming to take his first look, added
zest to his own scrutiny. It would take something more than the sight of
a well-known door to give it such a tone of astonished discovery. What?
Even he, with the accumulated surprises of years to give wings to his
imagination, did not succeed in guessing. But when his eyes, once
accustomed to the semi-darkness of the narrow space which Correy had thus
opened out before him, saw not the door but what lay within its recess,
he acknowledged to himself that he should have guessed--and that a dozen
years before, he certainly would have done so.

It was a _bow_--not like the one hanging high in the Apache exhibit, but
yet a bow strong of make and strung for use.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here was a discovery as important as it was unexpected, eliminating Mrs.
Taylor at once from the case and raising it into a mystery of the first
order. By dint of long custom, Mr. Gryce succeeded in hiding his extreme
satisfaction, but not the perplexity into which he was thrown by this
complete change of base. The Curator appeared to be impressed in much the
same way, and shook his head in a doubtful fashion when Correy asked him
if he recognized the bow as belonging to the museum.

"I should have to see it nearer to answer that question with any sort of
confidence," he demurred. "From such glimpses as I can get of it from
here I should say that it has not been taken from any of our exhibits."

"I am sure it has not," muttered Correy. Then with a side glance at Mr.
Gryce, he added: "Shall I slip in behind and get it?"

The detective, thus appealed to, hesitated a moment; then with an
irrelevance perhaps natural to the occasion, he inquired where this door
so conveniently hidden from the general view led to. It was the Curator
who answered.

"To a twisting, breakneck staircase opening directly into my office. But
this door has not been used in years. See! Here is the key to it on my
own ring. There is no other. I lost the mate to it myself not long after
my installation here."

The detective, working his way back around the pedestal, cast another
glance up and down the gallery and over into the court. Still no spying
eye, save that of the officer opposite.

"We will leave that bow where it is for the present," he decided, "a
secret between us three." And motioning for Correy to let the tapestry
fall, he stood watching it settle into place, till it hung quite straight
again, with its one edge close to the wall and the other sweeping the
floor. Had its weight been great enough to push the bow back again into
its former place close against the door? Yes. No eye, however trained,
would, from any bulge in the heavy tapestry, detect its presence there.
He could leave the spot without fear; their secret would remain theirs
until such time as they chose to disclose it.

As the three walked back the way they had come, the Curator glanced
earnestly at the detective, who seemed to have fallen into a kind of
anxious dream. Would it do to interrupt him with questions? Would he
obtain a straight answer if he did? The old man moved heavily but the now
fully alert Curator could not fail to see that it was with the heaviness
of absorbed thought. Dare he disturb that thought? They had both reached
the broad corridor separating the two galleries at the western end before
he ventured to remark:

"This discovery alters matters, does it not? May I ask what you propose
to do now? Anything in which we can help you?"

[Illustration:
1--Ephraim Short.
2--Mrs. Lynch.
3--Director Roberts.
4--Door-man.
5--Copyist.
6--Mrs. Alice Lee.
7-8--Mr. and Mrs. Draper.
9--Mr. Coit.
10--Mr. Simpson.
11--Prof. Turnbull.
12--Second Door-man.
13--Miss Hunsicker.
14--Attendant.
15--Miss Blake.
16--Officer.]

The detective may have heard him and he may not; at all events he made no
reply though he continued to advance with a mechanical step until he
stood again at the top of the marble steps leading down into the court.
Here some of the uncertainty pervading his mind seemed to leave him,
though he still looked very old and very troubled, or so the Curator
thought, as pausing there, he allowed his glance to wander from the
marble recesses below to the galleries on either side of him, and from
these on to the seemingly empty spaces back of the high, carved railing
guarding the great well. Would a younger man have served them better? It
began to look so; then without warning and in a flash, as it were, the
whole appearance of the octogenarian detective changed, and turning with
a smile to the two men so anxiously watching him, he exclaimed with an
air of quiet triumph:

"I have it. Follow and see how my plan works."

Amazed, for he looked and moved like another man,--a man in whom the
almost extinguished spark of early genius had suddenly flared again into
full blaze,--they hastily joined him in anticipation of they knew not
what. But their enthusiasm received a check when at the moment of descent
Mr. Gryce again turned back with the remark:

"I had forgotten. I have something to do first. If you will kindly see
that the people down there are kept from growing too impatient, I will
soon join you with Mrs. Taylor, who must not be left on this floor after
we have gone below."

And with no further explanation of his purpose, he turned and proceeded
without delay to Room B.




IV

A STRATEGIC MOVE


He found the unhappy woman quite recovered from her fainting spell, but
still greatly depressed and not a little incoherent. He set himself to
work to soothe her, for he had a request to make which called for an
intelligent answer. Relieved from all suspicion of her having been an
active agent in the deplorable deed he was here to investigate, he was
lavish in his promises of speedy release, and seeing how much this
steadied her, he turned to Mr. Roberts, who was still in the room, and
then to the young lady who had been giving her a woman's care, and
signified that their attentions were no longer required and that he would
be glad to have them join the people below.

When the door had closed and Mr. Gryce found himself for the first time
alone with Mrs. Taylor, he drew up a chair to her side and remarked in
his old benevolent way:

"I feel guilty of cruelty, madam, in repeating a question you have
already answered. But the conditions are such that I must, and do it now.
When this young lady fell so unexpectedly at your feet, was your first
look at her or at the opposite gallery?"

For an instant her eyes held his--something which did not often happen to
him.

"At her," she vehemently declared. "I never thought of looking anywhere
else. I saw her at my feet, and fell on my knees at her side. Who
wouldn't have done so! Who would have seen anything but that arrow--_that
arrow_! Oh, it was terrible! Do not make me recall it. I have sorrows
enough----"

"Mrs. Taylor, you have my utmost sympathy. But you must realize how
important it is for me to make sure that you saw nothing in the place
from which that arrow was sent which would help us to locate the author
of this accident. The flitting of an escaping figure up or down the
opposite gallery, even a stir in the great tapestry confronting you from
that far-away wall, might give us a clue."

"I saw nothing," she replied coldly but with extreme firmness, "nothing
but that lifeless child and the picture of desolation which rose in my
own mind. Do not, I pray, make me speak again of that. It would sound
like delirium, and it is my wish to impress you with my sanity, so that
you will allow me to go home."

"You shall go, after the Coroner has had an opportunity to see you. We
expect him any moment. Meanwhile, you will facilitate your release and
greatly help us in what we have to do, if you will carry your fortitude
to the point of showing me in your own person just where you were
standing when this young girl dashed by you to her death."

"Do you mean for me to go back to that--that----"

"Yes, Mrs. Taylor. Surely you can do so if you will. When you have time
to think, you will be as anxious as ourselves to know through whose
carelessness (to call it nothing worse) this child came to her death.
Though it may prove to be quite immaterial whether you stood in one place
or another at that fatal moment, it is a question which will be sure to
come up at the inquest. That you may be able to answer correctly I urge
you to return with me to the exact spot, before your recollection of the
same has had time to fade. After that we will go below and I will see
that you are taken to some quiet place where you can remain undisturbed
till the Coroner comes."

Had she been a weak woman she would have succumbed again at this. But
she was a strong one, and after the first moment of recoil she rose
tremulously to her feet and signified her willingness to follow him to
the scene of death.

"Is--is she there alone?" was her sole question as they crossed the
corridor separating the room they had been in from the galleries.

"No--you will find an officer there. We could not leave the place quite
unguarded."

If she shuddered he did not observe it. Having summoned up all her
forces to meet this ordeal, she followed him without further word, and
re-entering the spot she had so lately left in great agony of mind,
stopped for one look and for one look only at the sweet face of the dead
girl smiling up at her from the cold floor, then she showed Mr. Gryce as
nearly as she could just where she had paused in shock and horror when
the poor child smitten by the fatal arrow fell back almost into her arms.

The detective, with a glance at the opposite gallery, turned and spoke to
the officer who had stepped aside into the neighboring section.

"Take the place just occupied by this lady," he said, "and hold it till
you hear from me again." Then offering his arm to Mrs. Taylor, he led her
out.

"I see that you were approaching the railing overlooking the court when
you were stopped in this fearful manner," he remarked when well down the
gallery toward its lower exit. "What did you have in mind? A nearer
glimpse of the tapestry over there and the two great vases?"

"No, no." She was wrought up by now to a tension almost unendurable. "It
was the court--what I might see in the court. Oh!" she impulsively cried:
"the child! the child! that innocent, beautiful child!" And breaking away
from his arm, she threw herself against the wall in a burst of
uncontrollable weeping.

He allowed her a moment of unrestrained grief, then he took her on his
arm again and led her down into the court where he gave her into the
charge of Correy. He had gone as far as he dared in her present
hysterical condition. Besides, he could no longer defer the great
experiment by means of which he hoped to reach the heart of this mystery.

Taking the slip of paper handed him by Sweetwater, he crossed the court
to where the various visitors, detained, some against their will and some
quite in accordance with it, stood about in groups or sat side by side on
the long benches placed along the front for their comfort. As he
confronted them, his face beamed with that benevolent smile which had
done so much for him in days gone by. Raising his hand he called
attention to himself; then, when he was quite sure of being heard by them
all, he addressed them with a quiet emphasis which could not fail to gain
and hold their attention:

"I am Detective Gryce, sent here from Police Headquarters to look into
this very serious matter. Till the Coroner arrives, I am in authority
here, and being so, will have to ask your indulgence for any discomfort
you may experience in helping me with my investigation. A young girl,
full of life an hour ago, lies dead in the gallery above. We do not know
her name; we do not know who killed her. But there is some one here who
does. The man or woman who, wittingly or unwittingly, launched that fatal
shaft, is present with us in this building. This person has not spoken.
If he will do so now, he will save us and himself, too, no end of
trouble. Let him speak, then. I will give him five minutes in which to
make this acknowledgment. Five minutes! If that man is wise--or can it
be a woman?--he will not keep us waiting."

Silence. Heads moving, eyes peering, excitement visible in every face,
but not a word from anybody. Mr. Gryce turned and pointed up at the
clock. All looked--but still no word from man or woman.

One minute gone!

Two minutes!

Three!

The silence had become portentous. The movement, involuntary and
simultaneous, which had run through the crowd at first had stopped. They
were waiting--each and all--waiting with eyes on the minute-hand creeping
forward over the dial toward which the detective's glance was still
turned.

The fourth minute passed--then the fifth--and no one had spoken.

With a sigh Mr. Gryce wheeled himself back and faced the crowd again.

"You see," he quietly announced, "the case is serious. Twenty-two of you,
and not one to speak the half-dozen words which would release the rest
from their present embarrassing position! What remains for us to do under
circumstances like these? My experience suggests but one course: to
narrow down this inquiry to those--you will not find them many--who from
their nearness to the place of tragedy or from some other cause equally
pertinent may be looked upon as possible witnesses for the Coroner's
jury. That this may be done speedily and surely, I am going to ask you,
every one of you, to retake the exact place in the building which you
were occupying when you heard the first alarm. I will begin with the
Curator himself. Mr. Jewett, will you be so good as to return to the
room, and if possible to the precise spot, you were occupying when you
first learned what had occurred here?"

The Curator, who stood at his elbow, made a quick bow and turned in the
direction of the marble steps, which he hastily remounted. A murmur from
the crowd followed this action and continued till he disappeared in the
recesses of the right-hand gallery. Then, at a gesture from Mr. Gryce, it
suddenly ceased, and with a breathless interest easy to comprehend, they
one and all waited for his next word. It was a simple one.

"We are all obliged to Mr. Jewett for his speedy compliance with so
unusual a request. He has made my task a comparatively easy one."

Then, glancing at the list of names and addresses which had been compiled
for him by Sweetwater, he added:

"I will read off your names as recorded here. If each person, on hearing
his own, will move quickly to his place and remain there till my young
man can make a note of the same, we shall get through this matter in
short order. And let me add"--as he perceived here and there a shoulder
shrugged, or an eye turned askance--"that once the name is called, no
excuse of non-recollection will be accepted. You must know, every one of
you, just where you were standing when the cry of death rang out, and any
attempt to mislead me or others in this matter will only subject the
person making it to a suspicion he must wish to avoid. Remember that
there are enough persons here for no one to be sure that his whereabouts
at so exciting a moment escaped notice. Listen, then, and when your own
name is spoken, step quickly into place, whether that place be on this
floor or in the rooms or galleries above.--Mrs. Alice Lee!"

You can imagine the flurry, the excitement and the blank looks of the
average men and women he addressed. But not one hesitated to obey. Mrs.
Lee was on the farther side of one of the statues before her name had
more than left his lips. Her example set the pace for those who followed.
Like soldiers at roll-call, each one responded to the summons, going now
in one direction and now in another until on reaching the proper spot he
or she stopped.

Only six persons followed the Curator upstairs--an old woman who shook
her head violently as she plodded slowly up the marble steps; Correy; a
man with a packet of books under his arm (the same who had been studying
coins in Section II); a young couple whose movements showed such a marked
reluctance that more than one eye followed them as they went hesitatingly
up, clinging together with interlocking hands and stopping now on one
step and now on another to stare at each other in visible consternation;
and a boy of fourteen who grinned from ear to ear as he bounded gayly
up three steps at a time and took his position on the threshold of one
of the upper doors with all the precision of a soldier called to
sentry-duty--a boy scout if ever there was one.

There were twenty-two names on the list, and with the calling out of the
twenty-second, Mr. Gryce perceived the space before him entirely cleared
of its odd assortment of people. As he turned to take a look at the
result, a gleam of satisfaction crossed his time-worn face. By this
scheme, which he may be pardoned for looking upon as a stroke of genius
worthy of his brilliant prime, he had set back time a full hour,
restoring as by a magician's wand the conditions of that fatal moment of
initial alarm. Surely, with the knowledge of that hidden bow in his mind,
he should be able now to place his hand upon the person who had made use
of it to launch the fatal arrow. No one, however sly of foot and quick of
action, could have gone far from the gallery where that bow lay in the
few minutes which were all that could have elapsed between the shooting
of the arrow and the gasping cry which had brought all within hearing to
the Apache section. The man or woman whom he should find nearest to that
concealed door in the northern gallery would have to give a very good
account of himself. Not even the Curator would escape suspicion under
those circumstances.

However, it is only fair to add that Mr. Gryce had no fear of any such
embarrassing end to his inquisition as that. He had noticed the young
couple who had betrayed their alarm so ingenuously to every eye, and had
already decided within himself that the man was just such a fool as might
in a moment of vacuity pick up a bow and arrow to test his skill at a
given mark. Such things had been and such results had followed. The man
was a gawk and the woman a ninny; a few questions and their guiltiness
would appear--that is, if they should be found near enough the tapestry
to warrant his suspicion. If not--the alternative held an interest all
its own, and sent him in haste toward the stairway.

To reach it Mr. Gryce had to pass several persons standing where fate had
fixed them among the statuary grouped about the court, and had his
attention been less engrossed by what he expected to discover above, he
would have been deeply interested in noting how these persons, or most of
them at least, had so thoroughly accepted the situation that they had
taken the exact position and the exact attitude of the moment preceding
the alarm. Those who were admiring the great torsos or carved chariots of
the ancients, made a show of admiring them still. The man or woman who
had been going in an easterly direction, faced east; and those who had
been on the point of entering certain rooms, stood halting in the
doorways with their backs to the court.

Unfortunately, he did not take note of all this, or give the poor pawns
thus parading for his purpose more than a cursory glance. When he did
think, which was when he was halfway up the staircase, it was to look
back upon a changed scene. For with his going, interest had flagged and
the tableau lost its pointedness. No one had ventured as yet to leave his
place, but all had turned their faces his way, and on many of these faces
could be seen signs of fatigue if not of absolute impatience. He had
ordered them to stand and they had stood, but to be left there while he
went above was certainly trying. The one spot which held the interest was
in the southern gallery. If they could only follow him there----

All this was to be seen in their faces, and possibly the cunning old man
read it there; but if he did, it was to ask himself if their conclusions
were quite correct. The locale of interest had shifted in the last half
hour; and while most of these people believed him to be searching for the
witness who could tell him what had occurred in the death gallery, he
really was hunting for one who could add to his knowledge of what had
happened in the opposite one. And this witness might not be found in the
gallery, or even on the upper floor. It was well among the probabilities
that there might be among the various persons he saw posing in the court
below some who by an upward look might take in a part of if not the whole
broad sweep of that huge square of tapestry upon which his thoughts were
centered. It was for him to make a note of these persons. A diagram of
the court as it looked to him at that moment is shown for your
enlightenment.

[Illustration:
1--Ephraim Short.
2--Mrs. Lynch.
3--Director Roberts.
4--Door-man.
5--Copyist.
6--Mrs. Alice Lee.
7-8--Mr. and Mrs. Draper.
9--Mr. Coit.
10--Mr. Simpson.
11--Prof. Turnbull.
12--Second Door-man.
13--Miss Hunsicker.
14--Attendant.
15--Miss Blake.
16--Officer.]

Sixteen persons! Ten in view from the steps and six not. Of the sixteen,
only the following seemed to afford any excuse for future interrogation:
Numbers Two, Six, Ten, Seven, Eight and Thirteen. Making a mental note of
these, during which operation the poor unfortunates who had just been
considering themselves as quite out of the game revived in a startling
manner under his eye, he proceeded on his way.

As the action has now shifted to the upper floor, a diagram of this
second story is now in order.

As you will see, a straight glimpse is given down either gallery from the
arches opening into the broad corridor into which Mr. Gryce had stepped
on leaving the central staircase. He had therefore only to choose which
of the two would better repay his immediate investigation.

He decided upon the northern one, which you will remember was the one
holding the tapestry; since, to find anybody there, no matter whom, would
certainly settle the identity of the person responsible for that flying
arrow. For, as all conceded, too little time had elapsed between its
delivery and the discovery of the victim for the quickest possible
attempt at escape to have carried the concealer of the bow very far from
the spot where he had thrown it. It was possible--just possible--that he
might have got as far as one of the four large rooms opening into the
corridor stretching across the front, but that he was not in the gallery
itself Mr. Gryce soon convinced himself by a rapid walk through its
entire length.

That he did not follow up this move by an immediate searching of the
rooms I have mentioned was owing to a wish he had to satisfy himself on
another point first.

What was this point?

In passing along the rear on his way to this gallery, he had noticed the
narrow staircase opening not a dozen feet away to his left. This
undoubtedly led down to the side-entrance. If by any chance the user of
the bow had fled to the rear instead of to the front, he would be found
somewhere on this staircase, for he never could have got to the bottom
before the cry of "Close the doors! Let no man out!" rendered this chance
of immediate exit unavailable. So Mr. Gryce retraced his steps, and
barely stopping to note the boy eying him with eager glances from the
doorway of Room A, he approached the iron balustrade guarding the small
staircase, and cautiously looked over.

A man was there! A man going down--no, coming up; and this man, as he
soon saw from his face and uniform, was Correy the attendant.

"So that is where _you_ were," he called down as he beckoned the man up.

"As near as I can remember. I was on my way in search of Mr. Jewett, for
whom I had a message, and had got as far as you saw me, when I heard a
cry of pain from somewhere in the gallery. This naturally quickened my
steps and I was up and on this floor in a jiffy."

"Did you notice, as you stepped from the landing, whether the boy staring
at us from the doorway over there was facing just as we see him now?"

"He was. I remember his attitude perfectly."

"Coming out of the door--not going in?"

"Sure. He was on the run. He had heard the cry too."

"And followed you into the gallery?"

"Preceded me. He was on the scene almost as soon as the man who stepped
in from the adjoining section."

"I see. And this man?"

"Was well within my view from the minute I entered the first arch.
He seemed more bewildered than frightened till he had passed the
communicating arch and nearly stumbled over the body of the girl shot
down almost at his elbow."

"And yourself?"

"I knew by his look that something dreadful had happened, and when I saw
what it was, I didn't think of anything better to do than to order the
doors shut."

"On your own initiative? Where was the Curator?"

"Not far, it seems. But he gets awfully absorbed in whatever he is doing,
and there was no time to lose. Some one had shot that arrow, some one who
might escape."

Mr. Gryce never allowed himself--or very rarely--to look at anyone full
and square in the face; yet he always seemed to form an instant opinion
of whomever he talked with. Perhaps he had already gauged this man and
not unfavorably, for he showed not the slightest distrust as he remarked
quite frankly:

"You must have had some suspicion of foul play even then, to act in so
expeditious a manner."

"I don't know what my suspicions were. I simply followed my first
impulse. I don't think it was a bad one. Do you, sir?"

"Far from it. But enough of that. Do you think"--here he drew Correy into
the gallery out of earshot of the boy, who was watching them with all the
curiosity of his fourteen years--"that this lad could have stolen from
where we are standing now to the door where you first saw him, during the
time you were making your rush up the stairs? Boys of his age are mighty
quick, and----"

"I know it, sir; and I see what you mean. But even if he had been able to
do this,--which I very much doubt,--no boy of his age could have strung
that bow, or had he found it strung, have shot an arrow from it with
force enough to kill. Only a hand accustomed to its use could handle a
bow like that with any success."

"You know the bow, then? Saw it nearer than you said--possibly handled
it?"

"No, sir; but I know its kind and have handled many of them."

"In this building?"

"Yes, sir, and in other museums where I have been. I have arranged and
rearranged Indian exhibits for years."

"Then you think that the bow we saw behind the tapestry is an Indian
one?"

"Without question."

The detective nodded and left him. One word with the boy, and he would
feel free to go elsewhere.

It proved to be an amusing one. The boy, for all his enthusiasm as a
scout, proved to be so hungry that he was actually doleful. More than
that, he had a ticket for that afternoon's ball game in his pocket and
feared that he would not be let out in time to see it. He therefore was
quick with his answers, which certainly were ingenuous enough. He had
been looking at the model of a ship (which could be seen through an open
door), when he heard a woman cry out as if hurt, from somewhere down the
gallery. He was running to see what it meant when a man came along who
seemed in as great a hurry as himself. But he got there first--and so on
and on, corroborating Correy's story in every particular. He was so
honest (Mr. Gryce had been at great pains to trip him up in one of his
statements and had openly failed) and yet so anxious for the detective to
notice the ticket to the ball game which he held in one hand, that the
old man took pity on him and calling an officer, ordered him to let the
boy out--a concession to youth and innocence he was almost ready to
regret when a woman of uncertain years and irate mien attacked him from
the doorway he had just left, with the loud remark:

"If you let him go, you can let me go too. I was in this room at the same
time he was and know no more about what happened over there than the
dead. I have an appointment downtown of great importance. I shall miss it
if you don't let me go at once."

"Is it of greater importance than the right which this dead girl's
friends have to know by whose careless hands the arrow killing her
was shot?" And without waiting for a reply, which was not readily
forthcoming, Mr. Gryce handed her over to Correy with an injunction to
see that she was given a comfortable seat below and proceeded to finish
up this portion of the building by a search through the three great rooms
extending along the rear.

He found them all empty and without clue of any kind, and satisfied that
his real work lay in front, he returned thither with as much expedition
as old age and rheumatism would admit. Why, in doing so, he went for the
third time through the gallery instead of through rooms J, H and I, he
did not stop to inquire, though afterward he asked that question of
himself more than once. Had he taken this latter course, he might not
have missed--

But that will come later. What we have to do now is to accompany him to
the front of the building, where matters of importance undoubtedly await
him. He had noted, in his previous passage to and fro, that the young man
who had been nearest to the tragedy was in his place before the case of
coins in Section I. This time he noted something more. The young man was
in the selfsame spot, but during this brief interval of waiting, the
passion he evidently cherished for numismatics had reasserted itself, and
he now stood with his eyes bent as eagerly upon the display of coins over
which he hung, as if no shaft of death had crossed the space without and
no young body lay in piteous quiet beyond the separating partition.

It was an exhibition of one of the most curious traits of human nature,
and Mr. Gryce would undoubtedly have expended a few cynical thoughts upon
it if, upon entering the broad front corridor which he had hitherto
avoided, he had not run upon Sweetwater pointing in a meaning way toward
two huge cases which, stacked with medieval arms, occupied one of the
corners.

"Odd couple over there," he whispered as the older detective paused to
listen. "Been watching them for the last five minutes. They pretend to be
looking at some old armor, but they are mighty uneasy and keep glancing
up at the window overhead as if they would like to jump out."

Mr. Gryce indulged in one of his characteristic exclamations. This was
the couple whose queer actions he had noticed on the staircase. "I'll
have a talk with them presently. Anyone in the rooms opposite?"

"Yes, the Curator. He's in Room A, where there are a lot of engravings
waiting to be hung. I guess he was pretty well up to his neck in business
when that fellow Correy set up his shout. And have you noticed that he's
a bit deaf, which is the reason, perhaps, why he was not sooner on the
scene?"

"No, I hadn't noticed. Anyone else at this end?"

"Only the young couple I speak of."

Mr. Gryce gave them a second look. They were by many paces farther from
the pedestal from behind which the bow had been flung back of the
tapestry than would quite fit in with the theory he had formed, and by
means of which he hoped to single out the person who had sent the deadly
arrow. But then, under the stress of fear, people can move very swiftly;
and besides, what guarantee did he have that these poor, frightened
creatures had located themselves with all the honesty the occasion
demanded? According to Sweetwater there was nobody sufficiently near to
notice where they had been at the critical instant, or where they were
now. The student's back was toward them, and the Curator quite out of
sight behind a close-shut door.

With this doubt in his mind, Mr. Gryce started to approach the couple. As
he did so, he observed another curious fact concerning them. They were
neither of them in the place natural to people interested in the contents
of the great cases which they had crossed the hall to examine. Instead of
standing where a full view of these cases could be had, they had
withdrawn so far behind them that they presented the appearance of
persons in hiding. Yet as he drew nearer and noted their youth and
countrified appearance, Mr. Gryce was careful to assume his most benign
deportment and so to modulate his voice as to call up the pink into the
young woman's cheek and the deep red into the man's. What Mr. Gryce said
was this: "You are interested I see in this show of old armor? I don't
wonder. It is very curious. Is this your first visit to the museum?"

The man nodded; the woman lowered her head. Both were self-conscious to a
point painful to see.

"It is a pity your first visit should be spoiled by anything so dreadful
as the accidental death of this young girl. It seems to have frightened
you both very much."

"Yes, yes," muttered the man. "We never saw anybody hurt before."

"Did you know the young lady?"

"Oh, no; oh, no!" they both hastened to cry out in a confused jumble,
after which the man added:

"We--we're from up the river. We don't know anybody in this big town."

As he spoke, he began to edge away from the wall, the girl following.

"Wait!" smiled the detective. "You are getting out of place. You were
looking at the armor when you first heard the hubbub over there?"

Both were silent.

"What were you looking at?"

"I was looking at her, and her was looking at me," stammered the man. "We
were--were talking together here--we didn't notice----"

"Just married, eh?"

"Yesterday noon, sir. How--how did you know?"

"I didn't know; I only guessed. And I think I can guess something
else--what your reason was for stealing into this dark corner."

It was the man who now looked down, and the woman who looked up. In a
pinch of this kind, it is the woman who is the more courageous.

"He was a-kissin' of me, sir," she whispered in a frank but shamefaced
way. "There was no harm in that, was there? We're so fond of one another,
and how could we know that anyone was dying so near?"

"No, there was no harm," Mr. Gryce reluctantly admitted. Caught in an
absurdity amusing enough in its way, he would certainly under less
strenuous circumstances have rather enjoyed his own humiliation. But the
occasion was too serious and his part in it too pronounced for him to
take any pleasure in this misadventure. In the prosecution of so daring
a scheme for locating witnesses if not of discovering the actual user of
the bow, it would not do to fail. He _must_ find the man he sought. If
the Curator--but one glance into the room where that gentleman stood amid
a litter of prints satisfied him that Sweetwater was right as to the
impossibility of getting any information from this quarter. Nor could he
hope, remembering what he had himself seen, that he would succeed any
better with the last person now remaining on this floor--the young man
busy with the coins in No. I.

That he was to be so fortunate as to lay an immediate hand on the person
who had shot the fatal arrow was no longer regarded by him as among the
possibilities. Whoever this person was, he had found a way of escape
which rendered him for the time being safe from discovery. But there was
another possible miscalculation which he felt it his duty to recognize
before he proceeded further in his difficult task. The bow found back of
the tapestry had every appearance of being the one used for the delivery
of the arrow. But was it? Might it not, in some strange and unaccountable
way, have been flung there previous to the present event and by some hand
no longer in the building? Such coincidences have been known, and while
as a rule this old and experienced detective put little confidence in
coincidences of any kind, he had but one thought in mind in approaching
this final witness, which was to get from him some acknowledgment of
having seen, on or about the time of the accident, a movement in the
tapestry behind which this bow lay concealed. If once this fact could
be established, there could be no further question as to the direct
connection between the bow there found and the present crime.

But Mr. Gryce might have spared his pains, so far as this young man was
concerned. He had been so engrossed in his search for a particularly rare
coin, that he had had no eyes for anything beyond. Besides, he was
abnormally nearsighted, not being able, even with his glasses, to
distinguish faces at any distance, much less a movement in a piece of
tapestry.

All of this was discouraging, even if anticipated; but there were still
the people below, some one of whom might have seen what this man had not.
He would go down to them now, but by a course which would incidentally
enlighten him in regard to another matter about which he had some doubts.

In his goings to and fro through the hall, he had passed the open door of
Room H and noted how easily a direct flight could be made through it and
Rooms I and J to the small staircase running down at the rear. Whether or
not this explained the absence of anyone on this floor who by the utmost
stretch of imagination could be held responsible for the accident which
had occurred there, he felt it incumbent upon him to see in how short a
time the escape he still believed in could be made through these rooms.

Timing his steps from the pedestal nearest this end, he found that even
at his slow pace it took but three minutes for him to reach the arcade
leading into the court from the foot of the staircase. A man conscious of
wrong and eager to escape would do it in less; and if, as possibly
happened, he had to wait in the doorway of Room J till Correy and the boy
had cleared the way for him by their joint run into the farther gallery,
he would still have time to be well on his way to the lower floor before
the cry went up which shut off all further egress. Relieved, if not
contented with the prospect this gave of a new clue to his problem, he
reëntered the court and was preparing to renew his investigations when
the arrival of the Coroner put a temporary end to his efforts as well as
to the impatience of the so-called pawns, who were now allowed, one and
all, to leave their posts.




V

THREE WHERE TWO SHOULD BE


It was a good half-hour before Mr. Gryce again found himself in a
position to pursue the line of investigation thus summarily interrupted.
The condition of Mrs. Taylor, which had not been improved by delay,
demanded attention, and it was with a sense of great relief that Mr.
Gryce finally saw her put into a taxi. Her hurried examination by Coroner
Price had elicited nothing new, and of all who had noticed her distraught
air on leaving the building, there was not one, if we except the
detective, but felt convinced that if she had not been of unsound mind
previous to this accident, she certainly had become so since. He still
held to his theory that her story, fantastic and out of character as it
seemed, was true in all its essentials, and that it was the warning she
believed herself to have received of her husband's death, rather than
what had taken place under her eyes, which had caused her such extreme
suffering and temporarily laid her reason low.

With the full approbation of the Coroner, to whom he had explained his
idea, Mr. Gryce began the sifting process by which he hoped to discover
the one witness he wanted.

To subject to further durance such persons as from their position at the
moment of tragedy could have no information to give bearing in any way
upon their investigation was manifestly unfair. The old woman who had
been found in Room A was of this class, and accordingly was allowed to
go, together with such others as had been within twenty feet or more of
the main entrance. These eliminated (it was curious to see how loath
these few chosen ones were to depart, now that the opportunity was given
them), Mr. Gryce settled down to business by asking Mrs. Lynch to come
forward.

She, as you will see by consulting the chart, answered to the person
marked "2." A little, dried-up, eager woman rose from the bench on which
were collected the few people still remaining, and met his inquiring look
with a nervous smile. She, of all the persons moving about on the main
floor at the moment of alarm, had been in the best position for seeing
the flight of the arrow and the fall of the victim in Section II. Had she
seen them? The continued jigging of the small, wiry curls hanging out
from either side of her old-fashioned bonnet would seem to betray an
inner perturbation indicative of some hitherto suppressed information. At
all events Mr. Gryce allowed himself this hope and was most bland and
encouraging in his manner as he showed her the place which had been
assigned her on the chart drawn up by Sweetwater, and asked if the
position given her was correct.

Perhaps a ready reply was too much to expect--women of her stamp not
knowing, as a rule, very much about charts. But when he saw her hasten
to the very spot assigned her by Sweetwater, he took heart and with a
suggestive glance at the gallery intimated that he would be very glad to
hear what she had seen there. Her surprise was evident, much too evident
for his satisfaction. The little curls jigged about more than ever, and
her cheeks grew quite pink as she answered hastily:

"I didn't see anything. I wasn't looking. Did you think I saw anything?"

"I hoped you had," he smiled. "If your eyes had chanced to be turned
toward that end of the gallery----"

"But I was going the other way. My back was to it, not my face--like
this." And wheeling herself about, she showed him that she had been
walking toward the rear of the building rather than advancing toward the
front.

His disappointment was great; but it would have been greater if he had
not realized that under these conditions she was in the precise position
to meet face to face any person emerging into the court from the foot of
the small staircase. If she could tell him of having seen any such
person, and closely enough to be able to give a description of this
person's appearance, then she might prove to be his prime witness, after
all. But she could not satisfy him on this point. She had been on her way
out, and was too busy searching in her bag for her umbrella check to
notice whether there were people about her or not. She had not found it
when the great shout came.

"And then?"

Oh, then she was so frightened and so shocked that everything swam before
her eyes and she nearly fell! Her heart was not a strong one and
sometimes missed a beat or two, and she thought it must have done so
then, for when her head steadied again, she found herself clinging to the
balustrade of the great staircase.

"Then you have nothing whatever to add to what the others have told?"

Her "no," if a shaky one, was decisive, and seeing no reason for
detaining her further, he gave her permission to depart.

Disturbed in his calculations, but not disheartened, Mr. Gryce next
proceeded to interrogate the door-man at this end of the building. From
his position, facing as he did the approach from the small staircase, he
should be able to say, if the old lady could not, whether anyone had
crossed the open strip of court toward which she had been advancing. But
Mr. Gryce found him no more clear-headed on this point than she. He was
the oldest man connected with the museum, and had been very much shaken
up by what had occurred. Really, he could not say whether anyone had
passed across his line of vision at that time or not. All he could be
sure of was that no attempt had been made by anyone to reach the door
after he had been bidden to close it.

So this clue ended like the rest in no thoroughfare. Would he have any
better luck with the subject of his next inquiry? The young lady
tabulated as No. 13 was where she could have seen the upper edge of the
tapestry shake if she had been looking that way; but she was not. She
also was going from instead of toward the point of interest--in other
words, entering and not leaving the room on whose threshold she stood.

Only two men were left from whom he could hope to obtain the important
testimony he was so anxiously seeking: Nos. 10 and 11. He had turned back
toward the bench where they should be awaiting his attention and was
debating whether he would gain more by attacking them singly or together,
when he suddenly became aware of a fact which drove all these small
considerations out of his mind.

According to every calculation and according to the chart, there should
be only these two men on that bench. But he saw _three_. Who was this
third man, and where had he come from?




VI

THE MAN IN THE GALLERY


Beckoning to Sweetwater, Mr. Gryce pointed out this extra man and asked
him if he recognized him as one of the twenty-two he had tabulated.

The answer was a vigorous no. "It's a new face to me. He must have
dropped from the roof or come up through the flooring. He certainly
wasn't anywhere about when I made out my list. He looks a trifle hipped,
eh?"

"Troubled--decidedly troubled."

"You might go a little further and say done up."

"Good-looking, though. Appears to be of foreign birth."

"English, I should say, and just over."

"English, without a doubt. I'll go speak to him; you wait here, but watch
out for the Coroner, and send him my way as soon as he's at leisure."

Then he reapproached the bench, and observing, with the keenness with
which he observed everything without a direct look, that with each step
he took the stranger's confusion increased, he decided to wait till after
he had finished with the others, before he entered upon an inquiry which
might prove not only lengthy but of the first importance.

He was soon very glad that he had done this. He got nothing from Mr.
Simpson; but the questions put to Mr. Turnbull were more productive.
Almost at the first word, this gentleman acknowledged that he had seen
a movement in the great square of tapestry to which Mr. Gryce drew his
attention. He did not know when, or just where he stood at the time,
but he certainly had noticed it shake.

"Can you describe the movement?" asked the gratified detective.

"It swayed out----"

"As if blown by some wind?"

"No, more as if pushed forward by a steady hand."

"Good! And what then?"

"It settled back almost without a quiver."

"Instantly?"

"No, not instantly. A moment or two passed before it fell back into
place."

"This was before the attendant Correy called out his alarm, of course?"

Yes, of course it was before; but how long before, he couldn't say. A
minute--two minutes--five minutes--how could he tell! He had no watch in
hand.

Mr. Gryce thought possibly he might assist the man's memory on this point
but forbore to do so at the time. It was enough for his present purpose
that the necessary link to the establishment of his theory had been
found. No more doubt now that the bow lying in the niche of the doorway
overhead had been the one made use of in this desperate tragedy; and the
way thus cleared for him, he could confidently proceed in his search for
the man who had flung it there. He believed him to be within his reach at
that very moment, but his countenance gave no index to his thought as
reapproaching the young man now sitting all alone on the bench, he halted
before him and pleasantly inquired:

"Do I see you for the first time? I thought we had listed the name of
every person in the building. How is it that we did not get yours?"

The tide of color which instantly flooded the young man's countenance
astonished Mr. Gryce both by its warmth and fullness. If he were as
thin-skinned as this betokened, one should experience but little
difficulty in reaching the heart of his trouble.

With an air of quiet interest Mr. Gryce sat down by the young man's side.
Would this display of friendliness have the effect of restoring some of
his self-possession and giving him the confidence he evidently lacked?
No, the red fled from his cheek, and a ghastly white took its place; but
he showed no other change.

Meantime the detective studied his countenance. It was a good one, but
just now so distorted by suffering that only such as were familiar with
his every look could read his character from his present expression.
Would a more direct question rouse him? Possibly. At all events, Mr.
Gryce decided to make the experiment.

"Will you give me your name?" he asked, "--your name and residence?"

The man he addressed gave a quick start, pulled himself together and made
an attempt to reply.

"My name is Travis. I am an Englishman just off the steamer from
Southampton. My home is in the county of Hertfordshire. I have no
residence here."

"Your hotel, then?"

Another flush--then quickly: "I have not yet chosen one."

This was too surprising for belief. A stranger in town without rooms or
hotel accommodations, making use of the morning hours to visit a museum!

"You must be very much interested in art!" observed his inquisitor a
little dryly.

Again that flush and again the quick-recurring pallor.

"I--I am interested in all things beautiful," he replied at last in
broken tones.

"I see. May I ask where you were when that arrow flew which killed a
young lady visitor? Not in this part of the court, I take it?"

Mr. Travis gave a quick shudder and that was all. The detective waited,
but no other answer came.

"I am told that as she fell she uttered one cry. Did you hear it, Mr.
Travis?"

"It wasn't a cry," was his quick reply. "It was something quite
different, but dreadful, dreadful!"

Mr. Gryce's manner changed.

"Then you did hear it. You were near enough to distinguish between a
scream and a gasp. Where were you, and why weren't you seen by my man
when he went through the building?"

"I--I was kneeling out of sight--too shocked to move. But I grew tired of
that and wanted to go; but on reaching the court, I found the doors
closed. So I came here."

"Kneeling! Where were you kneeling?"

He made a quick gesture in the direction of the galleries.

The detective frowned, perhaps to hide his secret satisfaction.

"Won't you be a little more definite?" he asked; then as the man
continued to hesitate he added, but as yet without any appreciable loss
of kindliness: "Every other person here has been good enough to show us
the exact place he was occupying at that serious moment. I must ask you
to do the same; it is only just."

Was the look this called up one of fear or of simple repugnance? It might
be either; but the detective was disposed to consider it fear.

"Will you lead the way?" he pursued. "I shall be glad to follow."

A glance of extreme reproach; then these words, uttered with painful
intensity:

"You want me to go back there--where I saw--where I can see again--_I
cannot_. I'm not well. I suffer. You will excuse me. You will allow me to
say what I have to say, _here_."

"I'm sorry, but I cannot do that. The others have gone without question
to their places; why should not you?"

"Because----" The word came brokenly and was followed by silence. Then,
seeing the hopelessness of contending with police authority, he cast
another glance of strong repulsion in the direction of the gallery and
started to his feet. Mr. Gryce did the same, and together they crossed
the court. But they got no further at this time than the foot of the
staircase. Coroner Price, by an extra effort which seemed to be called
for by the circumstances, had succeeded in picking up a jury from the
people collected on the street, and entering at this moment, created a
diversion which effectively postponed the detective's examination of his
new witness.

When the opportunity came for resuming it, so much time had elapsed that
Mr. Gryce looked for some decided change in the manner or bearing of the
man who, unfortunately for his purposes, had thus been given a quiet hour
in which to think. Better, much better, for the cause of justice, if he
could have pushed him to the point at once, harried him, as it were, in
hot blood. Now he might find him more difficult.

But when, in company with the Coroner, who now found himself free to
assist him in his hunt for witnesses, he reapproached the Englishman
sitting as before alone on his bench, it was to find him to all
appearance in the same mind in which he had left him. He wore the same
look and followed with the same reluctance when he was made to understand
that the time had now come for him to show just where he was standing
when that arrow was sped on its death-course. And greatly impressed by
this fact, which in a way contradicted all his expectations, Mr. Gryce
trod slowly after, watching with the keenest interest to see whether, on
reaching the top of the steps, this man upon whose testimony so much
depended would turn toward the southern gallery where the girl had
fallen, or toward the northern one, where Correy had found the bow.

It looked as if he were going to the left, for his head turned that way
as he cleared the final step. But his body soon swayed aside in the other
direction, and by the time the old detective had himself reached the
landing, Travis, closely accompanied by the Coroner, had passed through
the first of the three arches leading to that especial section of the
gallery where the concealing tapestry hung.

"The man is honest," was Mr. Gryce's first thought. "He is going to show
us the bow and confess to what was undoubtedly an accident." But Mr.
Gryce felt more or less ready to modify this impromptu conclusion when,
on passing through the arch himself he came upon the young man still
standing in Section VI, with his eyes on the opposite gallery and his
whole frame trembling with emotion.

"Is she--the young lady who was shot--still lying on those cold stones
alone, forsaken and----"

Mr. Gryce knew misery when he saw it. This man had not overstated the
case when he had said "I suffer." But the cause! To what could this
excess of sensibility be attributed? To remorse or to an exaggerated
personal repulsion? It looked like remorse, but that there might be no
doubt as to this, Mr. Gryce hastened to assure the Englishman that on the
departure of the jury the body had been removed to one of the inner
rooms. The relief which this gave to Mr. Travis was evident. He showed no
further reluctance to proceed and was indeed the first of the three to
enter where the great drapery hung, flanked by the two immense vases.
Would he pause before it or hurry by into the broad corridor in front? If
he hurried by, what would become of their now secretly accepted theory?

But he did not hurry by; that is, he did not pass beyond the upper end,
but stopped when he got there and looked back with an air of extreme
deprecation at the two officials.

"Have we arrived?" asked Mr. Gryce, his suspicions all returning, for the
man had stepped aside from the drapery and was standing in a spot
conspicuously open to view even from the lower court.

The Englishman nodded; whereupon Mr. Gryce, approaching to his side,
exclaimed in evident doubt:

"You were standing _here_? When? Not at the moment the young girl fell,
or you would have been seen by some one, if not by everyone, in the
building. I want you to take the exact place you occupied when you first
learned that something had gone wrong in the opposite gallery."

The stranger's distress grew. With a show of indecision scarcely
calculated to inspire confidence in either of the two men watching him,
he moved now here and now there till he finally came to a standstill
close by the pedestal--so close, indeed, to its inner corner that he was
almost in a line with its rear.

"It was here," he declared with a gulp of real feeling. "I am sure I am
right now. I had just stepped out----"

"From behind the tapestry?"

"No." His blank astonishment at the quickness with which he had been
caught up left him staring for a moment at the speaker, before he
added:

"From behind the pedestal. The--the vase, as you see, is a very curious
one. I wanted to look at it from all sides."

Without a word the Coroner slipped past him and entering the narrow space
behind the pedestal took a look up at the vase from his present cramped
position.

As he did this, two things happened: first Sweetwater, who had stolen
upon the scene, possibly at some intimation from Mr. Gryce, took a step
toward them which brought him in alignment with the Englishman, of whose
height in comparison with his own he seemed to take careful note; and
secondly, the sensitive skin of the foreigner flushed red again as he
noticed the Coroner's sarcastic smile, and heard his dry remark:

"One gets a better view here of the opposite gallery than of the vase
perched so high overhead. Had you wished to look at those ladies, without
being seen by them, you could hardly have found a better loophole than
the one made by the curving in of this great vase toward its base." Then
quickly: "You surely took one look their way; that would be only
natural."

The answer Mr. Travis gave was certainly unexpected.

"It was after I came out that I saw them," he stammered. "There were two
ladies, one tall and one very young and slight. The older lady was
stepping toward the front, the other entering from behind. As I looked,
the younger made a dash and ran by the first lady. Then----"

"Proceed, Mr. Travis. Your emotion is very natural; but it is imperative
that we hear all you have to tell us. She ran by the older lady, and
then?"

Still silence. The Englishman appeared to be looking at Coroner Price,
who in speaking emerged from behind the pedestal; but it is doubtful if
he saw him. A tear was in his eye--a tear!

Seeing it, Mr. Gryce felt a movement of compassion, and thinking to help
him, said kindly enough:

"Was it so very dreadful?"

The answer came with great simplicity:

"Yes. One minute she was all life and gaiety; the next she was lying
outstretched on the hard floor."

"And you?"

Again that look of ingenuous surprise.

"I don't remember about myself," he said. "I was thinking too much about
her. I never saw anyone killed before."

"Killed? Why do you say killed? You say you saw her fall, but how did you
know she was killed?"

"I saw the arrow in her breast. As she fell backward, I saw the arrow."

As he uttered these words, the three men watching him perceived the sweat
start out on his forehead, and his eyes take on a glassy stare. It was as
if he were again in gaze upon that image of youthful loveliness falling
to the ground with the arrow of death in her heart. The effect was
strangely moving. To see this event reflected as it were in horror from
this man's consciousness made it appear more real and much more
impressive than when contemplated directly. Why? Had remorse given it its
poignancy? Had it been his own hand which had directed this arrow from
behind the pedestal? If not, why this ghastly display of an emotion so
far beyond what might be expected from the most sentimental of onlookers?

In an endeavor to clear the situation, the Coroner intervened with the
following question:

"Have you ever seen a shot made by a bow and arrow before, Mr. Travis?
Archery-practice, I mean. Or--well, the shooting of wild animals in
India, Africa or elsewhere?"

"Oh, yes. I come from a country where the bow and arrow are used. But I
never shoot. I can only speak of what I have seen others do."

"That is sufficient. You ought to be able to tell, then, from what
direction this arrow came."

"It--it must have come from this side of the gallery. Not from this
section, as you call it, but from some one of the other open places along
here."

"Why not from this one?"

"Because there was nobody here but me," was the simple and seemingly
ingenuous answer.

It gave them an unexpected surprise. Innocence would speak in this
fashion. But then the bow--the bow which was lying not a dozen feet from
where they stood! Nothing could eliminate that bow.

After a short consultation between themselves, which the Englishman
seemed not to notice, the Coroner addressed him with the soothing remark:

"Mr. Travis, you must not misunderstand me. The accident which has
occurred (we will not yet say crime) is of so serious a nature that it is
imperative for us to get at the exact facts. Only yourself and one other
person whom we know can supply them. I allude to the lady you saw, first
in front of and then behind the girl who was shot. Her story has been
told. Yours will doubtless coincide with it. May I ask you, then, to
satisfy us on a point you were in a better position than herself to take
note of. It is this: When the young girl gave that bound forward of which
you both speak, did she make straight for the railing in front, or did
she approach it in a diagonal direction?"

"I do not know. You distress me very much. I was not thinking of anything
like that. Why should I think of anything so immaterial. She came--I saw
her smiling, beaming with joy, a picture of lovely youth--then her arms
went suddenly up and she fell--backward--the arrow showing in her breast.
If I told the story a hundred times, I could not tell it differently."

"We do not wish you to, Mr. Travis. Only there must be somewhere in your
mind a recollection of the angle which her body presented to the railing
as she came forward."

The unhappy man shook his head, at which token of helplessness Mr. Gryce
beckoned to Sweetwater and whispered a few words in his ear. The man
nodded and withdrew, going the length of the gallery, where he
disappeared among the arches, to reappear shortly after in the gallery
opposite. When he reached Section II, Mr. Gryce again addressed the
witness, who, to his surprise and to that of the Coroner as well, had
become reabsorbed in his own thoughts to the entire disregard of what
this movement might portend. It took a sharp word to rouse him.

"I am going to ask you to watch the young man who has just shown himself
on the other side, and tell us to what extent his movements agree with
those made by the young lady prior to her collapse and fall to the
floor."

For an instant indignation robbed the stranger of all utterance. Then he
burst forth:

"You would make a farce of what is so sad and dreadful, and she scarcely
cold! It is dishonoring to the young lady. I cannot look at that young
man--that hideous young man--and think of her and of how she looked and
walked the instant before her death."

The two officials smiled; they could not help it. Sweetwater was
certainly no beauty, and to associate him in any kind of physical
comparison with the dead girl was certainly incongruous. Yet they both
felt that the point just advanced by them should be settled and settled
now while the requisite remembrance was fresh in the mind of this
invaluable witness. But in order to get at what they wanted, some show
of consideration for his feelings was evidently necessary. Police
persistence often defeats its own ends. If he was to be made to do what
they wished, it would have to be through the persuasion of some one
outside the Force. To whom should they appeal? The question answered
itself. Mr. Roberts was approaching from the front, and to him they
turned. Would he use his influence with this stranger?

"He may listen to you," urged the Coroner in the whispered conference
which now followed, "if you explain to him how much patience you and all
the rest of the people in the building have had to exercise in this
unhappy crisis. He seems a good enough fellow, but not in line with our
ideas."

Mr. Roberts, who saw the man for the first time, surveyed him in
astonishment.

"Where was he standing?" he asked.

"Just where you see him now--or so he says."

"He couldn't have been. Some one would have observed him--the woman who
was in the compartment with the stricken girl, or the man studying coins
in the one next to it."

"So it would seem," admitted the Coroner. "But if he were behind the
pedestal----"

"Behind the pedestal!"

"That's where we think he was. But no matter about that now!--we can
explain that to you later. At present all we want is for you to reassure
him."

Not altogether pleased with his task, but seeing no good reason for
declining it, the affable director approached the Englishman, who,
recognizing one of his own social status, seemed to take heart and turn
a willing ear to Mr. Roberts' persuasions. The result was satisfactory.

When the Coroner again called Mr. Travis' attention to Sweetwater
awaiting orders in the opposite gallery he did not refuse to look, though
his whole manner showed how much he was affected by this forced
acquiescence in their plans.

"You will watch the movements of the young man we have placed over
there," the Coroner had said; "and when he strikes a position
corresponding to that taken by the young lady at the moment she was shot,
lift up your hand, thus. I will not ask you to speak."

"But you forget that there is blood on that floor. That man will step in
it. I cannot lend myself to such sacrilege. It is wrong. Let the lady be
buried first."

The outburst was so natural, the horror so unfeigned, that not only the
men he addressed but all within hearing showed the astonishment it
caused.

"One would think you knew the victim of this random shot!" the Coroner
intimated with a fresh and close scrutiny of this very reluctant witness.
"Did you? Was she a friend of yours?"

"No, no!" came in quick disavowal. "No friend. I have never exchanged a
word with her--never."

"Then we will proceed. One cannot consider sensibilities in a case like
this." And he made a signal to Sweetwater, who turned his body this way
and that.

The distressed Englishman watched these movements with slowly dilating
eyes.

"It's the angle we want--the angle at which she presented her body to the
gallery front," explained the relentless official.

A shudder, then the rigidity of fixed attention, broken in another
moment, however, by an impulsive movement and the unexpected question:

"Is it to find the man who did it that you are enacting this horrible
farce?"

Somewhat startled, the Coroner retorted:

"If you object on that account----"

But Mr. Travis as vehemently exclaimed:

"But I don't! I want the man caught. One should not shoot arrows about in
a place where there are beautiful young women. I want him caught and
punished."

As they were all digesting this unexpected avowal, they saw his hand go
up. The Coroner gave a low whistle, and the detective in obedience to it
stood for one instant stock-still--then bent quickly to the floor.

"What is he doing?" cried Mr. Travis.

"Yes, what is he doing?" echoed Mr. Roberts.

"Running a mark about his shoes to fix their exact location," was the
grim response.




VII

"YOU THINK THAT OF ME!"


"We're certainly up against it this time," were the words with which Dr.
Price led the detective down the gallery. "What sort of an opinion can a
man form of a fellow like that? Is he fool or knave?"

Mr. Gryce showed no great alacrity in answering. When he did speak it was
to say:

"We shall have to go into the matter a little more deeply before we can
trust our judgment as to his complete sincerity. But if you want to know
whether I believe him to have loosed the arrow which killed that innocent
child, I am ready from present appearances to say yes. Who else was there
to do it? He and he only was on the spot. But it was a chance action,
without intention or wish to murder. No man, even if he were a fool,
would choose such a place or such a means for murder."

"That's true; but how does it help to call it accident? Accident calls
for a bow in hand, an arrow within reach, an impulse to try one's skill
at a fancied target. Now the arrow--whatever may be said of the bow--was
not within the reach of anyone standing in this gallery. The arrow came
from the wall at the base of which this young woman died. It had to be
brought from there here. That does not look like accident, but crime."

Yet as the Coroner uttered this acknowledgment, he realized as plainly as
Mr. Gryce how many incongruous elements lay in the way of any such
solution of the mystery. If they accepted the foreigner's account of
himself,--which for some reason neither seemed ready to dispute,--into
what a maze of improbabilities it at once led them! A stranger just
off ship! The victim a mere schoolgirl! The weapon such an unusual one as
to be _outré_ beyond belief. Only a madman--But there! Travis had less
the appearance of a lunatic than Mrs. Taylor. It must have been an
accident as Gryce said; and yet--

If there is much virtue in an _if_, there is certainly a modicum
of the same in a _yet_, and the Coroner, in full recognition of this
stumbling-block, remarked with unusual dryness:

"I agree with you that some half-dozen questions are necessary before we
wade deeper into this quagmire. Where shall we go to have it out?"

"The Curator will allow us to use his office. I will see that Mr. Travis
joins us there."

"See that he comes before he has a chance to fall into one of his
reveries."

But quickly as Mr. Gryce worked, he was not speedy enough to prevent the
result mentioned. The man upon whose testimony so much hinged did not
even lift his eyes when brought again into their presence.

The Coroner, in his determination to be satisfied on this point, made
short work of rousing him from his abstraction. With a few leading
questions he secured his attention and then without preamble or apology
asked him with what purpose he had come to America and why he had been so
anxious to visit the museum that he hastened directly to it from the
steamer without making an effort to locate himself in some hotel.

The ease with which this apparently ingenuous stranger had managed to
meet the opening queries of this rough-and-ready official was suddenly
broken. He stammered and turned red and made so many abortive attempts to
reply that the latter grew impatient and finally remarked:

"If the truth will incriminate you, you are quite justified in holding it
back!"

"Incriminate me!" With the repetition of this alarming word, a change of
the most marked character took place in young Travis' manner. "What does
that mean?" he asked. "I am not sure that I understand your use of that
word _incriminate_."

Dr. Price explained himself, to the seeming horror of the startled
Englishman.

"You think that of me!" he cried, "of me, who----"

But here indignation made him speechless, till some feeling stronger
than the one subduing him to silence forced him again into speech, and
he supplemented in broken tones: "I am only a stranger to you and
consequently am willing to pardon your misconception of my character and
the principles by which I regulate my life. I have a horror of crime and
all violence; besides, the young lady--she awakened my deepest admiration
and reverence. I,"--again he stopped; again he burst forth,--"I would
sooner have died myself than seen such angel graces laid low. Let my
emotion be proof of what I say. It was a man of the hardest heart who
killed her."

"It would seem so."

It was the Coroner who spoke. He was nonplussed; and Mr. Gryce no less
so. Never had either of them been confronted by a blinder or more
bewildering case. An incomprehensible crime and a suspect it was
impossible to associate with a deed of blood! There must be some other
explanation of the mournful circumstance they were considering. There had
been twenty or more people in the building, but--and here was the rub--if
the chart which they had drawn up was correct and the calculations which
they had drawn from it were to be depended upon, this man was the only
person who had been in this gallery when the arrow was shot.

With a side glance at Mr. Gryce, who seemed content to remain silent in
the background, Dr. Price turned again to Mr. Travis.

"Your admiration of the young lady must have been as sudden as it was
strong. Or possibly you had seen her before you hid behind the pedestal.
Had you, Mr. Travis? She was a charming child; perhaps you had been
attracted by her beauty before you even entered the galleries."

Instantly the man was another being.

"You are right," he acquiesced with undue alacrity. "I had seen her
crossing the court. Her beauty was heavenly. I am a gentleman, but I
followed her. When she moved, I moved; and when she went upstairs, I
followed her. But I would not offend. I kept behind,--far behind
her,--and when she entered the gallery on one side, I took pains to enter
it on the other. This is how I came to be looking in her direction when
she was struck down. You see, I speak with candor; I open my whole
heart."

Dr. Price, stroking his long beard, eyed the man with a thoughtful air
which changed to one of renewed inquiry. Instead of being convinced by
this outburst, he was conscious of a new and deepening distrust. The
transition from a low state of feeling to one so feverishly eager had
been too sudden. The avidity with which this man just off ship had made
a grasp at the offered explanation had been too marked; it lacked
sincerity and could impose on no one. Of this he seemed himself aware,
for again the ready flush ran from forehead to neck, and with a
deprecatory glance which included the silent detective he vehemently
exclaimed:

"I am poor at a lie. I see that you will have the whole truth. It was on
her account I crossed the ocean. It was by dogging her innocent steps
that I came to the museum this morning. I am a man of means, and I can do
as I please. When I said that I had never exchanged a word with her, I
spoke the truth. I never have; yet my interest in her was profound. I
have never seen any other girl or woman whom I was anxious to make my
wife. I hoped to meet and woo her in this country. I had no opportunity
for doing so in my own. I did not see her till a night or so before she
sailed, and then it was at the theater, where she sat with some friends
in an adjoining box. She talked, and I heard what she said. She was
leaving England. She was going to America to live; and she mentioned the
steamer on which she expected to sail. It may strike you as impetuous,
unnatural in an Englishman, and all that, but next morning I secured my
passage on that same ship. As I have just said, I am my own master and
can do as I please, and I pleased to do that. But for all the opportunity
which a voyage sometimes gives, I did not succeed in making her
acquaintance on shipboard, much as I desired it. I was ill for the first
three days and timorous the rest. I could only watch her moving about the
decks and wait for the happy moment in which I might be able to do her
some service. But that moment never came, and now it never will come."

The mournfulness with which this was uttered seemed genuine. The Coroner
was silenced by it, and it was left to Mr. Gryce to take up the
conversation. This he did with the same show of respect evinced by Dr.
Price.

"We are obliged to you for your confidence," said he. "Of course you can
tell us this young girl's name."

"Angeline--Angeline Willetts. I saw it in the list of passengers."

"What ship?"

"The _Castania_, from Southampton."

"We are greatly obliged to you for this information. It gives us the
much-wanted clue to her identity. Angeline Willetts! Whom was she with?"

"A Madame Duclos, a French lady. I once spoke to _her_."

"You did? And what did you say?"

"I bade her good morning as we were passing on the main-deck stairs. But
she did not answer, and I was not guilty of the impertinence again."

"I see. Such, then, was the situation up to this morning. But since? How
did it happen that a young girl, six hours after landing in this country,
should come to a place like this without a chaperon?"

"I don't know what brought her here; I can only tell you why I came. When
she left the dock, I was standing near enough to hear the orders Madame
Duclos gave on entering a cab. Naturally, mine were the same. I have been
in New York before, and I knew the hotel. If you will consult the
Universal's register for the day, you will find my name in it under hers.
You will understand why I shrank from confessing to this fact before. I
held her in such honor--I was and am so anxious that no shadow should
fall upon her innocence from my poor story of secret and unrecognized
devotion. She knew nothing of what led me to follow every step she took.
I was a witness of her fate, but that is all the connection between us.
I hope you believe me."

It would be difficult not to, in face of his direct gaze, from which all
faltering had now vanished. Yet the matter not being completely thrashed
out, Mr. Gryce felt himself obliged to say in answer to this last:

"We see no reason to doubt your word or your story, Mr. Travis. All that
you have said is possible. But how about your following the young girl
here? How did that come about?"

"That was occasioned by my anxiety for her--an anxiety which seems to
have been only too well-founded."

"How? What?" Both of the officials showed a greatly increased interest.
"Please explain yourself, Mr. Travis. What reason had you for any such
feeling in regard to a person with whom you had held no conversation?
Anything which you saw or heard at the hotel?"

"Yes. I was sitting in the foyer. I knew that the ladies were in the
house, but I had not seen them. I was anxious to do so (see, I am telling
all) and was watching the door of the lift from behind my journal, when
they both stepped out. Miss Willetts was dressed for the street, but
Madame Duclos was not, which seemed very strange to me. But I felt no
concern till I caught some fragments of what Madame said in passing me.
She spoke in French, a language I understand, and she was exclaiming
over her misfortune at not being allowed to accompany her young charge to
whatever place she was going. It was bad, bad, she cried, and she would
not have a moment's peace till her dear Angeline got back. Anxiety of
this kind was natural in a Frenchwoman not accustomed to see a young lady
enter the streets alone; but the force with which she expressed it
betrayed a real alarm--an alarm which communicated itself to me. Where
could this unprotected girl be going, alone and in a hotel cab?

"I could not imagine, and when I saw Madame stop in the middle of her
talk to buy some fresh flowers and pin them to Miss Willetts' corsage, I
got a queer feeling, and flinging my newspaper aside, I strolled to the
door and so out in time to hear Madame's orders to the chauffeur. The
young lady was to be taken to a museum. To a museum, at this early hour!
and alone, alone! Such a proceeding is not at all in accord with French
ideas, and I feared a plot. Though it was far from being my affair, I
determined to make it so; and as soon as I dared, I followed her just as
I had followed her from the dock. But fruitlessly! Not knowing the
danger, how could I avert it? I was in one gallery, she in the other. It
was my evil fate to see her fall, but by whose hand I am as ignorant as
yourselves. _Now_ I have told it all. Will you let me go?"

"Not yet," interposed the Coroner. "There are one or two questions more
which you will undoubtedly answer with the same frankness. Were you
standing in front of the pedestal or behind it when you saw Miss Willetts
fall?"

"I was standing just where I said, somewhere near it in the open
gallery."

This seemed so open to question that the Coroner paused a moment to
recall the exact situation and see if it were possible for a man as
conspicuous in figure as Mr. Travis to have stood thus in full view of
gallery and court, without attracting the attention of anyone in either
place. He found, after a moment's consideration, that it was possible.
Mr. Gryce, for all his efforts and systematic inquiry into the position
which each person had held at or near this time, had been able to find
but one who chanced to be looking in the direction of this gallery, and
he with a limited view which took in only the upper part of the tapestry.

A probe in a fresh direction might reach a more vulnerable spot.

"But you had been behind the pedestal?" Dr. Price suggested.

"Yes"--the quick flush coming again. "My old timidity led me to conceal
myself where I could watch undetected her bright young figure pass from
arch to arch along the opposite gallery. Not till she had got past my
line of view did I step out, and then--then it was to see what I have
already told you--her rush toward the front--the start she gave--the
fall--that cruel arrow! I own that I shrank back into my narrow
hiding-place when I realized that all was at an end--that she was dead."

"Why? You had been witness to a deed of blood--a deed which must have
recalled to you the anxiety expressed by the woman whom you regarded
as the young girl's guardian; and yet you shrank back--out of sight--away
from those who had the right to make inquiries! How do you explain that,
Mr. Travis?"

"I cannot, except that I was so dazed, so stricken, that I was hardly
conscious of what I did. And, sirs, believe me or not, had it not been
for the refuge afforded by that narrow space behind the pedestal, I think
I should have fallen headlong to the floor. When I came again to myself,
which was after some of the confusion had abated, I had only one thought
in mind: to suppress myself and my story lest some shadow should fall
across her sweet purity. Waiting till the attention of the man you had
placed on guard over her body was attracted another way, I slid out and
hastened to the front, where I managed to find a quiet room in which to
sit down and brood again over my misfortune. Forewarned, as you have
said, and on the spot, with every wish to protect her, I had failed to do
so. I fear it will make me mad some day."

Had it made him insane already? Was his story to be trusted? It was full
of incongruities; were they those of a disordered mind? Such had been the
excuse made for Mrs. Taylor when she had been thought guilty of this
attack; why should it not be applied to this man who certainly had given
evidences of not being of the usual type of young Englishman? With a
sidelong look at Mr. Gryce, which that individual perfectly understood,
Dr. Price thanked Mr. Travis for his candor and asked if he could point
out the room in which he had sat while their young man had gone through
the building checking off the position of everybody in it.

To his surprise, the Englishman answered quite simply, "I will try," and
rose when they rose.

The glances exchanged between the other two men were eloquent. Where was
he about to take them? Sweetwater was no fool; how had this man of
marked appearance and generous proportions managed to elude him?

As has happened before, it proved to be easily explainable when once the
conditions were known. The room to which he led them was that on the
upper story marked H on Chart Two. It was devoted, like one or two others
near it, to a line of famous paintings at once the hope and despair of
young girl copyists. The one most favored for this purpose hung just
behind the door "X," which, half-open as they found it, made with the
easel, the canvas upon it and an apron hanging carelessly over all, an
impromptu screen behind which a man crouched in misery on the copyist's
stool might easily remain unnoticed by anyone passing hurriedly by him.

And thus vanished one hindrance to a full belief in young Travis' story.

But a greater one remained. The bow! the bow found behind the tapestry at
the edge of which he had stood in timorous hiding! In the hope that a
shock might startle him into some admission which would give a different
aspect to the case, they now led him back to this place of first
concealment. He was showing strain by this time, and no delay was made to
press their point. Giving the tapestry a pull, the Coroner bade him tell
what he saw behind it.

The answer came with much emotion.

"The bow! The bow which sped the arrow which killed Miss Willetts. I do
not want to see it. It hurts me--hurts me physically. Let me go, I
entreat."

"Mr. Travis," urged the Coroner as they again emerged upon the open
gallery, "you have said that there was no one with you in the section
where you stood. If that was so, how came this bow to be where you have
just seen it?"

A bewildered look, a slow shake of the head and nothing more.

"Did you know it was there? Did you see it thrown there?"

"No, I saw nothing. I am an honest man. You may believe me."

The Coroner scrutinized him closely but not unkindly.

"We shall know before night who handled that bow, Mr. Travis. It carries
its own clue with it."

A gleam of unmistakable joy lighted up the Englishman's features.

"I am glad," he cried. "I am glad."

Coroner Price was a man of experience. He recognized the ring of truth in
the Englishman's tones, and saying no more, led the way from the gallery.

A few minutes later he was on the lower floor. He had a short
conversation with the two doormen; then he proceeded to the telephone and
called up the Universal.

The result was startling.

Asked if the name of Rupert Henry Travis, Hertfordshire, England, was on
their register, the answer was yes.

"The date of his arrival?"

"Early this morning."

"Any other arrivals to-day from the other side?"

"Yes, a Madame Duclos and a Miss Willetts."

The Coroner's tone altered. So much of the stranger's story was true,
then.

"Will you connect me with Madame Duclos. I have important news to give
her. Some woman had better be with her when she receives it."

"I am sorry, but I cannot do this. Madame Duclos has left."

"Left? Gone out, you mean?"

"No, left the hotel. She's been gone about half an hour. The young lady
who came with her has gone out too, but we expect her back."

"You do. And what took the older woman away? What excuse did she give,
and where has she gone?"

"I cannot tell you where she has gone. She left after receiving a
telephone message from some one in town. Came down to the desk looking
extremely distressed, said that she had had bad news and must go at once.
I made out her bill and, at her request, that of the young lady, whom she
said would be called for by a friend on her return to the hotel. These
bills she paid; after that she left the hotel on foot, carrying her own
bag. The young lady has not returned----"

"Enough. The young lady is dead, killed by chance here at the museum. A
plain-clothes man will be with you shortly from Headquarters. Meanwhile
keep your eyes and ears open. If a message comes for either Madame Duclos
or Miss Willetts, notify me here; and if anyone calls, detain the party
at all hazards. That's all; no time to talk."

And now Gryce entered the room. He was accompanied by an inspector. This
was a welcome addition to their force. Coroner Price greeted him with
cordiality:

"You've come in good time, Inspector. The death of this young girl
struck down by an arrow shot by an unknown hand from the opposite side
of the building bids fair to make a greater call on your resources than
on mine. The woman who appears to have acted as companion to Miss
Willetts has fled the hotel where they both took rooms immediately upon
leaving the steamer. Either she has heard of the accident which has
occurred here--and if so, how?--or she's but carrying out some deep-laid
plan which it is highly important for us to know. It looks now like a
premeditated crime."

"With this Englishman involved?"

"I doubt that; I seriously doubt that--don't you, Gryce? A more subtle
head than his planned this strange crime."

"Yes; there can be little doubt about that. Shall I set the boys to work,
Inspector? This Frenchwoman must be found."

"At once--a general alarm. You can get a description of her from the
clerk at the Universal. She must not be allowed to leave town."

Mr. Gryce sat down before the telephone. Coroner Price proceeded to
acquaint the Inspector with such details of the affair as were now known.
The Curator moved restlessly about. Gloom had settled upon the museum. On
only one face was there a smile to be seen, but that was a heavenly one,
irradiating the countenance of her who had passed from the lesser to the
larger world with the joy of earth still warm in her innocent heart.




BOOK II

MR. X




VIII

ON THE SEARCH


It was late in the afternoon. The Inspector's office had hummed for hours
with messages and reports, and the lull which had finally come seemed
grateful to him. With relaxed brow and a fresh cigar, he sat in quiet
contemplation of the facts brought out by the afternoon's inquiries. He
was on the point of dismissing even these from his mind, when the door
opened and Gryce came in.

Instantly his responsibilities returned upon him in full force. He did
not wait for the expected report, but questioned the detective at once.

"You have been to the hotel," he said, pointing out a chair into which
the old man dropped with a sigh as eloquent of anxiety as of fatigue.
"What more did you learn there?"

"Very little. No message has come; no persons called. For them and for us
these two women, Madame Duclos and Miss Willetts, are still an unknown
quantity. Their baggage, which arrived while I was there, supplied the
only information I was able to obtain."

"Their baggage! But that should tell us everything."

"It may if you think best to go through it. It is not heavy--a trunk for
each, besides the one they brought with them from the steamer. From the
pasters to be seen on them, they have come from the Continental Hotel,
Paris, by way of the Ritz, London. At this latter place their stay was
short. This is proved by the fact that only the steamer-trunk is pasted
with the Ritz label. And this trunk was the one I found in their room at
the Universal. From it Miss Willetts had taken the dress she wore to the
museum. Her other clothes--I mean those she wore on arriving--lay in
disorder on the bed and chairs. I should say that they had been tossed
about by a careless if not hasty hand, while the trunk----"

"Well?"

"Stood open on the floor."

"Stood open?"

"Yes, I went through it, of course."

"And found nothing?"

"Nothing to help us to-day. No letters--no cards. Some clothing--some
little trifles (bought in Paris, by the way) and one little book."

"A name in it?"

"Yes--_Angeline_; and one line of writing from some poem, I judge. I put
it back where I found it. When we know more, it may help us to find her
friends."

"And is that all?"

"Almost, but not quite. The young girl had a bag too. It stood on a
table----"

"Well?"

"Empty. Everything had been tumbled out--turned upside down and the
contents scattered. I looked them carefully over. Nothing, positively
nothing, but what you would be likely to find in any young girl's
traveling-bag. There's but one conclusion to be drawn."

"And what is that?"

"That all these things, such as they were, had been pushed hastily about
after being emptied out on the table. That was not the young girl's
work."

"Madame Duclos'!"

"You've hit it. She was in search of some one thing she wanted, and she
took the quickest way of finding it. And----"

"Yes, Gryce?"

"She was in a desperate hurry, or she wouldn't have left the trunk open
or all those dainty things lying about. Frenchwomen are methodical and
very careful of their belongings. One other thing I noted. There was a
loose nail in the lock of the trunk. Sticking to this nail was a raveling
of brown wool. Here it is, sir. The woman--Madame Duclos--wore a dress of
brown serge. If my calculations are not wrong and we succeed in getting a
glimpse of that dress, we shall find a tear in the skirt--and what is
more, one very near the hem."

"Made to-day?"

"Yes--another token of haste. She probably jerked at the skirt when
she found herself caught. She could not have been herself to have done
this--for which we may be glad."

"You mean that by this thoughtless action she has left a clue in our
hands?"

"That and something more. That tear in her decent skirt will bother her.
She will either make an immediate attempt to mend it, or else do the
other obvious thing--buy a new one. In either case it gives us something
by which to trace her. I have put Sweetwater on that job. He never tires,
never wearies, never lets go. No report in yet from the terminals?"

"Not a word. But she will not get far. Sooner or later we shall find her
if she does not come forward herself after reading the evening papers."

"She will never come forward."

"I am not so sure. Something not a little peculiar happened at the
museum after you left. We had Reynolds up, and he made a most careful
examination of that bow for finger-prints. He did not find any. But
fortune favored us in another way almost as good."

"Now you interest _me_."

"We had brought the bow into the Curator's office, and it lay on the long
table in the middle of the room. I had been looking it over (this was
after Reynolds had gone, of course) and had already noted a certain
defect in it, when on chancing to look up, my eyes fell on a mirror
hanging in a closet the door of which stood wide open. A face was visible
in it--a very white face which altered under my scrutiny into a semblance
more natural. It was that of Correy--you remember Correy, one of the
assistants, and an honest fellow enough, but more troubled at this moment
than I had ever seen him. What could have happened?

"Wheeling quickly about, I caught him just as he started to go. He had
openly declared that he did not know this bow; but it was evident that he
did, and I did not hesitate to say so. Taken unawares, he could not hide
his distress, which he proceeded to explain thus: He did remember the
bow, now that he had the opportunity of seeing it closer. He pointed to
the nick I had myself noticed and said that owing to this defect the bow
had been cast aside, and the last time he had handled it----Here he
caught his breath and stopped. Another memory had evidently returned to
embarrass him."

"Did you succeed in getting him to acknowledge what it was?"

"Yes, after I had worked with him for some time. He didn't want to talk.
In a moment you will see why. Going back to the time he had seen it
before, he said that he had found it in the cellar in an old box, the
contents of which he had been pulling over in a search for something very
different. Amazed to find it there, he had taken it out, examined it
carefully, noted the nick I mentioned and tossed it back again into the
box. This he told, but reluctantly.

"Why reluctantly, I was soon to find out. He was not alone in the cellar.
The shadow of some person at his back had fallen across the lid of the
box as he was closing it. He did not recognize the shadow and had not
given it at the time a second thought, but the remembrance of it came
back vividly when he saw the bow lying before him and realized the part
it had played in the morning's tragedy. Was it because he knew that only
a person actively connected with the museum would have access to that
part of the cellar? I asked. I did not expect an answer, and I did not
get it. We looked at each other for a moment, then I let him go."

A momentary silence, which the Inspector broke by saying:

"Later I called the Curator in, and he also recognized the bow as
belonging to the museum. But he volunteered no explanations and in fact
had little to say on the subject. He was evidently too much startled by
the direct connection which had thus been made between the crime (or
accident, if you will) and the personnel of the museum."

"That was natural. He should be the first to see that the bow which shot
the arrow must of necessity have been brought into the building by some
other door than those at which the doormen stood guard. I had a talk
with those men, and they both declared that no sticks or umbrellas or
anything of that nature ever went by them or would be allowed to go by
them, no matter how concealed or wrapped up. But to revert to the matter
in hand. So Correy made absolutely no attempt to explain how this weapon
had been carried from cellar to gallery without his knowledge?"

"No. He for one will have a sleepless night."

"Not he alone. I must and will see a way through this maze. To-morrow may
bring luck. Ah, I forgot to say that I spent an hour of the three you
allowed me with the captain of the steamer which brought over these two
women. As might be expected, he had no information of any significance to
give me; nor could I obtain much from such members of the crew as I could
get hold of. One steward remembered the Englishman, chiefly because he
never showed himself unless the young lady was on deck. But he never saw
them speak."

"Which bears out Travis' story to the last detail."

"Exactly. I think we can depend upon _him_; otherwise we _should_ be at
sea."

"Yet his story is a very strange one."

"The whole affair is strange--the strangest I ever knew. But that isn't
against it. It's the commonplace case which baffles. We shall get the key
to the whole mystery yet."

"I've no doubt. Is Mr. Travis to be detained?"

"Yes, as witness."

"Does he object?"

"Not at all. Having spoken--told his whole story, as he says--he is
rather glad than otherwise to be relieved from the common curiosity of
strangers. He's a rare bird, Gryce. If he stops to think, he must see
that he stands in a more or less ticklish position. But he does not
betray by look or action any doubt of our entire belief in the truth of
all his statements. His only trouble seems to be that he has lost, by
these inhuman means, the girl upon whom he had set his heart. To-morrow
we will confront him with Mrs. Taylor. She should be able to say whether
he did or did not stand out in the open gallery at the moment Miss
Willetts fell."

But Mr. Gryce had no encouragement to give him on this head.

"Mrs. Taylor is ill--very ill, as I take it. I stopped at her hotel to
inquire. I was anxious about her for more than one reason and the report
I got of her condition was far from favorable. She is suffering cruelly
from shock. How occasioned, whether by the peculiar and startling death
to which she was a witness or by the strangely coincident fancy to which
she herself attributes her deep emotion, will have to be decided by
further developments. Nothing which I was able to learn from doctor or
nurse settled this interesting question. Meanwhile, no one is allowed to
see her--or will be till she is on the direct road to recovery. Let us
hope that this may be soon, or the inquest may be delayed indefinitely."

"I don't know as that is to be deplored. I imagine we shall find enough
to fill in our time.... Any communications made by her before she
collapsed? Did she send out or receive messages of any kind since her
return from the museum?"

"She received none; but it is impossible to say whether or not she sent
any out. There is a letter-chute very near her door. She may have dropped
a letter in that any time before a watch was put upon her. You are
thinking, of course, of the anxiety she expressed about her husband, and
whether she took any measures for ascertaining if her fears for him had
any foundation in fact?"

"I was, yes; but I presume this fancy had passed, or else she is too ill
to remember her own aberrations. Were you able to effect an understanding
with her nurse?"

"Yes; that's fixed. I had a short talk, too, with the proprietor of the
hotel. He thinks very highly of Mrs. Taylor. She has lived in the one
apartment for years, and he cannot say enough of her discreet and uniform
life. Though she made no secret of the fact that she does not live with
her husband, her conduct has always been such as to insure universal
respect. He did not even make mention of eccentricities. If she is crazy,
it is a late development. She seemed to have been all right up to this
morning. Whichever way you turn, you encounter mystery and a closed
door."

"The papers may spring the lock of that door at any moment. Publication
does much in a case of this kind. To-morrow we may be in a much more
favorable position. Meantime, let us recount the facts it is our business
to clear up."

"On what hypothesis?"

"On all hypotheses. We are not sure enough of our premises, as yet, to
confine ourselves to one."

"Very good, these are the ones which seem to me to be of the greatest
importance:

"Whose hand carried the bow from cellar to gallery?

"Was it the same which carried the arrow from one gallery to the other?

"Is it possible for an arrow, shot through the loophole made by the
curving-in of the vase, to reach the mark set for it by Mr. Travis'
testimony?

"Which one of the men or women known to be in the museum when this arrow
was released has enough knowledge of archery to string a bow? A mark can
be reached by chance; but only an accustomed hand can string a bow as
unyielding as this one.

"Who telephoned to Madame Duclos; and of what nature was the message
which sent her from the hotel so precipitately that she not only left the
most important part of her baggage behind but went away without making
adequate provision for the young girl confided to her charge?

"Does this mean that she had been made acquainted with the fate of the
young girl; and if so, by whom?"

"Business enough for us all," was the Inspector's comment as Gryce paused
in this enumeration. "As you put it, I am more and more convinced that
the key you spoke of a short time ago will be found in this missing
woman's tightly shut hand."

"Which brings us round full-circle to our first conclusion: that Miss
Willetts' death is not only a crime, but a premeditated one."

"Carried out, not by the one benefited, but by an agent selected for the
purpose."

"An agent, moreover, who knew the ways and possibilities of the place."

"A logical conclusion; but still too incredible for belief. I find it
hard to trust to appearances in this case."

"And I also. But as we have both said, time may clear away some of its
incongruities. Meanwhile I have an experiment to propose." And leaning
close to the Inspector, notwithstanding the fact that there was nobody
within hearing and he knew it, he whispered a few words in his ear.

The Inspector stared.

"To-night?" he asked.

The detective nodded.




IX

WHILE THE CITY SLEPT


Night--the night of a great city with its myriad of garish lights and its
many curious and incongruous activities.

Who has not felt his imagination stirred by the contrasts thus
offered--contrasts never more apparent than at these hours of supposed
rest? Grim walls, with dimpled children sleeping behind them! Places of
merrymaking athrob with music and dazzling with jets of incandescent
light, with grief in the heart of the dancer and despair making raucous
the enforced laugh!

But nowhere in the great city of which we write on this night of May 23,
1913, was there to be found a scene of greater contradictions than in the
court and galleries of its famous museum.

Lighted as for a reception, the architectural beauties of its Moorish
arcades and carven balustrades flashed in full splendor. Gems of antique
art, casts in which genius had stored its soul and caused to live before
us the story of the ancients, pillars from desert sands, friezes from the
Parthenon and bas-reliefs from Nineveh and Heliopolis, filled every
corner, commanding the eye to satisfy itself in forms of deathless grace
or superhuman power. And no one to heed! Not an eye to note that the
Venus in one corner seemed to smile in the soft light with more than its
accustomed allurement, or that the armor in which kings had fought wore a
menacing sparkle exceeding that of other times and quieter days. Ghosts
of vanished ages might parade at will among the chattels of their time or
drain the iridescent beaker to their unknown gods--no one would have
noticed or turned aside to see. For there was something else within these
walls to-night for the men assembled there to look upon, and a story to
be read which shut the imagination upon the past by amply filling it with
the present.

What is this something? Let us follow the gaze of the half-dozen persons
grouped in front of the tapestry hanging in the northern gallery, and
see.

But first, of whom is this small and mystic group composed? Who are these
men who in the middle of the night, in the security of a completely
shuttered building, busy themselves, not with the inestimable treasures
surrounding them, but with an odd and seemingly mountebank adventure
totally out of keeping with the place and their absorbed demeanor? We
will name them:

Mr. Roberts and a second director seen here for the first time, Inspector
Jackson, Mr. Gryce, two lesser detectives, and a strange young man of
undoubted Indian extraction who kept much in the background and yet stood
always at attention like one awaiting orders.

Are these all? Yes, in the one gallery; but in the other, shadowy figures
are visible among the arches at one end, with whose identity we shall
probably soon be made acquainted.

At what are these various persons, in the one gallery as in the other,
looking so intently that all are turned one way--the way of greatest
interest--the way the fatal arrow had flown some fourteen hours before,
carrying death to the innocent girl smiling upon life in youthful
exuberance? Is it at some image of herself they see restored to hope and
joy? An image is there, but alas! it is but a dummy taken from one of the
exhibits and so set up as to present the same angle to the gallery-front
as her young body had done, according to Mr. Travis' reluctant
declaration.

Why so placed, and why regarded with such concentrated interest by the
men confronting it from the opposite gallery, will become apparent when,
upon the Indian's being summoned from his place of modest retirement, it
can be seen that the bow he carries in one hand is offset by the arrow he
holds in the other. A test is to be made which will settle, or so they
hope, the truth of Mr. Travis' story. If an arrow launched from before
the pedestal or even from behind it through the loophole made by the
curving-in of the vase toward its base can be made to reach its mark in
the breast of this dummy, then they would feel some justification in
doubting his statement that the arrow, whatever the appearances, was not
shot from this gallery. If it could not, belief in his statements would
be confirmed and their minds be cleared of a doubt which must hamper all
their future movements.

The second director, whose name was Clayton, stood at the left of the
Inspector and close against the tapestry. To him that official now turned
with this explanation:

"The bow you see in Mr. La Flèche's hand is similar in length and weight
to the one found lying strung for use in the doorway back of where you
are now standing. The arrow is from the same quiver as the one which
entered Miss Willetts' breast.... Did you speak?"

No, Mr. Clayton had not spoken; yet for some reason a thrill had passed
through the small group surrounding him, which had heightened the
consciousness of them all. Eyes and ears became alert; only the Indian
showed stolidity.

"Mr. La Flèche, you will first stand here," continued the Inspector,
pointing to the spot which Mr. Travis had finally settled upon as the one
where he had been standing at the moment he saw Miss Willetts fall.

The Indian took the place, sighted the figure diagonally opposite and
laid his finger on the string.

"An inch to the left of the bunch of flowers pinned on the dummy's
breast," murmured Mr. Gryce almost in his ear.

It was a breathless moment; even the two detectives showed excitement.

But the Indian failed to shoot. Instead, he looked around at the
Inspector and quietly remarked:

"I will shoot standing, since you so request, but I think you will find
that the arrow which caused death was delivered by a man kneeling."

A flash of the eye between the two detectives, which only one man saw!
All the others were watching the lightning flight of the arrow. It struck
the dummy full and square. Everyone shuddered, even the Inspector; it
brought the real tragedy so vividly to mind.

Meanwhile a movement had taken place in the small group of men watching
from the other side. One of them stepped fully into view and approaching
the figure thus attacked, drew out the arrow and made close examination
of the hole it had made and shook his head. It was Coroner Price.

"Try again, and from behind the pedestal this time," he called out across
the intervening space as he stepped back into his former place of
observation.

The Inspector motioned his wishes to the Indian, who with a subtle twist
of his body slipped behind the pedestal.

"That's better," was the Inspector's quick comment. "Can you handle the
bow easily from where you now stand?"

"There is plenty of room."

"Very well. But wait! Before we proceed further, there is a matter to
which I wish to call the attention of these gentlemen. It must have been
apparent to you all that a person standing where Mr. La Flèche did a
moment ago would be easily visible to anyone looking up from the court or
across from the opposite gallery, or even from the broad corridors at
either end of the building. But would the same hold true if instead of
being in front he had been behind the pedestal, as Mr. La Flèche is now?
Run below, Barney; and, gentlemen, disperse yourselves in different
directions and give me your opinion. Now!" he demanded after a few
minutes' wait, during which there had been a scattering to right and left
along the galleries, "what do you say?"

"If anyone chanced to be looking directly there, yes," was shouted up
from below.

"What do you say, Coroner Price?"

"Ask the man to kneel."

The Inspector gave the word.

"Ah, that's different! The bulge of the vase hides the upper part of his
head, and the pedestal itself the lower. He might shoot from his present
position with impunity."

"Do you all agree?"

"Yes, yes!" came from different parts of the building.

"Then, Mr. La Flèche, here's another arrow from the same quiver. Take
fresh aim and shoot."

Another breathless moment--more breathless than the other; then a second
arrow flew across the court and hung quivering in the breast of the
dummy.

From both ends of the gallery men came running, and leaning eagerly over
the gallery-rail they watched the Coroner as he stepped again into view
to make a second examination.

This time he kept them several minutes in suspense, and when he had drawn
out the arrow, he looked long at the hole it had made. Then, instead of
shouting his decision across the court, he could be seen leaving the
gallery and coming around their way.

What had he to say? As they waited, a clock struck from some neighboring
steeple--three sonorous peals! The two directors glanced at each other.
Doubtless they felt the weirdness of the hour as well as of the occasion.
It was a new experience for these amateurs in police procedure.

Arrived on their side, the Coroner advanced quickly. When close upon the
reassembled group, he remarked quickly but with great decision:

"Mr. Travis seems to have been correct in denying that the arrow flew
either from before or behind this pedestal. The first arrow sent by Mr.
La Flèche entered the dummy almost at a right angle; the last departed
but a little from this same line. But the real wound which I probed and
located to a hair was a decidedly slanting one. It must have been sent
from a place further off."

"From behind the other pedestal!" spoke up Mr. Gryce, all fire and
interest at once. "Either the Englishman deceived us, or each pedestal
had its man."

"We'll see! Another shot, and from behind the further pedestal, Mr. La
Flèche!"

The Indian glided into view and started for the other end of the
tapestry, followed by the Inspector, his detectives and the two
directors. As they passed one by one across the face of the great
hanging, they had the appearance not of living men but of a parade of
specters, so silent their step and so somber their air. The dread of some
development hitherto unacknowledged made their movements slow instead of
hasty. The upper pedestal instead of the lower! Why should this possible
fact make any difference in their feelings. Yet it did--perhaps because
it meant deception on the part of one they had instinctively believed
trustworthy, or--

But why pursue conjecture when actuality only is of moment? Let us
proceed with our relation and await the result.

Arrived at the upper pedestal, Mr. La Flèche took his place, received the
third arrow and presently delivered it. The Coroner, who had already
started for the other side, hastily approached the dummy, made his
examination and threw up his hand with the loud shout:

"The shot was made from there; the matter is settled!"

Question: Had Mr. Travis wilfully misled them, or had the presumption in
his favor been strengthened by this proof that it had been shown possible
for another hand than his to have shot the arrow from this same section
of the gallery, without disturbing his belief that he was the only person
in it at the time?




X

"AND HE STOOD _HERE_?"


The Inspector, finding himself very much disturbed by the doubt just
mentioned, felt inclined to question whether any perceptible advancement
had been made by this freak business of his canny subordinate. He was
hardly ready to say yes, and was not a little surprised when on his way
toward the head of the staircase he heard the exultant voice of Mr. Gryce
whisper in his ear:

"That's all right. We've gained a point. We know now the exact place from
which the arrow was shot."

"But not who shot it."

"No--except that it was not the man Travis."

"How can you be sure of that?"

"For two reasons. This is the first one: If it is difficult to understand
how a man could slip from behind the eastern pedestal and make his way
along the open gallery to Room H, without attracting the attention of the
officer posted opposite, how next to impossible we should find it, if
thirty feet were added to his course--which is the distance between the
two pedestals!"

"What was that fellow doing, that he shouldn't have seen this effort at
escape, whether it involved a short flight or a long one?"

"He says he was not given detective-duty--that he was placed there to
keep watch over the body of the young girl;--that at a certain moment he
imagined himself to hear a stealthy footstep approaching from the farther
end of the gallery, and anxious to spot the man yielding to so doubtful a
curiosity, he approached the arch separating his section from the
adjoining one, and stopping just inside, stood for a moment or so,
listening. As this involved the turning of his back upon the court and
consequently upon the opposite gallery, it gave Travis just the
opportunity he needed for an unobserved escape. But I see you are not
very much impressed by the reason I have advanced for believing his story
and placing him where he says he was placed, behind the eastern pedestal.
You doubtless think that if the officer opposite had stood long enough
with his back to the court, Travis might have taken those extra thirty
steps as easily as the twenty he had confessed to. Listen, then, to my
second reason, or rather, step this way."

Leading his superior toward Room B, the door of which stood wide open, he
paused just outside the threshold to note the effect produced upon the
Inspector by what he saw inside. Evidently it was as marked with surprise
as the detective had calculated upon, for with an air of great
astonishment the Inspector turned upon him with the whispered
exclamation:

"Travis here! where he could listen--see----"

"Yes. Take a good look at him, Inspector. It won't trouble him any. I
doubt if he would notice us if we stepped into the room."

And such was the opinion of the Inspector himself, as he remarked the
extreme excitement under which the Englishman was laboring. Absorbed in
thoughts of his own, he was pacing the room with long strides, turning
mechanically as he met some impediment, but otherwise oblivious to his
surroundings, even to the point of not noting the presence of Sweetwater,
who stood quietly watching him from one of the corners.

This display of feeling was certainly eloquent enough to attract anyone's
attention, but what gave it impressiveness to the official mind was this:
his excitement was that of triumph, not fear, of hope without any trace
of confusion.

"It is not of himself he is thinking," muttered Gryce.

"And he stood _here_?"

"No--we left him free to move about at will, and his will carried him
into full view of the whole performance."

"And Sweetwater?"

"Was near enough to note his every move, but of course kept himself well
out of sight."

Then as they both stepped back from the doorway: "Mr. Travis didn't know
he was being watched. He thought himself alone; and having an expressive
countenance,--very expressive for an Englishman,--it was easy enough for
Sweetwater to read his thoughts."

"And those thoughts?"

"Relief to find an explanation of the phenomenon he had doubtless been
puzzling over for hours. The moments he had spent in hiding behind one
pedestal had evidently failed to suggest that another man might have been
in hiding behind the other."

"I am not surprised. Coincidences of this astonishing kind are not often
met with even by us," was the Inspector's dry retort.

During the interchange of these hurried sentences, they had withdrawn
still farther out of sight and hearing of the man discussed. But at this
point Inspector Jackson reapproached the doorway, and entering in a
manner to intercept Mr. Travis in his nervous goings to and fro, remarked
in an off-hand way:

"I see that you have met with a surprise, Mr. Travis. Like ourselves, you
gave little thought to what that upper pedestal might conceal."

"You are right. I never even glanced that way. But if I had, I should
have seen nothing. He was well hid, exceedingly well hid, whoever he was.
But he cannot escape now; you'll get him, won't you, Inspector? He could
not have left the building--all say that this was impossible. He was one,
then, of the people I saw moving about when I went down into the court.
Find him! Find this murderer of innocence! of the sweetest, purest
child----"

He turned away; grief was taking the place of indignation and revenge.
At this sight the two men left him. The Inspector was at last convinced,
both of the man's probity and of one stern, disconcerting fact: that the
real culprit--the man whose guilty fingers had launched the fatal
arrow--had been, as Travis said, one of the twenty-two persons who had
been moving about for hours not only under his eyes but under those of
the famous detective posted there.




XI

FOOTSTEPS


  WANTED--A WOMAN CALLING HERSELF ANTOINETTE Duclos, just arrived from
  Europe on the steamer _Castania_, who after taking rooms at the
  Universal for herself and her steamer companion, Angeline Willetts,
  left the hotel in great haste late in the afternoon of May twenty-third
  and has not been heard of since.

  In person she is of medium height, but stocky for a Frenchwoman. Dark
  hair, black eyes, with an affection of the lid which causes the left
  one to droop. Her dress consisted of skirt and jacket of a soft shade
  of brown. Hat indistinguishable. She carried, on leaving the hotel, a
  dark brown leather bag of medium size, long and narrow in shape. Her
  only peculiarity, saving the one drooping eyelid, is a hesitating walk.
  This is particularly obvious when she attempts to hasten.

  It is to be hoped that this person on hearing of Miss Willetts' death,
  will communicate at once with the clerk of the hotel.

  If in two days this does not occur, a reward of five hundred dollars
  will be given to the man or woman who can give definite news of this
  Frenchwoman's whereabouts.

  Police Headquarters, Mulberry St.

This notice, appended to such particulars of the tragedy as appeared in
all the morning papers, roused the city--I may even say the country--to
even greater wonder and excitement than had followed the first details
given in the journals of the evening before.

Would anything come of it?

Morning passed; no news of Antoinette Duclos.

Afternoon: messages of all kinds leading to much work, but bringing no
result.

Five o'clock: a missive from the directors of the museum to the effect
that under the peculiar circumstances and the seeming absence of any
friends of the deceased, they would be glad to furnish the means
necessary to the proper care and burial of the young woman killed in such
an unhappy manner within their walls.

A half-hour later, Gryce, for whose appearance the Inspector had been
anxiously waiting, came in with his report. A chair was pushed up for
him, for he was an old man and had had a sleepless night, as we know,
besides two days of continued work. But he did not drop into it, as the
Inspector expected, or give any other signs of exceptional fatigue; yet
when he had seated himself and they were left alone, he did not hasten to
speak, though he evidently had much to say, but remained quiet, holding
counsel, as it were, in his old way, with some small object he had picked
up from the desk before him.

At last the Inspector spoke:

"You have been on the hunt; what did you find?"

"Not much, Inspector--and yet enough to disturb me in a way I was not
looking for. Of course, in studying the situation carefully, you have
asked yourself how the man who shot the arrow from behind the upper
pedestal got away. He did not wait as Travis did till the first
excitement had abated and the way was, in a manner, cleared for an escape
into the court. For X, as we will call him, was certainly among those I
saw lined up before me at the moment I bade them one and all to return
and stand until released, in the exact spot occupied by them when the
first alarm rang out. After the surprise Travis gave us we had the
building searched from roof to cellar. Not another soul was found in it
whose name was not registered on the chart. As I have already said, the
guilty one had managed to escape immediately upon the flight of the
arrow, though how, even then, he could have got below in the time he did
is a mystery which trips me up every time I think of it. But letting that
go for the present, he did get there and get there unnoticed. How? Now,
there are three ways of escape from behind either of those pedestals. The
way Travis took, that is, toward the front, and round through the suite
of rooms headed by the one marked H, to the rear staircase; the more
direct one of an immediate exit from the gallery through Sections VI and
VII to this same staircase; and (the only one worth considering) a
straight plunge for the door behind the tapestry and so down by the
winding staircase beyond, into the Curator's office. The unknown never
went Travis' way, and he couldn't have gone the other without running
into the arms of Correy; so he must have made use of the hidden door. So
convinced was I of this, after last night's discovery eliminated Travis
as a suspect, that I made it my first duty this morning to examine this
door and the mysterious little passageway back of it. When first notified
of this door, we had been assured that it had not been opened in years,
that the only key remaining to it was the one the Curator showed us
hanging from the ring he drew from his own pocket; and acting upon these
statements, which I would not allow myself to doubt for a moment, we
decided to open the door in our own way, which we immediately did. The
result was the instant discovery that some one had passed through this
door and down these stairs very much later than years ago. We could see,
without taking a step beyond the doorway, traces of a well-shod foot in
the dust lying thickly on every tread. These traces were so many and so
confused that I left them for Stevens' experienced eye and deft
manipulation to separate and make plain to us. He is making an
examination of them now, and will be able to report to you before night."

The Inspector was a man of little pretense. He felt startled and showed
it.

"But this is a serious matter, Gryce."

"Very serious."

"No mere visitor to the museum would have presumed upon this venture."

"No."

"Which means----"

"That some one actively connected with it had a guilty hand in this
deplorable affair."

"I am afraid so."

"Some one well acquainted with the existence of this door and who had
means of opening it. The question is--who?"

In saying this, Mr. Gryce studiously avoided the Inspector's eye; while
the Inspector in his turn looked up, then down--anywhere but in the
detective's direction. It was a moment of mutual embarrassment, broken,
when it was broken, by a remark which manifestly avoided the issue.

"Possibly those traces you speak of were not made at the time you
specify. They may have been made since, or they may have been made
before. Perhaps the Curator was curious and tried his hand at a little
detective work on his own account."

"He hadn't the chance. Every portion of the building has been very
thoroughly guarded since first we entered it. He may have gone up prior
to the shooting. That is open to dispute; but if he had done so, why did
he not inform us of the fact when he showed us the key? The Curator is
the soul of honor. He would hardly deceive us in so important a matter."

The quick glance which this elicited from the Inspector awoke no
corresponding flash in the eye of the imperturbable detective. He
continued to shake his head over the small object he was twirling
thoughtfully about between his thumb and finger, and only from his
general seriousness could the Inspector gather that his mind was no more
at rest than his fingers. Was this why his remark took the form of a
question?

"Where was the Curator when you forced open that door behind the
tapestry? Was he anywhere in the building?"

"No, sir; he has not been there to-day. He was ill last night, and he is
ill to-day. He sent us his excuses. If he had been in the building, I
doubt whether I would have given the order to burst open the door. I
would simply have requested him to use his key. And he would have done so
and kept his own counsel. I do not know as I can say as much for any of
his subordinates. Happily, no spying eye was about at that time; and
Stevens will be sure to see that he is not watched at his work if he
has to lock the door upon the whole bunch of directors."

"This is to be a secret investigation, then?"

"I would so advise."

"With every reporter headed off, and anyone likely to report to a
reporter headed off also?"

"Do not _you_ advise this?"

"I do. Anything more?"

"Not till we hear from Stevens."

They had not long to wait. Sooner than they expected the expert mentioned
came in. He held a batch of papers in his hand, which at a gesture from
the Inspector he spread out before them. Then he spoke:

"One man and one man only has passed down those stairs. But that man has
passed down them twice--once with rubbers on and once without. There are
signs equally plain of his having gone up them, but only once, and at the
time he wore the rubbers. I took every pains possible to preserve and
photograph the prints, but as you see, great confusion was caused by the
second line of steps falling half on and half off the other. All I dare
read there is this: A quick run up and a quick run down by a man in
rubbers, and then a second run down by the same man in shoes. That's the
whole story. These other scraps of paper," he went on as he saw the
Inspector's eye travel to some small bits lying on the side, "are what I
have to show as the result of my search on and about the western pedestal
for finger-prints. A gloved hand drew that bow. See here: this is an
impression I obtained from the inner edge of the pedestal in question."

He pulled forward a small square of paper; the sewing of a kid glove was
plainly indicated there.

When Stevens had gone, the Inspector exclaimed meaningly:

"Gryce! Name your man; we shall get on faster."

The aged detective rose.

"I dare not," he said. "Give me one--two days. I must have time to
think--to collect my evidence. A name once mentioned leaves an echo. When
my echo rings, it must carry no false sound. Remember, I did not sleep
last night. When I present this case to you as I see it, I must be at my
best. I am not at my best to-day."

This was doubtless true, but the Inspector had not discovered it.




XII

"SPARE NOBODY! I SAY, SPARE NOBODY!"


On his way home Mr. Gryce stopped at the Calderon to inquire how Mrs.
Taylor was doing, and what his prospects were for a limited interview
with her.

He was told that no such interview could be considered for days--that she
still lay in a stupor, with brief flashes of acute consciousness, during
which she would scream "No! no!"--that brain fever was feared and that
increased excitement might be fatal.

Another bar to progress! He had hoped to help her memory into supplying
him with a fact which would greatly simplify a task whose anomalies
secretly alarmed him. She had been in a fair state of mind before her
nerve was attacked by the event which robbed the little Angeline of life
and herself of reason, and if carefully approached, might possibly recall
some of the impressions made upon her previous to that moment. If, for
instance, she could describe even in a general way the appearance of any
person she may have seen advancing in the direction of the northern
gallery at the moment she herself turned to enter the southern one, what
a stability it would give to his theory, and what certainty to his future
procedure!

But he must wait for this, as he must wait for Angeline's story from
Madame Duclos. Meantime, a word with Sweetwater--after which, rest.

It was Mr. Gryce's custom, especially when engaged upon a case of marked
importance, to receive this, his recognized factotum, in his own home. No
prying ears, no watchful eyes, were to be feared there. He was the
absolute master of everything, even of Sweetwater, he sometimes thought.
For this young fellow loved him--had reason to; and when Sweetwater
played the violin, as he sometimes did after one of their long talks, the
aged detective came as near happiness as he ever did, now that his little
grandchild was married and had gone with her husband to the other side of
the world.

To-night he was not anticipating any such relaxation as this, yet to
Sweetwater, arriving later than he wished, he had never looked more in
need of it, as, sitting in his old and somewhat dingy library, he mused
over some little object he held in his half-closed palm, with an intent,
care-worn gaze which it distressed his young subordinate to see.
Uncertainty incites the young and fires them to action; but it wearies
the old and saps what little strength they have; and Sweetwater detected
uncertainty in his patron's troubled brow and prolonged stare at the
insignificant article absorbing his attention.

However, Gryce roused quickly at the young detective's cheery greeting,
and looking up with an answering welcome, plunged at once into business.

"So you have seen Turnbull! What did the man say?"

"That it was the left-hand upper corner of the tapestry he saw shaking,
and not the right-hand one as we had blindly supposed."

"Good! Then we can take it for granted that our new theory is well
founded. Certain things have come to light in your absence. That tapestry
was pulled aside not merely for the purpose of flinging in the bow, but
to let the flinger pass through the door at its back down to the
Curator's office and so out into the court."

"Whew! And who...."

"If this fact had been made known to me sooner, you would have had a
different day's work; not getting it until late this afternoon, we have
perhaps wasted some valuable hours. But we won't fret about that. Mrs.
Taylor being no better, we are likely to have all the time we want for
substantiating my idea. It cannot take long if we succeed either in
tracing the Duclos woman or in drawing the net I am quietly
manufacturing, so closely about--well, I've decided to call him X--that
it will hold against all opposition. I have hopes of finding the woman,
but great doubts as to the efficacy of the net I have mentioned; it will
have to be so wide and deep, and so absolutely without a single weak
strand."

Sweetwater sat astonished, and what was more, silent--he who had a word
for everything. Accustomed as he was to the varying moods of his
remarkable friend, he had never before been met with a reticence so
absolute. It made him think; but for once in his life did not make him
loquacious.

Mr. Gryce seemed to be gratified by this, though he made no remark to
that effect and continued to preserve his abstracted look and quiet
demeanor. So Sweetwater waited, and while waiting managed to steal a
glimpse at the small object to which his professional friend still paid
his undivided attention.

It looked like a narrow bit of dingy black cloth--just that and nothing
more--a thing as trivial as the band which clips a closed umbrella. Was
it such a band, and would he presently be asked to find the umbrella from
which it had fallen or been twisted away? No. Umbrellas are not carried
about museum buildings. Besides, this strip of cloth had no ring on the
end of it. Consequently it could not have served the purpose he had just
ascribed to it. It must have had some other use.

But when, after an impatient flinging aside of this nondescript article,
Mr. Gryce spoke, it was to say:

"I had a long talk with Correy to-day. It seems that he goes through both
galleries every morning before the museum opens. Though he will not swear
to it, he is of the opinion that the quiver holding the Apache arrows had
its full complement when he passed it that morning. He has a way of
running things over with his eye which has never yet failed to draw his
attention to anything defective or in the least out of order."

"I see, sir," acquiesced Sweetwater in an odd tone, Mr. Gryce's attitude
showing that he awaited some expression of interest on his part.

The elder detective either did not notice the curious note in the younger
one's voice, or noticing it, chose to ignore it, for with no change of
manner he proceeded to say:

"I wish you would exercise your wits, Sweetwater, on the following
troublesome question: if the arrow which slew this young girl was in one
gallery at ten o'clock, how did it get into the other at twelve? The
bow"--here he purposely hesitated--"might have been brought up the iron
staircase. But the arrow----"

His eyes were on Sweetwater (a direct glance was a rare thing with Mr.
Gryce), and he waited--waited patiently for the word which did not come;
then he remarked dryly:

"We are both dull; you are tired with your day's work and I with mine:
we will let difficult questions rest until our brains are clearer.
But"--here he reached for the strip of dingy cloth he had cast aside, and
tossing it over to Sweetwater, added with some suggestion of humor,--"if
you want a subject to dream upon to-night, there it is. If you have no
desire to dream, and want work for to-morrow, make an effort to discover
from whose clothing that fell and what was its use. It was picked up in
Room B on the second floor, the one where Mrs. Taylor was detained before
going downstairs."

"Ah, something tangible at last!"

"I don't know about that; I honestly don't know. But we cannot afford to
let anything go by us. Little things like that have not infrequently
opened up a fresh trail which otherwise might have been missed."

Sweetwater nodded, and laying the little strip along his palm, examined
it closely. It was made of silk, doubled, and stitched together except at
the ends. These were loose, but rough with bits of severed thread, as if
the thing had been hastily cut from some article of clothing to which it
had been attached by some half-dozen very clumsy stitches.

"I think I understand you, Mr. Gryce," observed Sweetwater, rising slowly
to his feet. "But a dream may help me out; we will see."

"I shall not leave here till ten to-morrow morning."

"Very good, sir. If you don't mind, I'll take this with me."

"Take it, by all means."

As Sweetwater turned to go, he was induced by the silence of his patron
to cast a backward glance. Mr. Gryce had risen to his feet and was
leaning toward him with an evident desire to speak.

"My boy," said he, "if your dreams lead you to undertake the search I
have mentioned, spare nobody; I say, spare _nobody_."

Then he sat down; and the memory which Sweetwater carried away with him
of the old detective at the moment he uttered this final injunction was
far from being a cheerful one.




XIII

"WRITE ME HIS NAME"


Refreshed by a good night's rest and quite ready to take up his task
again, Mr. Gryce sat at the same table in the early morning, awaiting the
expected message from Sweetwater. Meanwhile he studied, with a fuller
attention than he had been able to give it the evening before, the
memorandum which this young fellow had handed him of his day's work. A
portion of this may be interesting to the reader. Against the list of
people registered on his chart as present in the museum at the moment of
tragedy, he had inscribed such details concerning them as he could gather
in the short time allotted him.

       *       *       *       *       *

I--Ephraim Short. A sturdy New Englander visiting New York for the first
time. Has a big story to take back. Don't care much for broken marbles
and pictures so dingy you cannot tell what you are looking at; but the
sight of a lot of folks standing up like scarecrows in a field, here and
there all over a great building, because something had happened to
somebody, will make a story the children will listen to for years.

Address taken, and account of himself verified by telegraph.

II--Mrs. Lynch. Widow, with a small house in Jersey and money to support
it. No children. Interested in church work. Honest and of reliable
character. Only fault a physical one--extreme nervousness.

III--Mr. Carleton Roberts, director; active in his work, member of the
Union League and an aspirant for the high office of U. S. Senator. Lives
in bachelor apartment, 67 W. ---- Street. A universally respected man of
unquestioned integrity and decided importance. Close friend of Curator
Jewett.

IV--Eben Clarke, door-man. Been long in the employ of museum. Considered
entirely trustworthy. Home in decent quarter of West 80th Street. Wife
and nine children, mostly grown. Never been abroad. Has no foreign
correspondence.

V--Emma Sutton, an art enthusiast, gaining her living by copying old
masters. Is at museum six days in the week. It was behind her easel
Travis found a hiding-place in Room H.

VI--Mrs. Alice Lee, widowed sister of Edward Cronk Tailor, ---- Sixth
Ave. Lives with brother. Kindly in disposition, much liked and truthful
to a fault. No acquaintance abroad.

VII-VIII--John and Mary Draper, husband and wife, living in East Orange,
N. J. Decent, respectable folk with no foreign connections.

IX--Hetty Armstrong, young girl, none too bright but honest to the core.
Impossible to connect her with this affair.

X--Charles Simpson, resident of Minneapolis. In town on business, stopping
at Hotel St. Denis. Eager to return home, but willing to remain if
requested to do so. Hates foreigners; thinks the United States the
greatest country on earth.

XI--John Turnbull, college professor; one of the new type, alert,
observant and extremely precise. Not apt to make a misstatement.

XII--James Hunter, door-man, a little old for his work, but straight as
a string and methodical to a fault. No wife, no child. Bank account more
than sufficient for his small wants.

XIII--Miss Charlotte Hunsicker, one of last season's débutantes. Given to
tennis and all outdoor sports generally. Offhand but stanch. It was she
who gave a woman's care to Mrs. Taylor when the latter fainted in Room B.

XIV--Museum attendant coming up from basement.

XV--Eliza Blake a school-teacher, convalescing after a long illness.

XVI--Officer Rudd.

XVII--Tommy Evans, boy scout. Did not lose his game. Went to the field
after lunching on pie at a bakery.

XVIII--Mrs. Nathaniel Lord, wealthy widow, living at the St. Regis.

XIX--Mrs. Ermentrude Taylor. (Nothing to add to what is already known.)

XX--Henry Abbott, Columbia student, good-hearted and reliable, but living
in a world of his own to such an extent as to make him the butt of his
fellow students.

XXI-XXII--Young couple from Haverstraw. Just married. He a drug-clerk,
she a farmer's daughter. Both regarded in their home town as harmless.

XXIII--James Correy, attendant. Bachelor, living with widowed mother.
Fair record on the whole. Reprimanded once, not for negligence, but for
some foolish act unbecoming his position. Thorough acquaintance with the
museum and its exhibits. A valuable man, well liked, notwithstanding the
one lapse alluded to. At home and among his friends regarded as the best
fellow going. A little free, perhaps, when unduly excited, but not given
to drink and very fond of games. A member once of a club devoted to
contests with foils and target-shooting. Always champion. Visits a
certain young lady three times a week.

XXIV--Curator Jewett. A widower with two grandchildren--a daughter
married to an Englishman and living in Ringold, Hants, and a son, owner
of a large ranch in California. Lives, when in city, at Hotel Gorham.
Known too well for any description of himself or character to be
necessary here. If he has a fault, or rather a weakness, it is his
extreme pride in the museum and his own conduct of its many affairs.

As on the evening before, Mr. Gryce lingered longest over one name. He
was still brooding anxiously over it when the telephone rang at his
elbow and he was called up from Headquarters. Cablegrams had been
received from London and Paris in acknowledgment of those sent, and in
both these cablegrams promises were made of a full examination into the
antecedents of Madame Duclos and her companion, Miss Willetts.

That was all. No further news regarding them from any quarter. Mr. Gryce
hung up the receiver with a sigh.

"It is likely to be a long road full of unexpected turns and perilously
near the precipice's edge," he muttered in weary comment to himself.
"Nothing to start from but----"

Here Sweetwater walked in.

Mr. Gryce showed surprise. He had not expected to see the young man
himself. Perhaps he was not quite ready to, for he seemed to shrink, for
one brief instant, as from an unwelcome presence.

But the cheer which always entered with Sweetwater was contagious,
and the old detective smiled as the newcomer approached, saying
significantly:

"I had those dreams you spoke of last night, Mr. Gryce, and found them
too weighty for the telephone."

"I see, I see! Sit down, Sweetwater, and tell me how they ran. I haven't
as much confidence in my own dreams as I hope to have in yours. Speak
up! Mention names, if you want to. No echo follows confidences uttered in
this room."

"I know that; but for the present perhaps it will be best for me to
follow your lead, and when I have to speak of a certain person, say X as
you do. X, Mr. Gryce, is the man who for reasons we do not yet understand
brought up the discarded bow from the cellar and stored it somewhere
within reach on the floor above. X is also the man who for the same
unknown reason robbed the quiver hanging in the southern gallery of one
of its arrows and kept the same on hand or in hiding, till he could mate
it with the bow. My dreams showed me this picture:

"A man with a predominating interest in sport, but otherwise active in
business, correct in his dealings and respectable in private life, sees
and frequently handles weapons of ancient and modern make which rouse his
interest and awaken the longing, common to such men, to test his skill in
their use. Sometimes it is a sword, which he twirls vigorously in sly
corners. Again, it is a bow calling for a yeoman's strength to pull. He
is a man of sense and for a long time goes no further than the play I
have just indicated. Perhaps he has no temptation to go further until one
unfortunate day he comes upon an idle bow, rotting away in the cellar."

Here Mr. Gryce looked sharply up--a proof of awakened interest which
Sweetwater did not heed. Possibly he was not expected to. At all events
he continued rapidly:

"It was a fine, strong bow, a typical one from the plains. He took it
up--examined it closely--noted a slight defect in it somewhere--and put
it back. But he did not forget it. Before many days had passed, he goes
down cellar again and brings it up and stands it on end in--where do you
think, sir?--in the closet of the Curator's office!"

"How did you learn that?"

"From the woman who comes every day to wipe up the floors. I happened to
think she might have something worth while to tell us, so I hunted her
up----"

"Go on, boy. Another long mark in your favor."

"Thank you, sir. I'm relating a dream, you know. He stands it on end then
in this closet into which nobody is supposed to go but the Curator _and_
the scrubwoman, and there he leaves it, possibly as yet with no definite
intention. How long it stood there I cannot say. It was well hidden, it
seems, by something or other hanging over it. Nor am I altogether sure
that it might not be standing there yet if the impulse swaying X had not
been strengthened by seeing daily over his head a quiver full of arrows
admirably fitted for this bow. Time has no place in dreams, or I might be
able to state the day and the hour when he stood looking at the ring of
keys lying on the Curator's desk, and struck with what it might do for
him, singled out one of the keys which he placed in the keyhole of a door
opening upon a certain little iron staircase. He was alone, but he
stopped to listen before turning that key. I can see him, can't you? His
air is a guilty one; but it is the guilt of folly, not of premeditated
crime. He wants a try at that bow and recognizes his weakness and laughs.

"But his longing holds, and running up the little staircase to a second
door, he unlocks this also and after another moment of hesitation pulls
it open. He has brought the bow with him, but he does not take it past
the drapery hanging straight down before his eyes. He simply drops it in
the doorway and leaves it there within easy reach from the gallery if
ever his impulse should be strong enough to lead him to make an attempt
at striking a feather from the Indian headdress on the other side of the
court. You think him mad. So do I, but dreams are filled with that kind
of madness; and when I see him shut the door upon this bow, and steal
back without relocking it or the one below, I have no other excuse than
this to give in answer to your criticisms."

"I do not criticise; I listen, Sweetwater."

"You will criticise now. As Bunyan says in his 'Pilgrim's Progress': 'I
dreamed again!' This time I saw the museum proper. It was filled with
visitors. The morning of May twenty-second was a busy one, I am told, and
a whole lot of people, singly and in groups, were continually passing up
and down the marble steps and along the two galleries. Partaking of the
feelings of the one whose odd impulses I am endeavoring to describe, I
was very uneasy and very restless until these crowds had thinned and most
of the guests vanished from the building. The hands of the clock were
stealing toward twelve--the hour of greatest quiet and fewest visitors.
As it reached the quarter mark, I saw what I was looking for, the man X
reaching for one of those arrows hanging in the southern gallery, and
slipping it inside his coat.--Did you speak, sir?"

No, Mr. Gryce had not spoken; and Sweetwater, after an interval of
uncertainty, went quietly on:

"As I saw both of his hands quite free the next minute, I judge that
something had been attached to the lining of that coat to hold the arrow
by its feathered head. But this is a deduction rather than a fact."

He stopped abruptly. An exclamation--one of Mr. Gryce's very own--had
left that gentleman's lips, and Sweetwater felt that he must pause if
only for an instant, to enjoy his small triumph. But the delay was short.

"Go on," said Mr. Gryce; and Sweetwater obeyed, but in lowered tones as
though the vision he was describing was actually before his eyes.

"Next, I see a sweep of tapestry, and an eager, peering figure passing
slowly across it. It is that of the love-lorn Travis watching his
inamorata tripping up the marble staircase and turning at its top in the
direction of the opposite gallery. His is a timid soul, and anxious as he
is to watch her, he is not at all anxious to be detected in the act of
doing so. So he slips behind the huge pedestal towering near him, thus
causing the whole gallery to appear empty to the eyes of X, now entering
it at the other end. This latter has come there with but one idea in his
head--to shoot an arrow across the court at the mark I have mentioned. It
may have been on a dare--sometimes I think it was; but shoot it he means
to, before a fresh crowd collects.

"He already has, as you will remember, the arrow hidden somewhere about
his person, and it is only a few steps to the edge of the tapestry behind
which he has secreted the bow. If he takes a look opposite, it is at the
moment when both Mrs. Taylor and Miss Willetts are screened from his view
by one of the partitions separating the various sections. For unless he
felt the way to be free for his arrow, he would never have proceeded to
slip behind his chosen pedestal, secure the bow, pause to string it, then
crouch for his aim in such apparent confidence. For after he has left the
open gallery and limited his outlook to what is visible beyond the
loophole through which he intends to shoot, he can see--as we know from
Mr. La Flèche--little more than the spot where the cap hangs and the one
narrow line between. Unhappily, it was across this line the young girl
leaped just as the arrow left the bow. Don't you see it, sir? I do; and I
see what follows, too."

"The escape of X?"

"Yes. Inadvertently, as you see, he has committed a horrible crime; he
can never recall it. Whatever his remorse or shame, nothing will ever
restore the victim of his folly to life, while he himself has many days
before him--days which would be ruined if his part in this tragedy were
known. Shall he confess to it, then, or shall he fly (the way is so
easy), and leave it to fate to play his game--fate, whose well-known
kindness to fools would surely favor him? It does not take long for such
thoughts to pass through a man's head, and before the dying cry of his
innocent victim had ceased to echo through those galleries, he is behind
the tapestry and on his way toward the court. Beyond that, my dream does
not go. How about yours, sir?"

"My dream was of a crime, not of an accident. No man could be such a fool
as you have made out this X of yours to be. Only an extraordinary purpose
or some imperious necessity could drive a man to shoot an arrow across an
open court where people were passing hither and yon, even if he didn't
see anyone in the gallery."

"By which you mean----"

"That he had already marked the approach of his victim and was ready with
his weapon."

"You are undoubtedly right, and I only wish to say this: that the purpose
in my relation was merely to show the method and manner of this shooting,
leaving _you_ to put on the emphasis of crime if you saw fit."

The gravity with which Mr. Gryce received this suggestion had the effect
of slightly embarrassing Sweetwater. Yet he presently ventured to add
after a moment of respectful waiting:

"Did you know that after I woke from my dream I had a moment's doubt as
to its accuracy on one point? The bow was undoubtedly flung behind the
curtain, but the man----"

He paused abruptly. A morsel of clean white paper had just been pushed
across the table under his eyes, and a peremptory voice was saying:

"Write me his name. I will do the same for you."




XIV

A LOOP OF SILK


Sweetwater hesitated.

"I am very fond of the one of your own choosing," he smiled, "but if you
insist----"

Mr. Gryce was already writing.

In another moment the two slips were passed in exchange across the table.

Instantly, a simultaneous exclamation left the lips of both.

Each read a name he was in no wise prepared to see. They had been
following diverging lines instead of parallel ones; and it took some few
minutes for them to adjust themselves to this new condition.

Then Mr. Gryce spoke:

"What led you into loading up Correy with an act which to accept as true
would oblige us to deny every premise we have been at such pains to
establish?"

"Because--and I hope you will pardon me, Mr. Gryce, since our conclusions
are so different--I found it easier to attribute this deed of folly--or
crime, if we can prove it such--to a man young in years than to one old
enough to know better."

"Very good; that is undoubtedly an excellent reason."

As this was said with an accent we will for want of a better word call
_dry_, Sweetwater, hardy as he was, flushed to his ears. But then any
prick from Mr. Gryce went very deep with him.

"Perhaps," he ventured, "you will give even less indulgence to what I
have to add in way of further excuse."

"I shall have to hear it first."

"Correy is a sport, an incorrigible one; it is his only weakness. He
bets like an Englishman--not for the money, for the sums he risks are
small, but for the love of it--the fun--the transient excitement It
might be"--here Sweetwater's words came slowly and with shamefaced
pauses--"that the shooting of that arrow--I believe I said something like
this before--was the result of a dare."

A halt took place in the quick tattoo which Mr. Gryce's fingers were
drumming out on the table-top. It was infinitesimal in length, but it
gave Sweetwater courage to add:

"Then, I hear that he wishes to marry a rich girl and shrinks from
proposing to her on account of his small salary."

"What has that got to do with it?"

"Nothing so far as I can see. I am only elaborating the meager report
lying there under your hand. But I recognize my folly. You ordered me
to dream, and I did so. Cannot we forget my unworthy vaporings and enter
upon the consideration of what may prove more profitable?"

Here he glanced down at the slip of paper he himself held--the slip which
Mr. Gryce had handed him with a single word written on it, and that word
a name.

"In a moment," was Mr. Gryce's answer. "First explain to me how, with the
facts all in mind, and your chart before your eyes, you reconciled
Correy's position on the side staircase two minutes after the shooting
with your theory of a quick escape to the court by means of the door back
of the tapestry? Haven't you hurried matters to get him so far in such a
short space of time?"

"Mr. Gryce, I have heard you say yourself that this question of time has
been, from the first, our greatest difficulty. Even with these three
means of escape in our minds, it is difficult to see how it was possible
for anyone to get from the gallery to the court in the minute or so
elapsing between the cry of the dying girl and the appearance at her side
of the man studying coins in the adjoining section."

"You are right. There was a delay somewhere, as we shall find later on.
But granting this delay, a man would have to move fast to go the full
length of the court from the Curator's room even in the time which this
small delay might afford him. But perhaps you cut this inextricable knot
by locating Correy somewhere else than where he placed himself at the
making of the chart."

"No, I cut it in another way. You remember my starting to tell you just
now how, in my dissatisfaction with a certain portion of my dream, I
refused to believe in the escape of my Mr. X by the way of the Curator's
office. The tapestry was lifted, the bow flung behind, but the man
stepped back instead of forward. An open flight along the gallery
commended itself more to him than the doubtful one previously arranged
for. If you will accept that for fact, which of course you will not, it
is easy to see how Correy might have been somewhere on that staircase
when the inspiration came to turn the appearance of flight into a show
of his own innocence, by a quick rush back into the further gallery
and a consequent loud-mouthed alarm. But I see that I am but getting
deeper and deeper in the quagmire of a bad theory badly stated. I am
forgetting----"

"Many things, Sweetwater. I will only mention a very simple one. The
man who shot the arrow wore gloves. You wouldn't attribute any such
extraordinary precaution as that to a fellow shooting an arrow across
the court on a dare?"

"You wouldn't expect it, sir. But in going about the museum that
afternoon, I came upon Correy's coat hanging on its peg. In one of its
pockets was a pair of kid gloves."

"You say the fellow is courting a rich girl," suggested Mr. Gryce. "Under
those circumstances some show of vanity is excusable. Certainly he would
not carry his folly so far as to put on gloves for the shooting match
with which you credit him, unless there was criminal intent back of his
folly--which, of course, would be as hard for you as for me to believe."

Sweetwater winced, but noting the kindly twinkle with which Mr. Gryce
softened the bitterness of this lesson, he brightened again and listened
with becoming patience as the old man went on to say:

"To discuss probabilities in connection with this other name seems futile
this morning. The ease with which one can twist the appearances of things
to fit a preconceived theory as exemplified by the effort you have just
made warns us to be chary of pushing one's idea too far without the
firmest of bases to support it. If you find a man's coat showing
somewhere on its lining evidences that there had once been sewed to it a
loop of the exact dimensions of the one I passed over to you last night,
I should consider it a much more telling clue to the personality of X
than a pair of gloves in the pocket of a man who in all probability
intends to finish up the day with a call on the girl he admires."

"I understand." Sweetwater was quite himself again. "But do you know that
this is no easy task you are giving me, Mr. Gryce. Where a man has but
two coats, or three at best, it might not be so hard, perhaps, to get at
them. But some men have a dozen, and if I don't mistake----"

"Sweetwater, I meant to give you a task of no little difficulty. It will
keep you out of mischief."




XV

NEWS FROM FRANCE


For the next three days the impatience of the public met with nothing
but disappointment. The police were reticent,--more reticent far than
usual,--and the papers, powerless to add to the facts already published,
had little but conjectures to offer.

The hunt for Madame Duclos continued, joined in now by the general
public. But for all the efforts made, aided by a careful search through
her entire baggage, there was as little known concerning her as on the
morning of her disappearance.

Nor did any better success follow the exhibition at the morgue of the
poor little victim's innocent body. The mystery covering the whole affair
seemed to be impenetrable, and the rush made on the museum upon its first
reopening to the public was such as to lead to its being closed again
till some limit could be put upon the attendance.

And thus matters stood when one morning the country was startled, and
the keenest interest again aroused in this remarkable case, by an
announcement received from France to the effect that the young lady so
unfortunately killed in one of the public buildings in New York City was,
from the description sent, not the ward of the woman Antoinette Duclos,
but her own child, Angeline Duclos. That the two were well known in St.
Pierre sur Loire, where they had lived for many years in the relationship
mentioned. At the convent where she was educated, she had been registered
under the name of Duclos--also at the hotel where she and her mother had
spent a few days before leaving for England. Though of pure French
descent, the father being a Breton, they could not furnish her
birth-certificate, as she had not been born in France. According to the
records to be seen at the convent, the father, Achille Duclos, was a
professor of languages, whom her mother had met in England and married in
France before going to the States. So far as known, their story was a
simple one, affording no reason, so far as could be learned, for any
change of name on the part of the young woman, in her visit to America.

This was supplemented by a word from Scotland Yard, England, received a
few hours after the other, to the effect that Madame Duclos and Miss
Willetts arrived at the Ritz from Dover, on the morning of May 16th, and
left the next morning for Southampton. They spent the evening at the
theater with friends who called for them in a public automobile. These
people had not been found, but they had been advertised for and might yet
show up. Nothing more could be learned of either of them.

Now here was an astonishing discovery! That two women known and
recognized as mother and daughter in France should pass for unrelated
companions on leaving that country to enter ours. What were we Americans
to think of this, especially in the light of the tragic event which so
soon terminated this companionship.

That the French records, imperfect as they were, were to be relied upon
as stating the truth as to the exact nature of the connection between
these two, there could be no doubt. But granting this, what fresh
complexities were thus brought into an affair already teeming with
incongruities--nay, absolute contradictions.

Madame Duclos' conduct, as shown toward her young charge, had seemed
sufficiently strange and inconsistent when looked upon as that of
governess or guardian. But for a mother, and a French mother at that, to
allow a young and inexperienced girl to go alone to a strange museum on
the very day of their arrival, and then, with or without knowledge of
what had happened to her there, to efface herself by flight without
promise of return, was inconceivable to anyone acquainted with the most
ordinary of French conventions.

Some sinister secret, despite the seeming harmlessness of their lives,
must hide behind such unnatural conduct! Was it one connected with or
entirely dissociated from the tragedy which had terminated the poor
child's existence? This was the great question. This was what gave new
zest to the search for the dark-skinned Frenchwoman, with her drooping
eyelid and hesitating walk, and led Sweetwater to whisper into Gryce's
ear, as they stepped out that same day from Headquarters:

"No more nonsense now. We must find that woman or her dead body before
the next twenty-four hours have elapsed. With our fingers on that end of
the string----"

"We will get hold of some family secret, but not of the immediate one
which especially concerns us. Madame Duclos sent her daughter unattended
to the museum, but she did not direct the shaft which killed her. That
was the work of our friend X. Let us then make sure that we fit the right
man to this algebraic symbol, and trust to her testimony to convict him."

By this time they had reached the taxi which was to convey Mr. Gryce
home. But though Sweetwater lent his arm to help the old man in, he did
it with such an air of hesitation that it caused the other to remark:

"You have not ended your argument. There is something more you want to
say. What is it? Speak up."

"No, no. I am quite satisfied, so far as the Duclos matter is concerned.
It is only--would you mind stepping aside for a moment till I tell you a
bit of gossip which has just come to my ears? Thank you, sir. Forbes is
all right" (Forbes was the chauffeur), "but confidences are sacred and
this thing was told me in confidence."

The humorous twist of his features as he said this quite transformed his
very plain countenance. Mr. Gryce, noting it, began to stare at the first
isolated object handy, which in this case happened to be the crooked end
of his umbrella--a sign, to those who knew him well, of awakened
interest.

"Well? Let's hear," he said.

"It doesn't sound like much; but it will probably be news to you, as it
certainly was to me. It's this, Mr. Gryce: A certain gentleman we know
has been contemplating matrimony; but since this accident happened at the
museum,--that is, within the last two days,--the engagement has been
broken off."

"So! But I thought he had not got so far as an engagement. You mean young
Correy----"

"No, Mr. Gryce, I do not. I mean--_the other_."

"The other! Well, that's worth listening to. Engaged, eh, and now all of
a sudden free again? At whose instance, Sweetwater, his or hers? Did you
hear?"

"Not exactly, but--it's quite a story, sir. I had it from his chauffeur
and will tell it to you later if you are in a hurry to go home."

"Home! Come back with me into Headquarters. I've got to sleep to-night."

Sweetwater laughed, and together they retraced their steps.

"You see, sir," the young detective began as they drew their chairs
together in an unoccupied corner, "you gave me a task the other day which
called for the help of a friend--one at court, I mean, a fellow who not
only knows the gentleman but has access to his person _and_ his wardrobe.
X does not keep a man-servant--men of his intellectual type seldom
do--but does own a limousine and consequently employs a chauffeur. To
meet and make this chauffeur mine took me just two days. I don't know how
I did it. I never know how I do it," he added with a sheepish smile as
Mr. Gryce gave utterance to his old-fashioned "Umph!" "I don't flatter
and I don't bring out my pocketbook or offer drinks or even cigars, but
I get 'em, as you know, and get 'em strong, perhaps because I don't make
any great effort.

"After an evening spent in the garage with this man, he was ready to
talk, and this is what slipped out, among a lot of nonsensical gossip.
Mr. X, the real Mr. X this time, has, besides his apartment in New
York, a place on Long Island. The latter has been recently bought and,
though fine enough, is being added to and refitted as no man at his age
would take the trouble of doing, if he hadn't a woman in mind. The
chauffeur--Holmes is his name--is no fool, and has seen for some time
that Mr. X, for all his goings to and fro and the many calls he is in the
habit of making on a certain young lady, did not expect him--that is,
Holmes--to notice anything beyond the limits of his work, or to recognize
in any way his employer's secret intentions. But fortunately for us, this
man Holmes is just one of those singularly meddlesome people whose
curiosity grows with every attempt at repression; and when, coincident
with that disastrous happening at the museum, all these loverlike
attentions ceased and no calls were made and no presents sent, and gloom
instead of cheer marked his employer's manner, he made up his mind to
sacrifice a portion of his dignity rather than endure the fret of a
mystery he did not understand. This meant not only keeping his eyes
open,--this he had always done,--but his ears as well.

"The young lady, whose name he never mentioned, lives not in the city but
in that same Long Island village where Mr. X's country-house is in the
process of renovation. If he, Holmes, should ever be so fortunate as to
be ordered to drive there again, he knew of a gravel walk running under
the balcony where the two often sat. He would make the acquaintance of
that gravel walk instead of sitting out the hour somewhere in the rear,
as he had hitherto been accustomed to do. What's the use of having ears
if you don't use them? Nobody would be any the worse, and his mind would
be at rest.

"And do you know, sir, that he did actually carry this cowardly
resolution through. There came a night--I think it was Tuesday--when the
order came, and they took the road to Belport. Not a word did his
employer utter the whole way. Solemn and still he sat, and when they
arrived he descended without a word, rang the bell and entered the house.
It was very warm, that night, Holmes said, and before long he heard the
glass doors open onto the balcony, and knew that his wished-for chance
had come. Leaving the limousine, he crept around to secure a place among
the bushes, and what he heard while there seemed to compensate him for
what he called his loss of dignity. The young girl was crying, and the
man was talking to her kindly enough but in a way to end whatever hopes
she may have had.

"Holmes heard him say: 'It cannot be, now. Circumstances have changed for
me lately, and much as I regret it I must ask you to be so good as to
forgive me for giving up our plans.' Then he offered her money,--an
annuity, I believe they call it,--but she cried out at that, saying it
was love she wanted, to be petted and cared for--money she could do
without. When he showed himself again in front, he was stiffer and more
solemn than ever, and said 'Home,' in a dreary way which made the
chauffeur feel decidedly uncomfortable.

"Of course Holmes is quite blind to what this all means, but you may
possibly see some connection between this sudden act of sacrifice on X's
part and the work of the arrow. At all events, I thought you ought to
know that Mr. X's closet holds a skeleton which he will doubtless take
every pains to keep securely locked from general view. Holmes says that
his last word to the disappointed girl was in the way of warning. No
mention of this break in their plans was to be made without his
sanction."

"Good work, Sweetwater! You have strengthened my hands wonderfully. Does
this fellow Holmes know you for a police-detective?"

"Indeed not, sir. That would be fatal to our friendship, I am sure. I
haven't even let him discover that what he was burning to tell had any
especial interest for me. I let him ramble on with just a word here and
there to show I wasn't bored. He hasn't an idea----"

"Very good. Now, what do you propose to do next?"

"To take up my residence in Belport."

"Why Belport?"

"Because X proposes to move there, bag and baggage, this very week."

"Before his house is done?"

"Yes. He hates the city. Wants to have an eye to the changes being made.
Perhaps he thinks a little work of this kind may distract him."

"And you?"

"Was a master carpenter once, you know."

"I see."

"And have a friend on the spot who promises to recommend me."

"Are workmen wanted there?"

"A good one, very much."

"I'm sure you'll fill the bill."

"I shall try to, sir."

"But for the risk you run of being recognized, I should bet on you,
Sweetwater."

"I know; people will not forget the unfortunate shape of my nose."

"You were up and down the museum for hours. He must know your face like a
book."

"It can't be helped, I shall keep out of sight as much as possible
whenever he is around. I am an expert workman in the line wanted. I
understand my trade, and he will see that I do and doubt his eyes rather
than stretch probabilities to the point of connecting me with the Force.
Besides, I get quite another expression when my hands get in touch with
the wood; and I can look a man in the eye, if I have to, without a quiver
of self-consciousness. His will drop before mine will."

"Your name as carpenter?"

"Jacob Shott. It's the name by which Holmes already knows me."

"Well, well, the game may be worth the candle. You can soon tell. I will
keep you posted."

The rest was business with which we need not concern ourselves.




BOOK III

STORM IN THE MOUNTAINS




XVI

FRIENDS


A shaded walk, with a glimpse of sea beyond, embowering trees, a stretch
of lawn on one side, and on the other the dormer windows of a fine old
house half hidden by scaffolding, from which there came now and then the
quick strokes of a workman's hammer.

It was half-past four, if the sharp little note of a cuckoo-clock,
snapping out one, told the time correctly.

Two men are pacing this leafy retreat, both of whom we have seen before,
but under circumstances so distracting that we took little note of their
appearance, fine as it undoubtedly was in either case. However, we are
more at leisure now, and will pause for an instant to give you some idea
of these two prominent men, with one of whom our story will henceforth
have very much to do.

One of them--the Curator of our famous museum--lacks comeliness of
figure, though at moments he can be very impressive. We can therefore
recognize him at a distance by means of a certain ungainliness of
stride sometimes seen in a man wholly given over to intellectual
pursuits. But when he turns and you get a glimpse of his face, you
experience at once the scope of mind and charm of spirit which make his
countenance a marked one in the metropolis. A little gray about the
temples, a tendency--growing upon him, alas!--to raise his hand to his
ear when called upon to listen, show that he has already passed the
meridian of life; but in his quick glance, and clear and rapid speech,
youth still lingers, making of him a companion delightful to many and
admirable to all.

The other--Carleton Roberts, his bosom friend, and the museum's chief
director--is of a different type, but no less striking to the eye. For
him, personality has done much toward raising him to his present status
among the leading men of New York. While not tall, he is tall enough
never to look short, owing to the trim elegance of his figure and the
quiet dignity of his carriage. He does not need to turn his face to
impress you with the idea that he is handsome; but when he does so, you
find that your expectations are more than met by the reality. For though
he may not have the strictly regular features we naturally associate with
one of his poise and matchless outline, there is enough of that quality,
and more than enough of that additional elusive something which is an
attraction in itself, to make for handsomeness in a marked degree. He,
like his friend, has passed his fortieth year, but nowhere save in his
abundant locks can one see any sign of approaching age. They are quite
white--cut close, but quite white, so white they attracted the notice of
his companion, who stole more than one look at them as he chatted on in
what had become almost a monologue, so little did Roberts join in the
conversation.

Finally the Curator paused, and stealing another look at that white head,
remarked anxiously:

"Have you not grown gray very suddenly? I don't remember your being
whiter than myself the day I dined with you just preceding the horrible
occurrence at the museum."

"I have been growing gray for a year," rejoined the other. "My father was
white at forty; I am just forty-three."

"It becomes you, and yet--Roberts, you have taken this matter too much
to heart. We were not to blame in any way, unless it was in having such
deadly weapons within reach. How could one suppose----"

"Yes, how could one suppose!" echoed the director. "And the mystery of
it! The police seem no nearer solving the problem now than on the night
they practised archery in the galleries. It does wear on me, possibly
because I live so much alone. I see----"

Here he stopped abruptly. They had been strolling in the direction of the
house, and at this moment were not many paces from it.

"See what?" urged the Curator with an accent one might almost call
tender--would have been called tender, if used in addressing a woman.

"See _her_, that dead girl!--constantly--at night when my eyes are
shut--in the daytime while I go about my affairs, here, there and
everywhere. The young, young face! so white, so still, so strangely and
so unaccountably familiar! Do you feel the same? Did she remind you of
anyone we know? I grow old trying to place her. I can say this to you;
but not to another soul could I speak of what has become to me a sort of
blind obsession. She was a stranger. I know of no Madame Duclos and am
sure that I never saw her young daughter before; and yet I have started
up in my bed more than once during these past few nights, confident that
in another moment memory would supply the clue which will rid my mind of
the eternal question as to where I have seen a face like hers before? But
memory fails to answer; and the struggle, momentarily interrupted, begins
again, to the destruction of my peace and comfort."

"Odd! but you must rid yourself of what unnerves you so completely. It
does no good and only adds to regrets which are poignant enough in
themselves."

"That is true; but--stop a minute. I see it now--her face, I mean. It
comes between me and the house there. Even your presence does not dispel
it. It is--no, it's gone again. Let us go back once more and take another
look at the sea. It is the one thing which draws me away from this
pursuing vision."

They resumed their stroll, this time away from the house and toward the
oval cut in the trees for a straight view out to the sea. Across this
oval a ship was now sailing which attracted the eyes of both; not till it
had passed, did the Curator say:

"You live too lonely a life. You should seek change--recreation--possibly
something more absorbing than either."

"You mean marriage?"

"Yes, Roberts, I do. Pardon me; I want to see your eye beam again with
contentment. The loss of your late companion has left you desolate, more
desolate than you have been willing to acknowledge. You cannot replace
her----"

"I am wedded to politics."

"An untrustworthy jade. When did politics ever make a man happy?"

"Happy!" They were turned toward the house again. When near, Roberts
capped his exclamation with the remark:

"You ask a great deal for me, more than you ask for yourself. You have
not married again."

"But my mistress is not a jade. I find joy in my work. I have not had
time to woo a woman as she should be wooed if she's to be a happy second
wife. I should have so much to explain to her. When I get looking over
prints, the dinner-bell might ring a dozen times without my hearing it. A
letter from an agent telling of some wonderful find in Mesopotamia would
make me forget whether my wife's hair were brown or black. I don't need
diversion, Roberts."

"Yet you enjoy a couple of hours in the country, a whiff of fresh
air----"

"And a chat with a friend. Yes, I do; but if the museum were open----"

Mr. Roberts smiled.

"I see that you are incorrigible." Then, with a gesture toward the house:
"Come and see my new veranda. Its outlook will surprise you."

As you have already surmised, he was the owner of this place; and the man
for whose better understanding Sweetwater had again taken up the plane
and the hammer.




XVII

THE CUCKOO-CLOCK


As they made their way through scattered timber and the litter of fresh
carpentry-work, the man who was busy there and who certainly had
outstayed his time took up his kit and disappeared around the corner of
the house. Neither noted him. The cuckoo-clock was chirping out its five
small notes from the cheerful interior, and the Curator was remarking
upon it.

"That's a merry sound both sweet and stimulating; and what is still
better, I can hear it without effort. I believe I should like to have
a clock of that kind."

"It goes where I go," muttered its strange owner with what seemed an
involuntary emphasis. Then as the Curator turned upon him in some
surprise, he added with studied indifference: "I brought it from
Switzerland when I was younger than I am now--a silly memento, but
I fancy it."

A commonplace explanation surely; why, then, did that same workman, who
had stopped short after rounding the corner to pick up something which he
as quickly threw down, turn a quick head and listen eagerly for what
might be said next. Nothing came of it, for the veranda door was near and
the two gentlemen had stepped in; but to one who knew Sweetwater, the
smile with which he resumed his work had an element in it which, if seen,
would have darkened still further the gloom in the troubled eye of the
speaker.

Switzerland! He had said Switzerland.

It was not long after this that the Curator and his host left for New
York.

The house was not quite ready for occupancy, but was in the process of
being made so by the woman who had done duty as housekeeper for Mr.
Roberts both before his marriage and since his wife's death. During the
fifteen years which had intervened, she had been simply the cook.

This woman, Huldah Weston by name, did not accompany them. She was in
Belport to stay, and as it behooves us to remain there for a while longer
ourselves, we will join her in the quiet rest she is taking on the
kitchen steps before shutting up the house for the night.

She is not alone. A young man is with her--one to whom she is giving
temporary board and lodging in exchange for the protection of his
presence and such slight help as he can afford her in the heavy task
of distributing and arranging the furniture.

We know this man. It is the one we have just seen halting at the corner
of the house, on quitting his work on the new veranda--Sweetwater.

He is a genial soul; she, though very old for the responsibilities she
still insists upon carrying, enjoys a good laugh. Nor is she averse to
the numberless little kindly attentions with which he shows his respect
for her age if not a personal liking for herself. In short, they are
almost friends, and she trusts him as she has never trusted any young man
yet, save the boy she lost when she was still a comely widow.

Perhaps this is why, on this night when we find the two together, he
ventures to turn the talk upon the man she had so devotedly served during
the better part of her life.

He began with the cuckoo-clock. Where did it come from? How long had they
had it? What a jolly little customer the wee bird was, darting out and
darting in with his hurry-call to anyone who would listen! It made a
fellow feel ashamed to dawdle at his work. It wouldn't do to let any mere
bird get ahead of him--a wooden bird at that!

He got her talking. She had known Mr. Roberts' mother, and she had been
in the house (a young girl then) when he went away to Europe. He had not
wanted to go. He was in love, or thought he was, with a woman older than
himself. But the mother did not approve of the match, though the lady had
a mint of money and everything in her favor but those seven years. She
afterward became his wife and for all his mother's fears they lived
together very happily. Since her death which occurred about a year ago
he's been a different man; very sad and much given to sitting alone.
Anyone can see the effect it has had upon him if they look at him
closely.

"She was a good woman, then?"

"Very good."

"Well, life must be lonesome for a widower, especially if he has no
children. But perhaps he has some married or at school?"

"No, he has no children, and no relations, to speak of."

"And he brought that clock from Switzerland? Did he ever say from what
part of Switzerland?"

"If he did, I don't remember; I've no memory for foreign names."

This sent Sweetwater off on another tack. He knew such a good story,
which, having told, he seemed to have forgotten all about the clock, for
he said nothing more about it, and not much more about Mr. Roberts.

But when, a little later, he followed her into that gentleman's room for
the purpose of unlocking a trunk which had been delivered that day, he
took advantage of her momentary absence in search of the key to pull out
that cuckoo-clock from the wall where it hung and read the small slip of
paper pasted across its back. As he hoped, it gave both the name and
address of the merchant from whom it had been bought. But that was not
all. Running in diagonal lines across this label, he saw some faded
lines in fine handwriting, which proved to be a couplet signed with
five initials. The latter were not quite legible, but the couplet he
could read without the least difficulty. It was highly sentimental, and
might mean much and might mean nothing. If the handwriting should prove
to be Mr. Roberts', the probabilities were in favor of the former
supposition--or so he said to himself, as he swung the clock back into
place.

When Mrs. Weston returned, he was standing as patiently as possible in
the middle of the room, saying over and over to himself to insure
remembrance till he could jot the lines down in his notebook: _Bossberg,
Lucerne.... I love but thee--and thee will I love to eternity._

His interest in this slight and doubtful clue, however, sank into
insignificance when, having unlocked and unstrapped the trunk which Mrs.
Weston pointed out, he saw to his infinite satisfaction that it held Mr.
Roberts' clothing--the one thing in the world toward which at this exact
moment his curiosity mainly pointed. If only he might help her handle the
heavy coats which lay so temptingly on top! Should he propose to do so?
Looking at her firm chin and steady eye, he felt that he did not dare. To
rouse the faintest suspicion in this woman's intelligent mind would be
fatal to all further procedure, and so he stood indifferent, while she
lifted garment after garment and laid them carefully on the bed. He
counted five coats and as many vests--and was racking his brains for some
plausible excuse for a nearer inspection, when she stopped in the midst
of her work, with the cheery remark:

"That will do for to-night. To-morrow I will look them all over for moths
before hanging them away in the closet."

And he had to go, leaving them lying there within reach of his hand, when
one glance at the lining of a certain coat which had especially attracted
his eye might have given him the one clue he most needed.

The room which had been allotted to him in this house was in the rear and
at the top of a steep flight of stairs. As he sought it that night, he
cast a quick glance through the narrow passageway opening just beyond his
own door. Would it be possible for him to thread those devious ways and
reach Mr. Roberts' room without rousing Mrs. Weston, who in spite of her
years had the alertness of a watchdog with eye and ear ever open? To be
found strolling through quarters where he had no business would be worse
than being suspected of taking a personal interest in the owner's
garments. He was of an adventurous turn, and ever ready to risk something
on the turn of a die, but not too much. A false move might hazard all;
besides, he remembered the airing these clothes were to get and the
nearness of the clothes-yard to the pump he so frequently patronized,
and all the chances which this gave for an inspection which would carry
little danger to one of his ready wit.

So he gave up the midnight search he might have attempted under other
circumstances, and shut his room from the moon and his eyes to sleep, and
dreamed. Was it of the great museum, with its hidden mystery enshrouding
its many wonders of high art, or of a far-off time and a far-off scene,
where in the stress of some great emotion the trembling hand of Carleton
Roberts had written on the back of this foolish clock for which he still
retained so great a fancy the couplet which he himself had so faithfully
memorized:

          I love but thee,
  And thee will I love to eternity.

At eight o'clock on the following morning the quick strokes of the
workman's hammer reawakened the echoes at the end of the building where
the big enclosed veranda was going up.

As the clock struck nine Mrs. Weston could be seen hanging up her
master's coats and trousers on a long line stretched across the
clothes-yard. They remained there two hours, viewed from afar by
Sweetwater, but not approached till he saw the old woman disappear
from one of the gates with a basket on her arm. Then he developed thirst
and went rearward to the pump. While there, he took a look at the sea.
A brisk wind was springing up. It gave him an idea.

Making sure that his fellow workmen were all busy, he loosened one end of
the line holding the fluttering garments and then went back to his work.
As the wind increased, the strain on the line became too great, and soon
he had the satisfaction of seeing the whole thing fall in one wild flap
to the ground. With an exclamation calculated to draw the attention of
the men about him to what had happened, he rushed to the rescue, lifted
the line and rearranged the clothes. Then refastening--this time
securely--the end of the line which had slipped loose, he returned to his
post, with just one quick and disappointed look thrown back at the now
safe if wildly fluttering garments.

He had improved his opportunity to examine the inside of every coat and
had found nothing to reward his scrutiny. But it was not this which had
given him his chief annoyance. It was the fact that the one coat from
which he had expected the anticipated clue--the coat which Mr. Roberts
had certainly worn on that tragic day at the museum--was not there. A
summer overcoat had filled out the number, and his investigation was
incomplete.

Why was that one coat lacking? He was sure he had seen it the night
before lying on the bed with the others. Was it still there, or had it
been stowed away in drawer or closet, irrespective of its danger from
moths, for a reason he would give his eyeteeth to know but dared not
inquire into till he had clinched his friendship with this old woman so
thoroughly that he could ask her anything--which certainly was not the
case as yet.

The absence of the one coat he wanted most to see afflicted him sorely.
He told Mrs. Weston, on her return, how the line had fallen and how he
had replaced it, but for all his wits, he could not get any further. With
the close of the day's work and the reappearance of Mr. Roberts, he
slipped away to the village, to avoid an encounter of the results of
which he felt very doubtful. His dinner would not be ready till after Mr.
Roberts had been served, and the three hours which must necessarily
elapse before that happy moment looked very long and very unproductive to
him, especially as he had found no answer as yet to the question which so
grievously perplexed him.

He had paced the main street twice and had turned into a narrow lane
ending in the smallest of gardens and the most infinitesimal of houses,
when the door of this same house opened and a man came out whose
appearance held him speechless for a moment--then sent him forward with
a quickly beating heart. It was not the man himself that produced this
somewhat startling effect; it was his clothes. So far as his hat and
nether garments went, they were, if not tattered, not very far from it;
but the coat he wore was not only trim but made of the finest cloth and
without the smallest sign of wear. It was so conspicuously fine, and
looked so grotesquely out of place on the man wearing it, that he could
pass no one without rousing curiosity, and he probably had all he wanted
to do for the next few days in explaining how a fine gentleman's coat had
fallen to his lot.

But to Sweetwater its interest lay in something more important than the
amusing incongruity it offered to the eye. It looked exactly like the one
belonging to Mr. Roberts which had escaped his scrutiny in so remarkable
a way. Should it prove to be that same, how fortunate he was to have it
brought thus easily within his reach and under circumstances so natural
it was not necessary for him to think twice how best to take advantage of
them.

Father Dobbins--for that is the name by which this old codger was
known to the boys--was, as might be expected, very proud of his new
acquisition and quite blind to the contrast it offered to his fringed-out
trouser-legs. He had a smile on his face which broadened as he caught
Sweetwater's sympathetic glance.

"Fine day," he mumbled. "Are ye wantin' somethin' of me that ye're comin'
this way?"

"Perhaps and perhaps," answered Sweetwater, "--if that fine coat I see
you wearing is the one given you by Mrs. Weston up the road."

"'Deed, sir, and what's amiss? She gave it to me, yes. Came all the way
into the village to find me and give it to me. Too small for her master,
she said; and would I take it to oblige him. Does she want it back?"

"Oh, no--not she. She's not that kind. It's only that she has since
remembered that one of the pockets has a hole in it--an inside one, I
believe. She's afraid it might lose you a dime some day. Will you let me
see if she is right? If so, I was to take you to the tailor's and have it
fixed immediately. I am to pay for it."

The old man stared in slow comprehension; then with the deliberation
which evidently marked all his movements, he slowly put down his basket.

"I warrant ye it's all right," he said. "But look, an ye will. I don't
want to lose no dimes."

Sweetwater threw back one side of the coat, then the other, felt in the
pockets and smiled. But Gryce, and not ignorant Father Dobbins, should
have seen that smile. There was comedy in it, and there was the deepest
tragedy also; for the marks of stitches forcibly cut were to be seen
under one of the pockets--stitches which must have held something as
narrow as an umbrella-band and no longer than the little strip at which
Mr. Gryce had been looking one night in a melancholy little short of
prophetic.




XVIII

MRS. DAVIS' STRANGE LODGER


"If you will look carefully at this chart, and note where the various
persons then in the museum were standing at the moment Correy shouted his
alarm, you will see that of all upon whom suspicion can with any
probability be attached there is but one who could have fulfilled the
conditions of escape as just explained to you."

Stretching forth an impressive finger, Mr. Gryce pointed to a certain
number on the chart outspread between him and the Chief Inspector.

He looked--saw the number "3" and glanced anxiously down at the name it
prefigured.

"Roberts--the director! Impossible! Not to be considered for a moment.
I'm afraid you're getting old, Gryce." And he looked about to be sure
that the door was quite shut.

Mr. Gryce smiled, a little drearily perhaps, as he acknowledged this
self-evident fact.

"You are right, Chief: I am getting old--but not so old as to venture
upon so shocking an insinuation against a man of Mr. Roberts' repute and
seeming honor, if I had not some very substantial proofs to offer in its
support."

"No doubt, no doubt; but it won't do. I tell you, Gryce, it won't do.
There cannot be any such far-fetched and ridiculous explanation to the
crime you talk about. Why, he's next to being the Republican nominee for
Senator. An attack upon him, especially of this monstrous character,
would be looked upon as a clear case of political persecution. And such
it would be, and nothing less; and it would be all to no purpose, I am
sure. I hope you are alone in these conclusions--that you have not seen
fit to share your ideas on this subject with any of the boys?"

"Only with Sweetwater, who did some of the work for me."

"And Joyce? How about him?"

"He had the same opportunities as myself, but we have not reached the
point of mentioning names. I thought it best to consult with you first."

"Good! Then we'll drop it."

It was decisively said, but Gryce gave no signs of yielding.

"I'm afraid that's impossible," said he. Then with the dignity of long
experience, he added with quiet impressiveness:

"I have, as you know, faced crime these many years in all its aspects.
I have tracked the ignorant, almost imbecile, murderer of the slums, and
laid my hand in arrest on the shoulder of so-called gentlemen hiding
their criminal instincts under a show of culture and sometimes of wide
education. Human nature is not so very different in high and low; and
what may lead an irresponsible dago into unsheathing his knife against
his fellow may work a like effect upon his high-bred brother if
circumstances lend their aid to make discovery appear impossible.

"Mr. Roberts is the friend of many a good man who would swear to his
integrity with a clear conscience. I would have sworn to it myself, a
month ago, had I heard it questioned in the slightest manner; and I may
live to swear to it again, notwithstanding the doubts which have been
raised in my mind by certain strange discoveries which link him to this
unhappy affair by what we are pleased to call circumstantial evidence.
For, as I am obliged to acknowledge, the one great thing we rely upon, in
accusations of this kind, is so far lacking in his case: I mean, the
motive.

"I know of none--can, in fact, conceive of none--which would cause a
gentleman of even life and ambitious projects to turn a deadly weapon
upon an innocent child with whom he is not, so far as we can discover,
even acquainted. Dementia only can account for such a freak, and to
dementia we must ascribe this crime, if it is necessary for us to find
cause before proceeding to lay our evidence before the District Attorney.
All I propose to do at present is to show you my reasons for thinking
that the arrow which slew Angeline Willetts--or, as we have been assured
by unimpeachable authority, Angeline Duclos masquerading under the name
of Angeline Willetts--was set to bow and loosed across the court by the
gentleman we have just mentioned."

Here Mr. Gryce stopped for a look of encouragement from the severely
silent man he was endeavoring to impress. But he did not get it. With
a full sense of his years weighing upon him as never before, he sighed,
but continued with little change of tone:

"In the first day or two of keen surprise following an event of so many
complicated mysteries, I drew up in my own mind a list of questions which
I felt should be properly answered before I would consider it my duty to
submit to you a report to the disadvantage of any one suspect. This was
Question One:

"'Whose was the hand to bring up into the museum gallery the bow
recognized by Correy as the one which had been lying by for an indefinite
length of time in the cellar?'

"Not till yesterday did I get any really definite answer to this. Correy
would not talk; nor would the Curator; and I dared not press either of
them beyond a certain point, for equally with yourself, I felt it most
undesirable to allow anyone to suspect the nature of my theory or whom it
especially involved.

"The Curator had nothing to hide on this or any other point connected
with the tragedy. But it was different with Correy. He had some very
strong ideas about that visit to the cellar--only he would not
acknowledge them. So yesterday, after the satisfactory settlement of
another puzzling question, I made up my mind to trap him--which I did
after this manner. He has, as most men have, in fact, a great love for
the Curator. In discussing with him the mysterious fetching up of the bow
and its subsequent concealment in the Curator's office, I remarked, with
a smile I did not mean to have him take as real, that only the Curator
himself would do such a thing and then forget it; that it must have been
his shadow he saw; and I begged him, in a way half jocose, half earnest,
to say so and have done with it.

"It worked, sir. He flushed like a man who had been struck; then he grew
white with indignation and blurted forth that it was no more his shadow
than it was Mr. Roberts'--that indeed it was much more like Mr. Roberts'
than the Curator's. At which I simply remarked: 'You think so, Correy?'
To which he replied: 'I do not think anything. But I know that Curator
Jewett never brought up that bow from the cellar, or he would have said
so the minute he saw it. There's no better man in the world than he.'
'Nor than Mr. Roberts either,' I put in, and left him comforted if not
quite reassured.

"So much for Question One--

"Number Two is of a similar nature. 'Was the transference of the arrow
from one gallery to the other due to the same person who brought up the
bow?' Now, in answer to that, I have a curious thing to show you." And
lifting into view a bundle of goodly size, wrapped in heavy brown paper,
he opened it up and disclosed a gentleman's coat. Spreading this out
between them lining side out, and pointing out two marks an inch or so
apart showing the remains of stitches for which there seemed to have been
no practical use, he took from his own vest-pocket what looked like a bit
of narrow black tape. This he laid down on the upturned lining in the
space bounded by the two lines of marks I have mentioned, and drawing the
Chief's attention to it, observed in quiet explanation:

"The one fits the other--stitch for stitch. Look closely at them both, I
beg, and tell me if in your judgment it is not evident that this strap or
loop, or whatever we may call it, has been cut away from this coat to
which it had been previously sewed--and by no woman either."

Anyone could see that this had been so. There could be but one reply:

"This coat I bought from an old man to whom it had been given by Mr.
Roberts' housekeeper on their arrival at his new home on Long Island. The
strip was picked up at the museum in the room where Mrs. Taylor spent an
hour or so immediately upon leaving the scene of crime. With her at the
time was the young lady who had kindly offered to look after her and two
or three men directly associated with the museum, of whom Mr. Roberts was
one. These and these only. Now, this strap or let us say loop, since we
are beginning to see for what purpose it was used, was not on the floor
previous to the entrance of these few persons into this room--or, indeed,
for some little time afterward. Otherwise this young lady, who was the
one to open my eyes to this clue, surely would have seen it in the
half-hour she stood at Mrs. Taylor's side with no one to talk to and
quite free to look about her. But it _was_ there after that lady had
revived from her fainting-fit--dropped, as you see--cut from its owner's
coat and dropped! Chief, let me ask why this should have been done in a
time of such suspense if it had had nothing to do with the crime then
occupying everybody's attention--a good coat too, almost new, as you will
observe?"

The Chief, possibly with a shade less of irony in his manner, answered
this direct question with one equally direct:

"And what connection have you succeeded in establishing between this
abominable crime and the coat with or without a loop worn by the museum's
leading director? One as straight and indisputable, no doubt, as that you
have just attempted to make between this same gentleman and the museum
bow," he added with biting incredulity.

"Yes," returned the other in calm disregard of the sarcasm, "straighter
and more indisputable, if anything. We are asking, as you will remember,
how an arrow could have been carried from the southern to the northern
gallery without attracting anyone's attention. I will show you how."

With a rap on the table which brought Sweetwater into the room, he
proceeded to pin again into its old place on the lining of Mr. Roberts'
coat the so-called tag. Then, taking the arrow which Sweetwater proceeded
to hand him, he slipped it into the loop thus made and showed how
securely it could be held there by its feather end.

"A man of Mr. Roberts' upright carriage might, with his coat well
buttoned up, walk the length of Broadway without disclosing the presence
of this stick," remarked Mr. Gryce as, at his look, Sweetwater doffed his
own coat and put on the one thus discreetly weighted.

The Chief stared, paling slightly as he noted the result. Mr. Gryce,
who never overemphasised his effects, motioned Sweetwater to leave and
proceeded to the next question.

"Number Three," he now observed, "should have come first, as it has
already been answered. It asks if it is possible to hit the mark in
Section II of the museum's gallery, from behind the pedestal in Section
VIII. From the pedestal nearest the front, _no_; but from the one further
back--upon which, by the way, Stevens found the print of a gloved
finger--_yes_.

"Who wore gloves that day--kid gloves, mind you, for the mark of the
stitching is exact, as you can see in this print of the same made by
Stevens? All the ladies, except a young copyist who was leaving in a
hurry and had not stopped to put hers on. But of the men, only one--Mr.
Roberts, the careful dresser, who was never known to enter the street
without this last touch to his toilet. How do I know this? Look at the
chart, Chief--this one which shows the court and the persons in it at the
precise minute of first alarm. You see how near the exit Mr. Roberts was,
and who was closest to him. I had a little talk--the most guarded one
imaginable--with this lady, who was the very one of whom I have just said
that she had omitted to put on her gloves; and she gave me the fact I
have just passed on to you. She noted Mr. Roberts' hands, because they
shamed hers, and she was just stopping to pull her gloves from her
coat-pocket when Correy's voice rang out and everything else was
forgotten.

"Corroborative, only corroborative, sir? I am quite aware of that. But
what I have now to add may give it weight. The stringing of a bow is no
easy task for an amateur; nor is the discharge of an arrow, under such
dangerous circumstances as marked the delivery of the one we are
discussing, one which would be lightly attempted by a person altogether
ignorant of archery. However strong the evidence might be against a man
who was not an utter fool, I would never have presumed to lay it out
before you if I had not verified the fact that the director, whatever his
life now, was once greatly addicted to sports, and thoroughly acquainted
with the management of a bow and arrow. It has taken time. Many
cablegrams were necessary, but I have at last received this copy of a
report made sixteen years ago by a club in Lucerne, Switzerland, in
which mention is made of a prize given to one Carleton Roberts, an
American, for twelve piercings of the bull's-eye in as many shots, in
an archery-contest which included all nationalities.

"Nor is that all. In a study of himself,--his home, his life, his secret
interests,--we come upon things which call for closer inspection. For
instance, not a day has passed since that poor child has been in the
morgue that he has not been one on the line to see her. He dreams of her,
he says; he cannot get her face out of his mind--you notice that he has
been growing gray.

"But I will stop here. I do not wonder that you look upon all this as the
ravings of a man on the verge of senility. If I were in your place, I
should undoubtedly do the same. But ungracious as the task has proved, I
owed it to myself to rid my mind of its secret burden. It is for you to
say whether, all things considered, I am to drop the matter here or
proceed blindly in search of the motive lying back of every premeditated
crime. I can imagine none in this case, as I have frankly stated, save
the very weak and improbable one already advanced by young Sweetwater in
connection with another party upon whom he had fixed his eye--that of the
irresistible desire of an expert to test his skill with a bow which comes
unexpectedly into his hands."

"That wouldn't apply to Roberts--not in the least," affirmed the Chief
with the emphasis of strong conviction. "Even if we should allow
ourselves to regard these stray bits of circumstantial evidence as in any
way conclusive of the extraordinary theory you have advanced, he's much
too able and cautious a man to yield to any such fool temptation as that.
But to let that matter pass for the present: why have you paid such close
attention to one end of your string, and quite ignored the other? Madame
Duclos' hasty flight and continued absence, in face of circumstances
which would lead a natural mother to break through every obstacle put
in the way of her return, offers a field of inquiry more promising, it
appears to me, than the one upon which you have expended your best
energies. You say nothing of her."

"I have nothing to say. I am glad to leave that particular line of
investigation to you, and more than glad if it has proved or is likely to
prove fruitful. Have you heard----"

"Read that."

He tossed a letter within the detective's grasp and leaned back while
Gryce laboriously perused it.

It was illy written, but well worth the pains he gave to it--as witness:

  _To the Chief of Police:_

  Dear Sir:--I am told that there is a reward out for a certain woman by
  the name of Duclos. I do not know any such person, but there is a woman
  who has been lodging in my house for the last two weeks who has acted
  so strangely at odd times that I have become very suspicious of her,
  and think it right for you to know what she did here one night.

  It's about a fortnight since she came to my house in search of
  lodgings. Had she been young, I would not have opened my doors to her,
  decent as she was in her dress and ways; for she was a foreign woman
  and I don't like foreigners. But being middle-aged and ready with her
  money in advance, I not only allowed her to come in but gave her my
  very best room. This is not saying much, because the elevated road runs
  by my door, darkening my whole front, besides making an awful clatter.
  But she did not seem to mind this, and I took little notice of her,
  till one of the other lodgers--a woman with a busy tongue--began to ask
  why this strange woman, who was so very dark and plain, went out only
  at night? Did she sew or write for a living? If not, what did she do
  with herself all day?

  As the last was a question I could easily answer, I said that she spent
  most of her time in reading the newspapers; and this was true, because
  she always came in with her arms full of them. But there I stopped, as
  I never discuss my lodgers. Yet I must acknowledge that my curiosity
  had been roused by all this talk, and I began to watch the woman, who I
  soon saw was in what I would call a flustered state of mind, and as
  unhappy as anyone could be who hadn't suffered some great bereavement.
  But still I wasn't really alarmed, being misled by the name she gave,
  which was Clery.

  Night before last I went to bed early. I am a heavy sleeper, as I need
  to be with those cars pounding by the house every few minutes. But
  there are certain noises which wake me, and I found myself all of a
  sudden sitting up in bed and listening with all my ears. Everything
  was quiet, even on the elevated road; but when the next train came
  thundering along, I heard, piercing shrilly through the rumble and
  roar, that same sharp _ping_ which had wakened me. What was it? It
  seemed to come from somewhere in the house. But how could that be! I
  was startled enough, however, to get up and slip on some of my clothes
  and stand with ears astretch for the next train.

  It came and passed, and right in the middle of the noise it made I
  heard again that quick, sharp sound. This time I was sure it came from
  somewhere near, and opening my door, I slid out into the hall. All
  my lodgers were in but one, a young gentleman who has a night-key. And
  most of the rooms were dark, as I can very well tell from the fact that
  none of the doors fit as they ought to and there is sure to be a streak
  of light showing somewhere about them if the gas is burning inside.
  Everything looked so natural, and the house was so still, that I was
  going back again when another train swept by and that sound was
  repeated. This time I was sure it came from somewhere on the lower
  floor, and mindful of Mrs. Clery's queer ways, I stole downstairs to
  her door. She was up--that was plainly enough to be seen. But what was
  she doing? I was just a little frightened, or I would have knocked on
  the door and asked.

  As I was waiting for the passing by of the next train, my last lodger
  came in and caught me standing there before Mrs. Clery's door. I know
  him pretty well; so I put my finger to my lips and then beckoned him to
  join me. As the train approached, I seized him by the arm and pointed
  toward Mrs. Clery's door. He didn't know what I meant, of course, but
  he looked and listened, and when the train had gone by, I drew him down
  the hall and said, "You heard it!" and then asked him what it was. He
  answered that it was a pistol-shot, and he wanted to go back to see if
  any dreadful thing had happened. But I shook my head and told him it
  was one of five, each one taking place when the roar of the trains
  going by was at the loudest. Then he said that this woman was
  practising at a mark, and bade me look out or we should have a house
  full of anarchists. At that, I loudly declared she should go the first
  thing in the morning and so got rid of him. But I did not keep my word,
  and for this reason: When I went to do her room-work as I always do
  immediately after breakfast, I was all smiles and full of talk till I
  had taken a good look at the walls for the bullet-holes I expected to
  see there. But I didn't find any, and was puzzled enough you may be
  sure, for those bullets must have gone somewhere and I was quite
  certain that they had not been fired out of the window. I hardly
  dared to look at the ceiling, for she was watching me and kept me
  chatting and wondering till all of a sudden I noticed that one of the
  sofa-pillows was missing from its place. This set me thinking, and I
  was about to ask her what she had done with it when my attention was
  drawn away by seeing among the scraps in the wastebasket I had lifted
  to carry out the end and corner of what looked like a partly destroyed
  photograph.

  This was something too strange not to rouse any woman's curiosity, but
  I was careful not to give it another glance till I was well out of the
  room. Then, as you may believe, I drew it quickly out, to find that all
  the middle part was gone--shot to pieces by those tearing bullets. Not
  a particle of the face was to be seen, and only enough of the neck and
  shoulders to show that it had been the portrait of a man. I enclose it
  for you to see; and if you want to talk to the woman, she is still
  here, though I only keep her in the hope of her being that Madame
  Duclos for whom money is offered. I will tell you why I think this: Not
  because of a torn skirt,--you see I have been looking over the
  advertisement printed in the papers,--but because she is foreign and
  dark and has a decidedly drooping eyelid. Then too, she halts a little
  on one foot, as I noticed when I called her hurriedly to the window to
  see something. If you want to have a look at her, come after five and
  before seven; we are both in then.

  Yours respectfully,

  Caroline Davis.

"No doubt that's the woman," commented Gryce. "We are fortunate in
hitting her trail at this critical moment."

He had already glanced at the mutilated photograph lying before him, but
now he took it up.

"Very little here," he remarked as he examined first the face of it and
then the back. "But if you will let me take it, I may find that its place
is in our incompleted chain."

"Take it, and if you would like to have a talk with the woman
herself----"

"Yes, Chief; I would like that above all things."

"Very good. I'm expecting her here any minute, but--Well, what now?
What's up?"

An officer had entered hurriedly after one quick knock.

"Mrs. Davis' lodger is gone," said he. "Left without a word to anybody.
When they went to her room they found it empty, with a five-dollar bill
pinned to the riddled cushion. As nobody saw her go, we are as much at
sea as ever."

A smile, both curious and fine, crossed Mr. Gryce's lips as he listened
to this, and turning earnestly to the Chief, he begged for the job of
looking her up.

"I think with the little start we now have that I can find her," said he.
"At all events, I should like to try."

"And let the other matter rest quiescent meanwhile?"

"If it will."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I hardly know myself, Chief. All is hazy yet, but skies clear, and so do
most of our problems. If the two ends of my string should chance to come
together----"

But here a look from his Chief stopped him.

"Let us pray that they won't. But if they do, we shall not shirk our
duty, Gryce."




XIX

MR. GRYCE AND THE TIMID CHILD


"Assurance does it, sir--a great deal of assurance. Not that I have
much----"

Here Mr. Gryce laughed, with the result that Sweetwater laughed also. A
moment of fun was a welcome relief, and they both made the most of it.

"Not that I lack it entirely," Sweetwater hastened to say. Then they
laughed again--after which their talk proceeded on serious lines.

"Sweetwater, what is that you once told me about a family named Duclos?"

"Why, this, sir: There is one such family in town, as Peters discovered
in looking up the name in the directory a day or two after Madame's
disappearance. But there's nothing to be learned from them. Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Duclos are a most respectable couple and have but one answer to
every question. They know no one of their name outside their own family.
Though the man of the house is Breton born, he has lived many years in
this country, and in all that time has never met another Duclos."

"And Peters let it go at that?"

"Had to. What else could he do? However, he did make this admission--that
there was a child in the room who betrayed a nervousness under his
questions which was not observable in her elders, a girl of twelve or so
who put her hands behind her when she found she could not control their
twitching. And I've an idea that if he could have got this child by
herself, he might have heard something quite different from the plain
denial he got from the mother. I've always thought so; but I've had too
many other things to do to make an effort in this direction.

"Now, if you approve, I'll see what I can do with this girl, for it
stands to reason there must be some place in town where this woman, just
off ship, found an immediate refuge and a change of clothing and effects.
Nor should I be much surprised if we should discover that she is an
inmate of this very house. What do you think, Mr. Gryce? Is it worth
looking into?"

"It is worth my looking into. I have other work for you. Where does this
Duclos family live?"

Sweetwater told him. It was in one of the Eighties, not a quarter of a
mile from the Hotel Universal.

This settled, Mr. Gryce took from his pocket the mutilated photograph
which had served as a target to the woman in Fifty-third Street.

"You see this," said he. "The face is all gone; only a sweep of the hair
on one side, and a bit of collar and the tip of a shoulder on the other,
remain to act as a clue. Yet I expect you to find the negative from which
this photograph was printed. It should not be so difficult,--that is, if
in the course of time it has not been destroyed,--for look here." And
turning over what remained of the mutilated photograph he displayed the
following:

  Cor. 9th Street
  w York)

"New York! The portrait was made here and--at Fredericks'. His studio was
on the corner of Ninth Street up to a few years ago. It's a trail after
my own mind. If that negative is in existence, I'll find it, if I have to
ransack half the photograph-studios in town. About how old do you think
this picture is?"

"Old enough to give you trouble. But that you're used to. What we want to
know--what we must know--is this: The name of the man who has incurred
Madame's enmity to such a degree that she spends the small hours of the
night in knocking out his features from a fifteen-year-old photograph. If
it should prove to be that of a public man, rich or otherwise, we might
consistently lay it to social hatred; but if, on the contrary, it turns
out to be that of a private individual--well, in that case, I shall have
a task for you which may call for a little of that assurance of which we
have just acknowledged you possess a limited share."

That evening, just at dusk, a taxicab which had been wandering up and
down a well-kept block in Eighty-seventh Street stopped suddenly in front
of a certain drug-store to let an old man out. He seemed very feeble and
leaned heavily on his cane while crossing the sidewalk toward the store.
But his face was kindly, and his whole aspect that of one who takes the
ills of life without bitterness or complaint. When halfway to his
goal,--for twenty steps are a journey to one who has to balance himself
carefully with every one,--he slipped or stumbled, and his cane flew out
of his hand. Happily--because he seemed unable to reach it himself--a
young girl just emerging from the drug-store saw his plight and stooping
for the stick, handed it to him. He received it with a smile, and while
it was yet in both of their hands, said in the most matter-of-fact way in
the world:

"Thank you, little Miss Duclos." Then suddenly: "Where's your aunt?"

She did not stop to think. She did not stop to ask herself what this
question meant or whether this old gentleman who seemed to know so much
about her and the family's secrets had a right to ask it, but blurted out
in nervous haste as if she knew of nothing else to do, "She's gone," and
then started to run away.

"Come back, little one." His tone was very imperative, but for all that
of a nature to win upon a frightened child. "I know she's gone," he added
soothingly as she looked back, hesitating. "And I'm sorry, for I have
something for her. I recognized you the moment you stepped out of the
store; but I see that you don't remember me. But why should you? Little
girls don't remember old men."

Again that benevolent smile as he poked about in one of his pockets and
finally drew out a little parcel which he held out toward her.

"This belongs to your aunt. See, it has her name on it, Madame Antoinette
Duclos. It came to the lodging-house in Fifty-third Street just after she
left, and I was asked to bring it to her. I was going to your house as
soon as I had done my little errand at this store, but now that I have
met you, I will ask you to see that she gets it."

The girl looked down at the parcel, then up at him, and reaching out her
hand, took it.

His old heart, which had almost stopped, beat again naturally and with
renewed strength. He was on the correct trail. When Mrs. Duclos and the
rest of them had said that they knew of no one of their name in this
country but themselves, it was because the Madame of the Hotel Universal
was of their family--the widow of their brother, as this child's
acknowledgment showed.

He was turning back to his taxi when the child, still trembling very
much, took a step toward him and said:

"I don't know where to find my aunt. She didn't tell us where she was
going; and--and I had rather not take this parcel back with me. Mother
don't like us to speak of Aunt Nettie; and--and I don't believe Aunt
Nettie would care to have this now. Won't--won't you forget about it,
sir, if I promise to tell her some day that it was brought back and I
wouldn't take it?"

Mr. Gryce felt a qualm of conscience. The child really was too simple to
be made game of. Besides, he felt sure that she had spoken the truth, so
far as she herself was concerned. She didn't know where her erratic aunt
had gone; and any further questioning would only frighten her without
winning him the knowledge he sought. He therefore took the parcel back,
said some soothing words and made his way across the walk to his taxi.
But the number he gave the chauffeur was that of the house where this
little girl lived.

He arrived there first. To him, waiting in the parlor and very near the
window, her shrinking little figure looked pathetic enough, as glancing
in at the taxi, and finding it empty, she realized who might be awaiting
her under her mother's eye. He remembered his grandchild, and made up his
mind, as she slid nervously in, that no matter what happened he would
keep this innocent child out of trouble.

The lady who presently came in to receive him was one who called him
instinctively to his feet in respect and admiration. She was an American
and of the best type, a woman who, if she told a lie, would not tell it
for her own comfort or gain, but to help some one else to whom she owed
fealty or love. But would she lie for anyone? As he studied her longer,
taking in, in his own way, the candid expression of her eye and the sweet
but firm set of her lips, he began to think she would not, and the
interest with which he proceeded to address her was as much due to
herself as to the knowledge he hoped to gain from her.

"Mrs. Duclos?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. And you?"

"I am a member of the New York police. My errand is one which you can
probably guess. You have a sister-in-law, the widow of your husband's
brother. As her testimony is of the utmost importance in the inquiry
which is to be made into the cause and manner of her daughter's death, I
should be very glad to have a few minutes' talk with her if, as we have
every reason to believe, she is in this house at the present moment."

Mrs. Edward Duclos was a strong and upright woman, but this direct
address, this open attack, was too much for her. However, before
replying, she had a question of her own to put, and she proceeded to ask
it firmly, quietly and apparently with every expectation of its being
answered:

"How did you learn that Mr. Duclos had a brother and that this brother
had left a widow?"

"Not from you, madam," he smiled. "Nor from your husband. I very much
wish we had. We have been waiting for some such word ever since our
advertisement appeared. It has not come."

She gave him a quick interrogating glance, folded her hands and answered
without further hesitation:

"We had our reasons for silence, reasons which we thought quite
justifiable. But they don't hold good if we are to be brought into
conflict with the police. Mr. Duclos told me this morning that if we were
driven to speak we must do so with complete honesty and without quibble.
What do you want to know?"

"Everything. First, your sister-in-law's story, then her reasons for
sending her child alone to the museum, as well as the cause of her flight
before she could have heard of that poor child's fate. More hangs upon an
understanding of these facts than I am at liberty to tell you. She
herself would agree with me in this if I could have a few minutes'
conversation with her."

"She is not in the house. She left us late last night without giving us
the least hint as to where she was going. She is, as you can very well
see, as little anxious to talk of her great trouble as you are to have
her, and recognizing that attempts were being made to find her and make
her speak, she fled before it was too late. I am sorry she did so, sorry
for her and sorry for ourselves. We do not approve her course, whatever
reasons she may have for it. At the same time, I feel bound to assure
you that to her they are all-sufficient. She is a conscientious woman,
with many fine qualities, and when she says as she did to us, 'It is my
duty to flee,' and again as she bade us a final adieu, 'I will die rather
than speak a word of what is on my mind,' I know that it is no small
matter which sends her wandering about like this."

"I should think not. A mother to leave her daughter to be exposed at the
morgue, and never intervene to protect her from this ignominy or to see
that she has proper burial after that dread display is over!"

"I know--it was dreadful--and we! Do you not think we felt the horror of
this also?"

"Your own flesh and blood--that is, your husband's. I wonder you could
stand it."

"We had promised. She made us promise the first day she came that we
would keep still and make no move, whatever happened."

"It was here she came then, directly from the hotel?"

"I am obliged to admit it."

"With her torn dress and her little bag?"

"Yes."

"And you procured her different clothes and the suit-case in which she
now lugs about her effects?"

"You seem to know it all."

"Mrs. Duclos, I hope you will answer my next question as honestly as you
have the previous ones. Had Madame Duclos heard of her daughter's death
when she first presented herself to you?"

"Since you ask me this, I must answer. She was in great distress, but did
not tell me why, till I asked her where Angeline was. Then she broke down
utterly and flinging herself face down on the sofa, sobbed and wailed and
finally confided to us that a terrible accident had happened to the child
and that she was lying dead in one of the city's great museums."

"Did she say what accident?"

"No; she was almost delirious with grief, and we couldn't question her.
After the papers came and we had read the dreadful news, we tried to get
from her some explanation of what it all meant, but now she wouldn't
answer; before, she couldn't."

"Did you ask her how she came to know that Angeline was dead, before the
news was circulated outside the museum?"

"Yes; but she did not answer, only looked at us. It was the most
despairing look I ever saw in my life. It made it easier for us to
promise her all she wanted, though we regretted having done this when
we came to think the matter over."

"So you positively do not know any more than this of what she has so
religiously held secret?"

"No; and I have got to the point where I do not wish to."

"Did you know she was coming to this country?"

"Yes--but not her reasons for doing so. She has been a little mysterious
of late."

"Did she say she was going to bring her daughter with her?"

"Yes, she mentioned Angeline. Also the name of the ship on which they
expected to sail."

"Was this letter mailed from Paris or London?"

"It came from Paris."

"Did you understand that she was leaving France for good?"

"I got that idea, certainly."

"But not her reasons for it?"

"No. The letter was very short and not very explicit. I really have given
you all the information I have on this subject."

"Mrs. Duclos, it is my duty to inform you that your sister-in-law had a
deep and intense hatred for a man to us at present unknown. Can you name
him? Is there anything in her early history or in what you know of her
later life, here and abroad, to enlighten you as to his identity?"

With a steady look and a slow shake of her head, Mrs. Duclos denied any
such knowledge, even showing a marked surprise at what was evidently a
new development to her.

"Antoinette has had little to do with the men since our brother's death,"
she said. "I can hardly conceive of her being greatly interested either
in favor of or against any of the opposite sex."

"Yet she is--even to the point of wishing him dead."

Mrs. Duclos rose quickly to her feet, but instantly sat again.

"How do you know?" she asked.

Should he tell her? At first he thought not; then he reconsidered his
decision and spoke out plainly.

"Madam," said he, "some day you will hear what I had rather you heard now
and from me. Madame Duclos left the lodging-house where she was so safe
because she was detected, or was suspicious of having been detected,
shooting the face from a photograph she had set up before her as a target
in the small hours of the night."

"Impossible!" The woman thus exclaiming was quite sincere. "I cannot
imagine Antoinette doing that."

"Yet she did. We have the remains of the photograph."

"And who was the man?"

"When we know that, we shall know all, or be in the way of knowing all."

"You alarm me!" She certainly looked alarmed.

"Why, madam? Do you not think it better for the truth to be known in such
a case?"

"You forget what I told you. Antoinette will not survive the betrayal of
her secret. She said she would not, and she is a woman who weighs her
words. There is a firm edge to her resolves. It has always worked for
good till now. I cannot bear to think of its working in any way for
evil."

"Has she socialistic ideas? Can her hatred be for some of our plutocrats
or supposed oppressors of the people?"

"Oh, no; she is of aristocratic descent and proud of her order. The
Duclos are bourgeois, but Antoinette is a De Montfort."

Mr. Gryce suppressed all token of his instinctive amazement. This fine
American woman was not without a sense of reflected glory given by this
fact. Her sister-in-law was a De Montfort! Expressing his thanks for her
candor, he rose to depart.

"For all that," said he, "she may be at heart a _révolutionnaire_." Then,
as he noticed the negation in her look, he added softly: "The least clue
as to her present refuge would make me greatly your debtor."

"I cannot give it; I do not know it."

And somehow he believed her as absolutely as even she could desire. If he
should yet be fortunate enough to find this elusive Madame, it would have
to be through some other agency than these relatives of hers by marriage.

As he passed out, he heard a frightened gasp from somewhere back in the
hall. Turning, he asked in the most natural manner whether there were
children in the house.

Mrs. Duclos answered with some dignity that she had three daughters.

"You are fortunate, madame," he remarked with his old-fashioned bow. "I
live alone. My last grandchild left me a year ago for a man many years
my junior."

This brought the little one into his view. She was smiling, and he went
away in a state of relief marred by but one regret:

He was as ignorant as ever where to look for the mother of Angeline.




XX

MR. GRYCE AND THE UNWARY WOMAN


Nevertheless Mr. Gryce was proud of the gain he had made in his talk with
Mrs. Duclos, and he smiled as he thought of his next interview with
Sweetwater. Assurance will often accomplish much, it is true, but it
sometimes needs age to make it effective. He could not imagine either
Mrs. Duclos or her daughter yielding to the blandishments of one even as
gifted in this special direction as Sweetwater. Authority was needed as
well--the authority of long experience and an ineradicable sympathy with
human nature.

Thus he gratified himself with a few complacent thoughts. But when he
stopped to think what a great haystack New York was, and how elusive was
the needle which had escaped them now these three times, his spirits sank
a trifle, and by the time he had ridden a half-block on his way back to
Headquarters, he was at that low ebb of disheartenment from which only
some happy inspiration can effectually lift one. He was glad to be able
to report that he had learned a few important facts in regard to Madame
Duclos, but he equally hated to admit that for all his haste in following
up the clue given him, he knew as little as ever of her present
whereabouts; and hated even worse to have to give the cue which would
lead to a surveillance, however secret, over a house which held a child
of so sensitive and tremulous a nature as that of the little friend who
had picked up his stick in front of the drug-store.

He was recalling to mind the pathetic spectacle presented by her agitated
little figure, when his eyes chanced to fall upon a small shop he was
then passing. It was devoted to ladies' furnishings, and as he took in
the contents of the window and such articles as could be seen on the
shelves beyond, a happy thought came to him.

Madame Duclos had left her hotel in a hurry, carrying but few of her
belongings with her. A lady of cultivated taste, she must have missed
many articles necessary to her comfort; and having money would naturally
buy them. Prevented by her fears from going downtown, or even from going
anywhere in the daytime, what was left for her to do but to patronize
some such small shop as this. Its nearness to her late refuge, as well as
its neat and attractive appearance, made this seem all the more likely.
A question or two would suffice to settle his mind on this point and
perhaps lead to results which might prove invaluable in his present
emergency.

Signaling to the chauffeur to stop, he got out in front of this little
shop, toward which he immediately proceeded, with an uncertainty of step
not altogether assumed. He did have some rheumatic twinges that day.

Entering, Mr. Gryce first cast a comprehensive glance at the shelves and
counters, to make sure that he would find here the line of dress-goods in
which he had decided to invest; then, approaching the middle-aged woman
who seemed to be in charge, he engaged her in a tedious display of the
goods, which led on to talk and finally to a casual remark from him,
quite in keeping with the anxiety he had been careful to show.

"I am buying this for a woman to whom you have probably sold many odd
little things within the past few days. Perhaps you knew her taste, and
can help me choose what will please her. She lives down the street and
buys always in the evening--a dark, genteel appearing Frenchwoman, with
a strange way of looking down even when other people would be likely to
look up. Do you remember her?"

Yes, she remembered her and recognized her perfectly from this
description. He saw this at once, but he kept right on talking as he
handled first one piece of goods and then another, seeming to hesitate
between the gray and the brown.

"She went out of town yesterday, and wanted this material sent after
her. Do you think you could do that for me, or shall I have to see to
expressing it myself? I'll do it if I must--only I've forgotten her exact
address." This he muttered self-reproachfully, "I've a shocking bad
memory, and it's growing worse every day. You don't happen to know where
she's gone to, do you?"

The innocence of this appeal from one of his years and benevolent aspect
did not appear to raise the woman's suspicion; yet she limited her reply
to this short statement:

"I'll send the goods, if you will make your choice." And it was not till
long after that he learned that Madame Duclos, being very anxious for her
mail and such newspapers as she wanted, had made arrangements with this
woman to forward them.

Disappointed, but still hoping for some acknowledgment that would give
him what he wanted, he continued to putter with the goods, when she broke
in with harsh decision:

"I think she would prefer the gray."

"Oh, do you?" said he, with just a hint of disapproval at the suggestion.
"I like brown best, myself; but let it be the gray. Ten yards," he
ordered. "She was particular to say that she wanted ten yards, and
that I was to be sure and purchase the dress at the shop adjoining the
drug-store. You see I have obeyed her," he added with a touch of senility
in his quiet chuckle which threw the busy woman off her guard.

"I fear," said she, "that the dress I sold her before will not prove very
becoming. But gray is always good. That's why I advised it."

"I see, I see," chattered away the old man, not without some slight
compunction. "But in my opinion she's too dark for such somber dresses.
I've told her so a score of times." Then as he watched the woman before
him rolling up the goods he proceeded to ask with fussy importunity what
she thought the express charges were likely to be, for he wanted to pay
the whole bill and be done with it.

She was caught--caught fairly this time, though I doubt if she ever knew
it.

"We don't often send up the river," said she. "But I should say that for
a package of this size and weight the charges would be about forty cents.
But that you can leave her to pay. She will be quite willing to do so, I
am sure."

"Of course, of course--I didn't think of that. She'll pay for it, of
course she'll pay for it." And he continued to fuss and chat, with that
curious mixture of native shrewdness and senile interest in little things
which he thought most likely to impress the woman attending him, and trap
her into giving him the complete address.

But she was too wary, or too much preoccupied with her own affairs, to
let the cat any farther out of the bag, and he had to be content with her
promise, that the package should be given to the expressman as early as
possible the next morning.

The feebleness he showed while leaving the shop was in marked contrast,
however, to the vigor with which he took down the telephone-receiver in
the booth of the neighboring drug-store. But she was not there to see;
nor anyone else who had the least interest in his movements. He could,
therefore, give all the emphasis he desired to the demand he made upon
Headquarters for a close watch to be set on the adjoining dry-goods shop,
for the purpose of intercepting and obtaining the address of a certain
package, on the point of being expressed from there to some place up the
river.

Then he went home; for by now he was fully as tired as his years
demanded.




XXI

PERPLEXED


"Elvira Brown."

"Elvira Brown? That the name on the package?"

"Yes."

"And the address?"

The name of a small town in the Catskills was given him.

"Thank you. Very good work." And Mr. Gryce hung up the receiver. Then he
stood thinking.

"Elvira Brown! A very fair alias--that is, the _Brown_ end. But what am I
to think of _Elvira_? And what am I to think of the _Brown_, now that I
remember that the woman who has chosen to hide her identity under another
name is a Frenchwoman. Something queer! Let me see if I can call up the
station-master at the place she's gone."

A long-distance connection proving practicable, he found himself after a
little while in communication with the man he wanted.

"I'm Gryce, of the New York police. A woman in whom we're greatly
interested has just entered your town under the name of Elvira Brown."

_"Elvira Brown!"_

Mr. Gryce was startled at the tone in which this was repeated, even
making due allowance for the medium through which it came.

"Yes. What's there strange about that?"

"Only this: That's the name of a woman who has lived in these mountains
for forty years, and who died here three days ago. To-day we're going
to bury her."

This _was_ a blow to the detective's expectations. What awful mistake had
he made? Or had it been made by the man detailed to steal the name from
the package--or by the woman in the shop, or by all these combined? He
could not stop to ask; but he caught at the first loose end which
presented itself.

"Well, it isn't she we're after, that's certain. The one we want is
middle-aged, and plain in looks and dress. If she came into your town, it
was yesterday or possibly the night before. You wouldn't be apt to notice
her, unless your attention was caught by her lameness. Do you remember
any such person?"

"No, and I don't think anyone like that passed through my station. We're
off the main road, and our travelers are few. I would have noticed the
arrival of a woman like that."

Mr. Gryce, with an exclamation of chagrin, hung up the receiver. He felt
completely balked.

But old as he was, he still had some of the tenacity of youth. He was not
willing to accept defeat without one more effort. Going downtown as
usual, he wandered again into the little dry-goods shop to see if the
package had been sent.

Yes, it had gone, but the expressman had had some trouble with a drunken
man who actually took the package out of his hands and didn't give it
back without a squabble. Strange how men can drink till they can't see,
and so early in the morning, at that!

Mr. Gryce's vigorous hunch dismissed summarily this expression of opinion
as altogether feminine. But he had something to say about the package
itself, which kept the good woman waiting, though a customer or two
demanded her attention.

"You'll think me a fussy old man," said he, "but I've worried about that
package all night. She needs a new dress so much, and I'm afraid you
didn't have the right address. I remember it now--it was--was----"

"Barford on the Hudson," she finished promptly. Evidently she begrudged
the time she was wasting on his imbecilities.

"That's it; that's it. 'Way up in the Catskills, isn't it?"

"I don't know. Those people are waiting, sir. I shall really----"

"One moment! I want to buy something more for her. But I'll send it
myself this time; I won't bother you again. Another dress, something
bright and prettier than anything she has. She'll forgive me. She'll be
glad to have it."

"I don't know, sir." The woman was really very much embarrassed. She was
honest to the core, and though she enjoyed seeing her goods disappear
from the shelves, it wasn't in her heart to take advantage of a man so
old as this. "I'm afraid she wouldn't be pleased. You see, it isn't a
fortnight since she bought and made up the one I sold her first, and she
thought that a great extravagance. Now with the gray----"

"Are you speaking of the blue one?"

"No, it wasn't blue."

"What color was it? Haven't you a bit left to show me? I should know
better what to do, then."

She pointed to a bolt of striped wool--a little gaudy for a woman whose
taste they had both been speaking of as inclined to the plain and somber.

"That? But that's bright enough. I've never seen her in that."

"She didn't like it. But something made her take it. She wore it when she
came in last."

"She did! Then I'm satisfied. Thankee all the same. Just give me a pair
of gloves for her, and I'll be getting on."

She picked out a pair for him, and he trotted away, mumbling cheerily to
himself as he passed between the counters. But once in his taxi again,
he concentrated all his thought on that bolt of striped dress-goods. The
colors were crimson and black, with a dot here and there of some lighter
shade! He took pains to fix it in his mind, for this was undoubtedly the
dress she fled in--an important clue to him, if this hunt should resolve
itself into a chase with doubling and redoubling of the escaping quarry.

He spent the next two hours in acquainting himself with the location and
some of the conditions of the town he now meant to visit. Though he could
not understand Madame Duclos' reason for taking the name of a woman so
well known as this Elvira Brown, there was something in this circumstance
and the fact that the person so styled had been at that moment at the
point of death, which called, as he felt, for personal investigation. He
hardly felt fit for any such purely speculative expedition as this;
especially as he must do without the companionship, to say nothing of the
assistance, of Sweetwater, whom he hardly felt justified in withdrawing
from the task he had given him. So he picked out a fellow named Perry;
and together they took the West Shore into Greene County, where they
stopped at a station from which a branch road ran to the small town
whither the package addressed to Elvira Brown had preceded them.

Accidents frequently determine our course, as well as turn us from the
one we had mapped out for ourselves. By accident I mean, in this case, an
actual one which had occurred on the branch road I have mentioned, by
which the trains were held up and further progress in that direction made
impossible. When this came to the knowledge of Mr. Gryce, he found it
necessary to choose between trusting himself to an automobile for the
rest of the journey, or of remaining all night in the town where the
train had stopped. A glance at the hills towering up between him and his
goal decided him to wait for the running of the trains next day; and
after an inquiry or two, he left the station on foot for the hotel to
which he had been recommended.

A philosopher, in many regards, Mr. Gryce quieted himself, under the
irritation of this annoyance, with the thought that in this world we do
not always know just what is best for us; and that the few hours of rest
thus forced upon him by the seemingly unfortunate break in his plans
might prove in the end to be the best thing that could happen to him. He
accordingly took a good room, enjoyed a good dinner and then sat down in
the lobby to have an equally good smoke. He chose a chair which gave him
a prospect of the river, and for a long time, while vaguely listening to
the talk about him, he feasted his eyes on the view and allowed some of
its calm to enter his perturbed spirit. But gradually, as he looked and
smoked, he found his attention caught, first by what a man was saying in
his rear, and secondly by something he saw intervening between himself
and the flow of shining river which had hitherto filled his eye.

The sentence which had roused him was one quite foreign to his thoughts
and seemingly of little importance to him or to anyone about. It was in
connection with a factory on the other side of the river, which was
running overtime, and had not help enough to fill its orders.

"It's women we want," he heard shouted out. "Young women, middle-aged
women, any sort of women who are anxious for steady work and good wages."

The emphasis with which this announcement was made perhaps gave it point;
at all events this one brief sentence sank into Mr. Gryce's ear just as
he began to notice a woman who sat with her back to him on the hotel
piazza.

He was not thinking of Madame Duclos at that moment; nor was there the
least thing about this woman to recall his secret quarry to mind. Yet
once his eyes had fallen on her, they remained there for several minutes.

Why?

Perhaps because she sat so unnaturally still. In all the time he stared
at her simple bonnet and decently clothed shoulders, the silhouette she
made against the silver band of the river did not change by an iota. He
had been agaze upon the landscape too, but he was sure that he had not
sat as still as this, and when, after an interval during which he had
turned to see what kind of man it was who had spoken so vigorously, he
wheeled back into place and glanced out again through his window, she was
there yet, hat, shoulders and all, immovable as an image and almost as
rigid.

Well, and what of it? There was surely nothing very remarkable in so
commonplace a fact; yet during the ensuing half-hour, during which he
gave, or tried to give, the greater part of his attention to the
political talk which followed the statements he had heard made in regard
to the needs of a certain factory, his eye would turn riverward from time
to time and always with a view to see if this woman had moved. And not
once did he detect the least change in her attitude.

"She will sit there all night," he muttered to himself; and after a while
his curiosity mounted to such a pitch that he got up and went out on the
piazza for one of his short strolls.




XXII

HE REMEMBERS


Just an ordinary woman, lost in a dream of some kind while awaiting her
departure on an out-going train!--or such was Detective Gryce's
conclusion as he hobbled slowly past her.

Why should he give her a moment's thought? Yet he did. He noticed her
dress and the way she held her hands, and the fact, not suspected before,
that she was not looking out at the landscape outspread before her eyes,
but down into her lap at her own hands clasped together in an unnaturally
tight grip. Then he straightway forgot her in the thought of that other
woman whose track he was following with such poor promise of success.
Madame Duclos' image was in his mind as plainly as if she sat before him
in place of this chance passenger. He knew the sort of hat she would wear
(or thought he did). He also knew the color of her dress. Had he not been
shown the piece of goods from which it had been taken? And had he not
understood her choice, bizarre as it was, and for this very reason, that
it was bizarre? Being a woman of subtle mind, she would reason that
since the police were seeking one of plain exterior and simple dress, a
gaudy frock would throw them off their guard and insure her immunity from
any close inspection. Therefore this striped material rather than the
plain black she so much preferred. Then her eyes! She would try to hide
the defect which particularized them, by the use of glasses or, at least,
by a very heavy veil. While her walk--well! she might successfully
conceal her halting step if she were not hurried. But he promised himself
that he would be very careful to see that any woman rousing his suspicion
should be given some reason for hurrying.

While thus musing, he had reached the farther end of the piazza. In
wheeling about to come back, the woman whose profile he now faced
attracted his eye again, in spite of himself, and he gave her another
idle thought. How absorbing was the subject upon which she was brooding,
and how deeply it affected her!

It struck him as he quietly repassed her that he had never seen a sadder
face. Then that impression passed from his mind, for he saw Perry coming
toward him with a pencil and telegram-blank in hand. He had decided to
let Sweetwater know where he could be reached that night, and Perry had
come for the message.

It must have been fully two hours later that Mr. Gryce, sitting down in
his former chair, looked up and found his view unobstructed to the river.
The woman had gone.

Just for the sake of saying something to Perry, who had drawn up beside
him, he remarked upon the fact, adding in explanation of his interest in
so small a matter:

"It's the thoughts and feelings of people which take hold of my curiosity
now. Human nature is a big book, a great book. I have only begun to
thumb it, and I'm an old man. Some people betray their emotions in one
way, some in another. Some are loudest when most troubled, and some are
so quiet one would think them dead. The woman I was watching there was
one of the quiet ones; her trouble was deep; that was apparent from her
outline--an outline which never varied."

"Yes, she's a queer duck. I saw her: I even did an errand for her--that
was before you sat down here."

"You did an errand for her?"

"Yes; she wanted a newspaper. Of course I was glad to get it for her, as
she said she was lame."

"Lame?"

"Yes; I suppose she spoke the truth. I didn't think of her being in any
special trouble, but I did think her an odd one. She seemed to be wearing
two dresses."

Mr. Gryce started and turned sharply toward him.

"What's that you say? What do you mean by that?"

"Why, this: when she stopped to get her money out of some hidden pocket,
she pulled up the skirt of her dress, and I saw another one under it.
Perhaps she thought that was the easiest way of carrying it. I noticed
that her suit-case was a small one."

"Describe that under-frock to me." Mr. Gryce's air and tone were
unaccountably earnest. "What was its color?"

"Why, reddish, I think. No, it had stripes in it and something like
spots. Do you suppose it was her petticoat?"

Mr. Gryce brought his hand down on his lame knee and did not seem to feel
it. "Find out where she's gone!" he cried. "No, I will do it myself."
And before the other could recover from his astonishment, he had started
for the piazza where he had just seen the proprietor of the hotel take
his seat.

"This comes from an old man's folly in thinking he could manage an affair
of this kind without help," he mumbled to himself as he went stumping
along. "Had I told Perry whom we were after and how he was to recognize
her, I should have spent my time talking with this woman instead of
staring at her. Two dresses! with the bright one under! Well, she's even
more subtle than I thought."

And by this time, having reached the man he sought, he put his question:

"Can you tell me anything about the woman who was sitting here? Who she
is and where she has gone?"

"The woman who was sitting here? Why, I should say she was a factory hand
and has gone to her work on the other side of the river."

"Her name? Do you know her name? I'm a detective from New York--one of
the regular police force. I'm in search of a woman not unlike the one
I saw here, though not, I am bound to state, a factory worker except on
compulsion."

"You are! A police detective, eh, and at your age! It must be a healthy
employment. But about this woman! I'm sorry, but I can't tell you
anything except that she came on the same train you did and wanted a boat
right away to take her across the river. You see, we've no ferry here,
and I told her so, and the only way she could get across was to wait for
Phil Jenkins, who was going over at five. She said she would wait, and
sat down here, refusing dinner, or even to enter the house. Perhaps she
wasn't hungry, and perhaps she didn't wish to register, eh?"

"Had her speech an accent? Did you take her for a foreign woman?"

"Yes, I did and I didn't. She spoke very well. She's not young, you
know?"

"I'm not looking for a young woman."

"Well, she's gone and you can't reach her to-night. There they are now,
see! about a quarter of the way across. That small boat just slipping
across the wake of the big one."

Mr. Gryce looked and saw that she was in the way of escape for to-night.

"When can I get over?" he asked.

"Not till Phil crosses again to-morrow noon."

"Meanwhile, she may go anywhere. I shall certainly lose her."

"Hardly. She's bound for the factory; you can just see the roof of
it above the trees a little to the right. She asked me all sorts of
questions about the work over there, and whether there were decent places
to live in within walking distance of the factory."

"Then she isn't lame? My woman is a trifle lame."

"So may this woman be, for all I know. I didn't see her on her feet, but
she carried no crutch--only a bag and an umbrella."

"A brown bag, neat like herself in appearance?"

"No. It was light in color and old. She herself was neat enough."

Mr. Gryce's brows came together. He was in a quandary. He felt convinced,
with a positiveness which surprised him, that in watching the withdrawal
of this small boat farther and farther toward the opposite shore, he was
watching the escape of Antoinette Duclos from his immediate interference.

Yet, circumstantial as were the proofs which had led him to this
conclusion, he felt that he would gladly welcome some further
corroboration of those proofs before risking the time and opportunity he
might lose in following the person of two skirts to her destination on
the other side of the Hudson. There were more reasons than one why he
could not afford to lose one unnecessary minute. An extra twinge or two
of rheumatism warned him that he was approaching the point of
disablement.

Moreover, of Mr. Gryce's secret fears there was one which loomed larger
than the others and held an impulsive, unconsidered movement in check.
He must have proof of her identity--which nevertheless he did not
question--before hazarding himself and the success of his undertaking
by a delay of so many additional hours. But what proof could he hope
to obtain under the circumstances in which he found himself placed?
Any appeal to Mrs. Edouard Duclos, by telephone or telegram, would
certainly fail of its purpose. Even if the neat black dress in which her
sister-in-law now traveled was one from her own wardrobe, he would find
it impossible to establish the fact in time to make his own decision. The
child--yes, he might worm that fact out of the child if he were where he
could reach her; but he was miles away; and besides, something within him
revolted from involving this child further in schemes honest enough from
his standpoint, but certainly not helpful to her. No, he would have to
trust his intuition, or--

He had thrown himself into a chair at the side of his host, but he rose
quickly as his musings reached this point. The proof he had been looking
for was his. In recalling the child to mind there had flashed upon his
inner vision an instantaneous picture of her appearance as she stooped to
pick up his stick in front of the drug-store. He saw again the bending
figure, the flushed cheeks and the flaxen locks surmounted by a little
hat. Ah! it was that little hat! The impression it had made upon him was
greater than he thought. He found that he remembered not only its
ribbons, but the bunches of curiously tinted flowers hanging down in
front. And these bunches, or some precisely like them, had been the
sole trimming of the hat he had been contemplating so long from the other
side of the window. The woman was Madame Duclos. These flowers had been
taken from the child's hat and pinned upon the aunt's; and it was their
familiar look which had given him, without any recognition of the reason,
his surety as to the latter's identity.

Calmed immensely by this assurance, he turned back to have another word
with the proprietor, now busily engaged with his newspaper.

"Will you be obliging enough to see that I'm given an opportunity for a
few words with this Phil Jenkins on his return?" he asked. "And if you
will be so good, respect my confidence till I am sure I have made no
mistake in thinking what I have of his passenger."

The proprietor nodded, and Mr. Gryce settled himself again inside to
watch for the rowboat's return.

What he learned that night from this man Jenkins calmed him still
further. The woman had acknowledged, on leaving him, that she was going
to seek work at the factory. "A little old for the job," the man
volunteered, "but spry. How she did clamber up that bank!"

It was enough; Mr. Gryce was satisfied, and engaged a seat in his small
boat for the following day.




XXIII

GIRLS, GIRLS! NOTHING BUT GIRLS!


The superintendent was puzzled and showed it. He listened to Mr. Gryce
with a shrug, saying that so many women had been taken on that day, that
he really couldn't remember whether any one of them answered to the given
description.

"There's the time-keeper's book. Look it over. All the names are there,"
he said.

Mr. Gryce did as he advised, but of course without finding there the name
of Antoinette Duclos or of anyone else of whom he had ever heard.

The next thing was for him to go through the factory itself and see if he
could pick her out from those already at work. This he was greatly averse
to doing; it would be too long and painful an effort for him, and he
could not trust Perry with any such piece of nice discrimination. How he
missed Sweetwater! How tempted he was to send for him! It was finally
decided that when the hour came for the departure of the whole dayshift,
he should take his stand where he could mark each employee as she
filed out.

A sorry attempt followed by as sorry a failure! He did not see one among
them who was over twenty-five years of age. But this did not mean the
end of all hope. There was the nightshift. Might she not be put on that?
A different man had charge at night. He would wait for this man's
appearance, present his cause to him and see what could be done.

Not much, he found, when the night superintendent finally entered the
office and he had the chance of introducing himself. Newer to authority
than the superintendent of the dayshift, he was also of a more active
temperament and much more self-assertive. He was not impressed by the
detective's years or even by his errand. It was a busy night, a very busy
night--new hands in every department. To take him through the building at
present was quite out of the question. Perhaps later it might be done;
but not now, not now.

With that the night superintendent bustled out. This was not very
encouraging, but Mr. Gryce did not despair. He had seen with what ease he
could look from the broad, rear window near which he stood, into the
rooms where rows upon rows of girls were already at work. Only a narrow
court divided him from these girls, and as the three stories of which the
factory was composed were all brilliantly lighted, he should have little
difficulty in picking out from among them the middle-aged woman who held
in her closed and mysterious hand the key to that formidable affair
threatening the honor of one of New York's most prominent men.

Before doing this, Mr. Gryce stopped to locate himself and recall if
possible the entire plan of the building. He was in what was called the
outer office. The inner one, used only by the president of the concern,
opened on his left. There was no one in the latter room at present, the
president seldom showing up at night. Another door led to the platform
outside, and a third one, located in the middle of the right-hand
partition, to a large vestibule or locker-room belonging exclusively to
the girls, which in its turn communicated with the work-rooms of the
factory running in unbroken continuity around a narrow central court.

He had been through this locker-room in the late afternoon. It was here
he had stood to watch the girls file out at the close of their day's
work. The exit for all employees was in one of the corners and out of
this Antoinette Duclos would have to pass when it came her turn to leave
the building--that is, if she were really in it, as he had every
reason to believe.

However, certainty on this point would relieve him from much of his
present impatience, and with this end in view he prepared to enter the
room again in the hope of spying among the various hats with which the
walls were hung the one with whose shape and trimming he was so well
acquainted.

But promising as this attempt looked, it was destined to immediate
failure. The room was not empty. He could hear girls whispering not a
dozen steps away, and anxious as he always was not to attract any
unnecessary attention to himself, he turned his back upon this door and
returned to the window from the broad view of which he anticipated so
much.

A brilliant scene awaited him. This building, built originally for other
purposes, had been hastily reconstructed for its present use in a manner
possibly open to criticism but which certainly gave those who worked in
it an abundance of light and air. The narrow columns supporting its three
stories were so inconspicuous at night when a blaze of electricity
dominated the whole, that it presented the appearance of being made
entirely of windows. One break and one only he observed in the double row
of lights encircling the courtyard. This was in a spot diagonally
opposite, where a space of several feet showed a dimness he failed to
understand. But as no workers appeared to be there, he passed the matter
over as one of no importance.

The task before him looked hopeless. In the first place there were the
three floors, with no faces visible above the first one. Then of the long
rectangle stretching out before him he could see but two sides, which
fact was further complicated by there being as many of the workers' faces
turned toward the outside of the building as toward the court. Yet having
determined upon his course, he was bound to see it through.

His position near the corner of the huge rectangle precluded his seeing
anyone working at his own end. He was obliged to pass them over. But of
those opposite, especially those directly so, he could take easy count.
They were all girls of fifteen or so, and could be passed over also
without more than a cursory glance. Further on he saw a row of older
women, and student as he was of human nature, there were faces among them
at which he was tempted to look twice, though once answered his purpose.
There was no Madame there.

Continuing his examination, he next encountered the space so
unaccountably darkened, and having skipped this, came upon a stretch of
benches displaying great activity. Only old hands seemed to be at work in
this section. Their method and despatch showed a training which made it
useless to look among them for one who had probably never worked before
amid the hum of machinery.

In the corner beyond he saw nobody, but when he came to look along the
end connecting the opposite rooms with those on his side, a different
scene awaited him. There every bench seemed occupied both back and front,
and mostly by newcomers, as was apparent from the anxious way the
superintendent moved about among them, explaining the work and directing
them with a zeal which not only attested his interest in the task but
showed how completely he had forgotten the man he had left behind him in
his office. Well, well, such is the way of the world! The old man saw
that he would have to depend upon himself, and realizing this, bent all
his energies to his present far-off inspection of these women, hoping
against hope that he would be able at least to tell the young from the
old.

Yes, he could do that, but the older women seemed to be in the majority;
and this perplexed him. It was all too distant for him to see clearly,
but he took heart of grace as he observed how the faces and figures he
was studying so closely were resolving themselves into mere silhouettes
under his gaze. For as I have already said, he had a quick eye for
outline, and felt sure that he could sufficiently recall that of the
woman whose head and shoulders had been so long under his eye that day,
to recognize it even among fifty others. But not one of them--not one of
them all--had the precise narrowness and rigidity of Madame Duclos'; and
after many painful minutes of renewed effort followed by renewed
disappointment he moved back from the window and sat down. There was one
thing you could always count on in Mr. Gryce, and that was his patience.

But it was a patience not without its breaks. Once he rose to look out
front to make sure he had not miscalculated the distance of this factory
from the river. Then after another period of waiting, he got thinking how
much he might discover if he could get one glimpse into that far corner
contiguous to that end of the rectangle where he had seen so many raw
workers receiving the assistance of the night superintendent. There was a
way of doing this of which he had not thought before. He had but to step
outside, walk the length of the platform where the loading of shipments
was going on, and look in at one of the great windows at the further end.
But when he came to make the attempt, he found himself plunged into such
a turmoil and the way so blocked by the loading of boxes and the backing
up and driving off of horses that he retreated precipitately. Rather than
encounter all this, he would await events from the inside. So he took his
old seat again and for another half-hour listened to the thump of
machinery and the squeak of a rusty elevator-brake which almost robbed
him of thought. He was even inclined to doze, when he suddenly became
aware of some change either in himself or in what lay about him.

Had the machinery stopped? No, it was not that.

The place seemed darker, yet it was still very light.

With a restless move, he rose heavily and peered again into the court.
Immediately it was evident what had occurred. The whole string of lights
in the third story had been shut off, and now those of the middle story
were following suit. Only the ground floor remained active with all its
lights at the maximum, and every belt moving.

At this unexpected narrowing down of his field of operations he felt
greatly relieved. He had dreaded those long walks through innumerable
rooms. He could manage circling the building once, but three times would
have been too much. In a mood of increased contentment, he started to
return to his seat, but found himself stayed by something he saw in what
had been but a dimly lighted space when he looked there last. It was now
as bright as the rest and showed him the figure of the superintendent
stooping over a woman, explaining to her some intricate manipulation of
the work in hand which was evidently quite new to her. He could see him
very plainly, but her figure was more or less hidden. Not for long
though. The superintendent passed on and she came into full view. It was
Antoinette Duclos. He was confident of this even before he noted her
dress. When his eyes fell on that, he was sure; there was no mistaking
the stripes and the dots. Antoinette Duclos! and she was where he could
reach her in five minutes--in fact as soon as the superintendent
returned. As he stood and watched her working quite assiduously but in
something like isolation, he felt as though ten years had slipped from
his age, and trifled with his pleasure as the rest of us do when we
behold a despaired-of goal loom suddenly in sight. Was she the woman he
had pictured in his mind's eye? Hardly. Yet there was an admirable
directness in her movements. From the way she went about things, he could
plainly see that she would master her duties in no time if Fate did not
interpose to prevent. It certainly was hard to interrupt her in her work
just when she was on the way to safety and competence. But there could be
no question of his duty, or of the claims of Mr. Roberts to whatever help
might accrue from an understanding of the relation of this woman to
events threatening his reputation with such utter destruction. Her story
might free him from all suspicion or it might actually determine his
guilt. Therefore her story must be had, and at once--if possible, this
very night.

But he must wait--wait for the coming of the superintendent. He felt safe
to do this. Meanwhile he was determined not to let this woman out of his
sight; so, drawing up a chair, he settled down within view of her active
figure, from which all rigidity had vanished in the interest she was
rapidly developing in her work. If he could have seen her countenance
more clearly, he would have been glad. There seemed to be a veil between
him and it, a hazy indistinctness which he found it difficult to
understand; but remembering that he was looking through two windows and
on a long diagonal, he accepted this slight drawback with equanimity and
was about to indulge in the comfort of a cigar when he saw the scene he
still held in view change, and change vividly, to the excitation of a
fresh interest and a still more careful watch.

A girl had approached Madame Duclos from some place quite out of sight,
and in passing her by, had slipped a note into her hand. The Frenchwoman
had taken it, but in a way indicating shock. The ease which had given
suppleness to her form and surety to all her movements was gone in an
instant, and from the furtive way in which she sought to read the
communication thus handed her Mr. Gryce saw that his own powers would
soon be taxed to keep him even with a situation changing thus from moment
to moment under his eye.

What did that note contain, and who could have taken advantage of the
arrival of some late-comer to slip it into her hand? Mr. Gryce found this
a very formidable question, and watched with ever-increasing anxiety to
see what effect these unknown words would have upon their recipient when
her opportunity came for reading them.

A startling one--of that he was presently a witness; for no sooner had
she taken in their import than she cast a hurried look about her and left
her place without fuss or flurry, but with an air of quiet determination
which Mr. Gryce felt confident covered a resolution which nothing could
balk.

She had not only left her bench but seemingly was in the act of leaving
the building. This, of course, it was for him to prevent, and he rose to
do so. It might be interesting to wait and watch her hurrying figure
threading its way to the locker-room through the double row of girls on
the opposite side of the court; but there were reasons why he wished to
reach that last mentioned room before she did; reasons which seemed good
enough to send him there without any further delay. If he could but
discover her hat among the many he had seen hanging on pegs in one of the
corners, how easy it would be for him to hold her back till he could make
her listen to the few words which must be said before he could allow her
to leave the building.

Quick of eye, if not of step, he had run in review the varying headgear
depending from those isolated pegs, before he had half-circled the
lockers. But hers he did not see. Could she have been given a locker on
this her first night? He did not think so; and approaching closer, he
looked again. The hat was there, but lying on the floor. Somebody had
knocked it down; perhaps the late-comer who had given her the letter.

Greatly gratified by the advantage he now indisputably held over her, he
picked up the hat and approached the door through which she must in
another minute emerge.

She did not come.

He waited and waited, and still she did not come. At last, driven by
impatience, he ventured to open the door he had previously hesitated to
touch and took a quick look in. Girls, girls! nothing but girls! No
Madame Duclos anywhere.

Something must have happened to interrupt her escape. Either she had been
caught in the attempt by the superintendent or by some one else of equal
authority. This, if bad for her, was also bad for him, as a quiet hold-up
in the manner he had planned was certainly better than the public one
which must now follow.

Sorry for her and sorry for himself, Mr. Gryce returned to the office
just as the superintendent entered from the opposite door. He thought the
latter looked a little queer, and in an instant he learned why.

"Was the woman you wanted a staid, elderly person, apparently a
foreigner?"

"Yes--of French birth, I am told."

"Well, I guess you were all right in distrusting her. She's gone--took a
notion that night work didn't agree with her and left without so much as
a 'By your leave!' She must have smelt you out in some uncanny way. Too
bad! She bade fair to be just the woman we wanted for a very nice part of
the work."

"Do you mean she's really out of the building--that you didn't stop
her----"

"I didn't know what she was up to, till she was gone. I----"

"But how did she get out? She didn't go by the employees' door for I
stood there on the watch. I had seen her receive a note----"

"A note? How? Who gave it to her?"

"Some girl."

"And you saw this? How could you? Been through the work-rooms?"

"No. I saw her from this window, as I was looking diagonally across the
court. She was in one of the opposite rooms over there----"

The superintendent broke into a hearty laugh.

"Fooled!" he cried. "You police detectives are a smart crowd, but our old
factory with its string of useless windows has led you astray for once.
You weren't looking into any one of the rooms over there. You were
looking at a reflection in that useless old window behind which the
elevator runs. That happens when the elevator running on that side is
down. I've seen it often and laughed in my sleeve at the chance it gives
me to observe on the sly how things are going on at certain benches. Many
a girl has got her discharge--But no matter about that. Come here.

"The room you think you see over there--you will notice that nobody is at
work in it now--is on this side of the building, and the woman you have
in chase escaped by the south delivery-door. We are loading cars to-night
from this side of the building, and she took a flying advantage of it.
Men give way to a woman. Though there's an order against any such use of
that door, you can't get one of them to hold onto a woman when she once
gets it into her head to skip the premises. But she can't have gone far.
This is a place of few houses and no big buildings besides the factory.
If you take pains to head her off at the station, you'll be safe for
to-night, and in the morning you can easily find her. Now I must go; but
first, what was her offense? Theft, eh?"

"No. This woman whom we have let slip through our fingers is Madame
Duclos, the mother of the girl shot in a New York museum. There is a big
reward out for her recovery and detention, and----"

The superintendent stood aghast.

"Why didn't you say so? Why didn't you say so at once? I'd have had the
whole troop file out before you. I'd have had----"

The detective caught at his hat.

"I wasn't aware that I had reached an age when I couldn't tell the
difference between a reflection and a reality," he growled, and hurried
out.

The town was a small one; and Perry would see that she didn't escape from
the station. Besides, she had fled without her hat. Surely, with all this
in his favor, he would soon be able to lay his hand upon her, if not
to-night, certainly before another day was at an end.




XXIV

FLIGHT


In leaving the building Mr. Gryce almost ran into the arms of Perry. In
his anxiety to be within call, the young detective had seated himself on
the steps outside and now stood ready for any emergency.

Mr. Gryce's spirits rose as he saw him there. The great door leading to
the elevator opened not twenty feet to the left of him. Perhaps Perry had
seen the woman and could tell which way she ran. Questions followed,
rapid and to the purpose. Perry had seen a woman flash by. But she seemed
to be in company with a man. He had not been able to see either clearly.

"Which way were they heading?" asked Mr. Gryce.

Perry told him.

It would look as though they were making for the station. Alarmed at the
idea, Mr. Gryce stepped down into the road and endeavored to pierce the
darkness in that direction. All he could see were the station lights.
Everything else was in shadow. The night hung over all, and had it not
been for the grinding of machinery in their rear, the silence would have
been just as marked.

"Perry, is the way rough between here and the station--I mean, rough for
me?"

"Not very, if you keep in the road."

"Run ahead, then, and learn how soon the next train is due--any train,
going north or going south--I don't care which. If it is soon, look
for a middle-aged woman in a striped dress, and if you can't prevent
her getting on, without a fracas, follow her yourself and never quit
her--telegraphing me at the first opportunity. Run."

Perry gave a leap and was soon swallowed up in the darkness which was
intense as soon as he had passed beyond the glare from the factory. Mr.
Gryce followed after, moving as quickly as he dared. It was not far to
the station platform, but in his anxiety it seemed a mile; nor did he
breathe with ease till he saw a flying shadow come between him and the
station lights and knew that Perry had reached the platform.

It was just at the hour when the fewest trains pass, and Mr. Gryce was
himself across the tracks and on the platform before a far-off whistle
warned him that one was approaching. Looking hastily around, he saw Perry
hurrying up behind him.

"No one," said he. "No such person around."

They waited. The train came in, stopped, took on two unimportant
passengers and rushed away north.

"I'm afraid I shall have to ask you to stay here, Perry. It would be so
easy for her to board one of these night trains and buy a ticket from the
conductor."

But as he spoke he paused, and gripping Perry's arm, turned his ear to
listen.

"A boat," said he. "A small boat leaving shore."

It was so. They could hear the dip of the oars distinctly in the quiet
which had followed the departure of the train. No other sound but that
was in the air, and it struck cold upon one old heart.

"It is she! I'm sure of it," muttered Gryce.

"The man across the river has warned her--sent a boat for her, perhaps.
Run down to the point and see if there is anyone there who saw her go."

Perry slid into the night, and Mr. Gryce stood listening. The quiet dip
of the oars was growing fainter every instant. The boat was rapidly
withdrawing, carrying with it all hope of securing off-hand this
desirable witness.

To be sure, there was nothing very serious in this. He had only to
telephone across the river to have the woman detained till he could reach
her himself in the early morning. Yet he felt unaccountably disturbed and
anxious. For all his many experiences and a record which should have made
him immune from the ordinary disappointments of life, he had never, or so
it seemed to him, felt more thoroughly depressed or weary of the work
which had given him occupation for more years than he liked to number,
than in the few minutes of solitary waiting, with his face toward the
river and the sense of some impending doom settling slowly over his aged
heart.

But he was still too much the successful detective to allow his
disheartenment to be seen by his admiring subordinate. As the latter
approached, the old man's countenance brightened, and nothing could
have been more deceptive than the calmness he displayed when the fellow
reported that he had just been talking to a man who had recognized the
boat and the oarsman. It was the same boat and the same oarsman that had
brought them over earlier in the day. He had made an extra trip at this
most unusual hour, for the express purpose of taking this woman back.

"I suppose there is no possibility of your drumming up anyone to row us
over in time to catch them?"

"None in the least. I have inquired."

"Then follow me into the station. I have a few messages to send."

Among these messages was a peremptory one to Sweetwater.

Morning! and an early crossing to the other side. Here a surprise awaited
them. They found, on inquiry, that the man responsible for Madame's
flitting was not, as they had supposed, the hotel proprietor, but Phil
himself, the good-natured, easily-imposed-upon ferryman, on whose
sympathies she had worked during their first short passage from one shore
to the other. Perhaps a little money had helped to deepen this
impression; one never knows.

But this was not all. The woman was gone. She had fled the town on foot
before they were able to locate Phil, who had not made shore at his usual
place but at some point up the river about which they knew nothing. When
he finally showed up, it was almost daybreak.

"Where is he now?"

"At home, or ought to be."

"Show me the house."

In ten minutes the two were face to face.

The result was not altogether satisfactory to the detective. Though he
used all his skill in his manipulation of this kind-hearted ferryman, he
got very little from him but the plain fact that the woman insisted upon
taking to the road when she heard that the train-service had stopped;
that he could not persuade her to wait till daylight or to listen for a
moment to what he had to say of the danger and terrors awaiting her in
the darkness, and the awful loneliness of the hills. She didn't fear
nature even at its worst, and she knew these hills better than many who
had lived among them for years. She was bound to go, and she went.

This was six hours ago. Asked to explain the interest he had shown in
her, it soon became evident that he was in complete ignorance of her
identity. He had simply, on their first trip over, seen that she was
middle-aged, suffering and much too good and kind to be followed up by
enemies and wicked police officials. True, he had rowed them over in her
pursuit in the early part of the day, but that was because he had not
known their business. When on returning he had learned it, he made up
his mind to help her out with a warning even if it kept him up all night.
He had not expected to bring her back with him, but she had insisted upon
his doing so, saying that she had friends in the mountains who would look
after her. He saw that she was dreadfully in earnest, for she had not
stopped to get her hat and would not have had so much as an extra stitch
with her if she had not taken the precaution to hide a bag of things
somewhere in the bushes near the factory, in anticipation of some such
emergency. And he couldn't resist her. She made him think of a sister of
his who had had a dreadful time of it in the world and was now well out
of it, thank God!

When the ferryman heard that a reward of hundreds of dollars was waiting
for the man who succeeded in bringing her before the police officials in
New York, he betrayed some chagrin, but even this did not last. He was
soon declaring with heartfelt earnestness that he didn't care anything
about that. It was peace of mind he wanted, and not money.

When Mr. Gryce left him, it was with an even slower step than usual.
Peace of mind! How about his own peace of mind? Was he trailing this
poor unfortunate from pillar to post, for the reward it would bring him?
No. With his advancing years money had lost much of its attraction. Nor,
if he knew himself, was he particularly affected by the glory which
attends success. Duty, and duty only, drove him on--to elucidate his
problem and merit the confidence put in him by his superiors. If
suffering followed, that was not his fault; his business was to go ahead.

It was in this frame of mind that he prepared himself for the automobile
trip he saw before him.

There was no question in Mr. Gryce's mind now, as to this woman's
destination or whither he should be obliged to go in order to find her.
As he now saw into her mind, she had left New York with the intention of
hiding herself in the remote village to which she had ordered her mail
sent under the name of Elvira Brown, whom she evidently knew; but
hearing, either on the car or in the hotel, where she was detained, the
plea which was being made for workers in the factory on the east side of
the river, she had modified her plans to the extent already known, only
to return to her original intention as soon as the attempt to provide for
herself in this independent way had proved a failure.

He would proceed then in her wake, conscious of the fresh disappointment
which awaited her in the loss, through Miss Brown's sudden death, of the
asylum she counted upon. Could he have gone on foot like herself, he
might have been tempted to do so, for a trail is best followed slowly and
with ear and eye very close to the ground. But as this was beyond his
strength, he must wait till an automobile could be procured, and possibly
till Sweetwater should arrive--for Perry was no man for this job. There
were no automobiles in this small town, and it might be necessary to send
up or down the river some distance before one could be found capable of
carrying them over the precipitous road they would be obliged to take in
order to avoid the washout which had driven them to this extremity.

But all would come right in time; and with Sweetwater at his elbow, the
journey would be made and the woman caught, soon enough for him no doubt,
hard as he felt it to wait. Why so hard, he might have found it difficult
to say, since hitherto he had found it easy enough when the goal seemed
sure and it was only with time he had to reckon!




XXV

TERROR


A woman fleeing from publicity as one flies from death--a refined woman,
too, whose life had hitherto been passed in the open!

When Antoinette Duclos, after a night and morning of unprecedented
fatigue and extraordinary fears, with little to upbear her in the way of
food, stepped from the train which brought a few local passengers into
the quiet village of Rexam, she hardly would have been recognized by her
best friend, such marks may a few hours leave upon one battling with
untoward Fate in one supreme effort.

She seemed to realize this, for meeting more than one eye fixed
inquiringly upon her she drew down the veil wound about a sort of cap she
wore till it concealed not only her features but her throat which a
restless pulse had tightened almost to the exclusion of her breath. Ready
to drop, she yet made use of the little energy left her, to approach with
faltering steps a lumbering old vehicle waiting in the dust and smoke for
such passengers as might wish to be taken up Long Hill.

There was no driver in sight, but she did not hesitate to take her seat
inside. There was extra business at the station, for this was the first
train to come in for two days; and if anyone noticed her in the shadowy
recesses of the cumbrous old coach, nobody approached her; nor was she in
any way disturbed. When the driver did show himself, she was almost
asleep, but she woke up quickly enough when his good-natured face peered
in at her and she heard him ask where she wanted to go and whether she
had any baggage.

"I want to go up Long Hill and be set down at the first cross-road," she
said. "My baggage is here." And she pointed to the space at her feet.
But that space was empty; she had no baggage. She had dropped both bag
and umbrella at the side of the road after one of her long climbs under a
fitful moon and had not so much as thought of them since.

Now she remembered and flushed as she met the eyes of the man looking in
at her with his hand on his whiskers, smoothing them thoughtfully down
but saying nothing, though his countenance and expression showed him to
be one of the loquacious sort. If any smiles remained to her from the old
days, now was the time for one; but before she could twist her dry lips
into any such attempt, he had uttered a cheerful "All right" and turned
away to clamber up into his seat.

The relief was great, and she settled back, rejoicing in the fact that
they would soon be moving and that she was likely to be the sole
passenger. But she soon came to rue this fact, for the driver wanted to
talk and even made many abortive attempts that way. But she could not
fall in with his mood, and seeing this, he soon withheld all remarks
and bent his full energies to the task of urging his horses up the
interminable incline.

Houses, at which she scarcely looked, disappeared gradually from view,
and groups of spreading trees and patches of upland took their places,
deepening into the forest as they advanced. When halfway up, the farther
mountains, which had hitherto been hidden by nearer hills, burst into
view. Behind them the sun was setting, and the scene was glorious. If
she saw it at all, she gave no sign of pleasure or even of admiration.
Her head, which she had held straight up for the first quarter of a mile,
sank lower and lower as they clambered on; yet she gave no signs of
drowsiness--only of a mortal weariness which seemed to attack the very
springs of life. The pomp and pageantry of the heavens, burning with
all the pigments of the rainbow, failed to appeal to a soul shut within
dungeon bars. Rocks and mighty gorges darkling to the eye and stirring to
the imagination held no story for her; she looked neither to the right
nor to the left while the beauty lasted, much less when the last gleam
had faded from the mountain tops and a troop of leaden clouds, coming up
from the east, added their shadows to those of premature night.

The driver, who had been eying these clouds for some little time, felt
that he ought to speak if she did not. Pulling up his horses as though to
give them a breathing spell, he remarked over his shoulder with a strain
of anxiety in his voice:

"I hope your friends live near the top of the hill, missus. A storm is
coming up, and it's getting very dark. Will you have to walk far?"

"No, no," she assured him with a quick glance up and around her. "A
little way, a very little way!" Then she became quiet and absorbed again.

"I've got to go on," he broke in again as the top of the hill came in
sight. "I've a passenger for the eight-fifty train waiting for me more
than a mile along the road. I shall have to leave you after I set you
down."

"That's right; I expect that. I can take care of myself--don't worry. Not
but what you're very kind," she added after a moment, in her cultured
voice, with just enough trace of accent to make it linger sweetly in the
ear.

"Then here we are," he called back a moment later, jerking his horses to
a standstill and jumping down into the road. "Goin' east or goin' west?"
he asked as he took another glance at her frail and poorly protected
figure.

"This way," she answered, pointing east.

He stopped and stared at her.

"Nobody lives that way," he said, "--that is, nobody near enough for you
to reach shelter before the storm bursts."

"You are mistaken," she said, cringing involuntarily as the first big
clap of thunder rolled in endless echoes among the mountains. And turning
about, she started hurriedly into the shadows of the narrow cross-road.

He gave one glance back at his horses, the twitching of whose ears showed
nervousness, uttered some familiar word and launched out after the woman.
"Pardon me, missus," he cried, "but is it Miss Brown's you mean?"

The widow stopped, glanced back at him over her shoulder, made a quick,
protesting gesture and dashed on.

With a shake of his head and a muttered, "Well, women do beat the devil!"
he retraced his steps; and she proceeded on alone.

As the last sound of his horses' hoof-beats died out on the road, a
second clap of thunder seemed to bring heaven and earth together. She
scarcely looked up. She was approaching a little weather-beaten house
nestled among trees on the edge of a deep gorge. As her eyes fell on it,
her footsteps quickened, and lifting a hasty hand, she pulled off her
veil. A change quite indescribable, but real for all that, had taken
place in her worn and waxen features. Not joy, but a soft expectancy
relieved them from their extreme tension. If a friend awaited her, that
friend would have no difficulty in recognizing her now. But alas!

A few steps more, and she stood before the door. It had a desolate look;
the whole house had a desolate look, possibly because every shade was
drawn. But she did not notice this; she was too sure of her welcome.
Raising her hand to the knocker, she gave two sharp raps. Then she
waited. No answer from within--no sound of hurrying steps--only another
rumble in the sky and a quick rustling of the trees on either side of her
as if the wind which made the horizon black had sent an _avant-courieur_
over the hilltops.

"Elvira is out--gone to some church meeting or social gathering down in
the village. She will be back. But I won't wait. I will try and get in in
the old way. The storm may delay her indefinitely."

Leaving the door, which was raised only two steps above the road, she
walked to the corner of the house and stooping down, felt behind a
projecting stone for what she had certainly expected to find there--a key
to the front door.

But her hand came away empty.

Surprised, for this was not her first visit to this house (she had once
spent weeks there and knew the habits of its mistress well), she felt
again in the place where the key should be, and where she had so often
found it when her friend was out. But all to no avail. It was not there,
and presently she was in the road again staring at the closed-up front.

As she did so, these words left her lips:

"And she knew I might come at any minute!"

Tottering from fatigue, she caught at the trunk of a great tree which
held roof and wall in its embrace.

Why did it quiver? Why did the ground beneath her feet seem to rock and
all nature darken as with the falling of a pall. The storm was upon her.
It had rolled up with incredible swiftness and was about to break over
her head. With a shock she realized her position. No shelter, and the
storm of the season upon her! What should she do? There was no way of
getting into the house at the rear, for the bushes were too thick. She
must accept her fate, be drenched to the skin, perhaps smitten by the
next thunderbolt. But Antoinette Duclos was no coward, so far as physical
ills were concerned. She drew herself up straight against the trunk of
the tree, thinking that this, bad as it was, was better than shelter with
the enemy at the door. She would be calm, and she was fast growing so
when she suddenly became aware of a man standing very near and hunting
her out through the dusk.

She never knew why the scream which rose in her throat did not pass her
lips. Her terror was unspeakable, for she had heard no advance; indeed,
there was too much noise about her for that. But it was the silent terror
of despair, for she thought it was the man from whom she had made this
great effort at escape. But he soon proved to her he was not. It was just
the driver of the stagecoach, returned to see what had become of her. He
had feared to find her stricken down in the road, and when he saw her
clinging alone and in a maddened way to this tree, he made no bones of
speaking to her with all necessary plainness.

"I asked you if it was Missus Brown you had come to see," he called to
her through the din. "And you wouldn't answer."

"Why should I?" she shouted back. "Why do you speak like that? Has
anything happened to her?"

"Don't you know?"

"No, no--she was well when I heard from her last, and expecting me, or so
she wrote. Is she--she--"

"Dead, missus. We buried her last Tuesday. I'm sorry, but--"

Why finish? She was lying out before him, straight and stark in the road.
A bolt of lightning which at that moment tore its way through the heavens
brought into startling view her face, white with distraction, framed in a
mass of iron-gray locks released by her fall.

"Good heaven!" burst from the lips of the frightened man as he stooped to
lift her. "What am I going to do now?"

The thunder answered him, or rather it robbed him for the moment of all
thought. Peal after peal rattled over the neighboring peaks, rocking the
air on the uplands and filling his soul with dismay. But when quiet had
come again, hope returned with it. She was not only standing upright but
was crying in his ear:

"Can I get into the house? If I could stay there to-night, I could go
back to-morrow."

"I'll see that you get in, if I have to break in a window," he answered.
"But you're sure that you will not be afraid to stay out this terrible
storm in a house with no neighbors within half a mile?"

"I know the house. I have been here before, and if Elvira Brown could
face the storms of forty years from her solitary home, I can surely face
a single one, without losing my courage."

He said no more, but approaching the house, began to test such windows as
he could reach. He finally broke in a pane and released the latch; after
that, entrance was easy.

Yet after he had opened the way for her and she had stepped into the dim
interior, he felt loth to leave her. Duty called him away. The passenger
awaiting him up the road was a man he could not afford to disappoint; yet
he stood there longer than the occasion warranted, with the knob of the
door in hand, watching her struggle with the lamp, which she at last
succeeded in lighting. As the walls of the hall and her anxiously bending
figure burst into view, he uttered a quick "Good-by!"

She turned, smiled and tried to thank him, but the words failed to leave
her lips. A nearer and fiercer bolt had shot to earth at that instant,
striking a tree so near that the noise of its fall mingled with the crash
of the heavens. When it had ceased, he had gone. He could not face the
look with which she met this new catastrophe.

That look never again left her. When she saw herself in a glass, as she
presently did, on entering one of the rooms lamp in hand, she was
startled and muttered:

"My own mother would pass me by if she saw me now. I could go anywhere I
wished without fear or dread. Why did I leave New York?" And setting the
lamp down, she covered her face and wept.

The storm abated; a few minutes of fiercely pouring rain, and all was
over. She was left in ghastly quiet--a quiet which was almost worse than
the turmoil which had preceded it--to face her memories and accustom
herself to the thought that the solitary woman with whose life everything
she looked upon was so intimately connected was gone, never to pass
through these doors again or touch with deft and careful fingers the
infinite number of little belongings with which the house was filled.

For as yet nothing had been changed, nothing had been moved. How fitting
this was, Antoinette knew better than anybody else, perhaps, for she was
the only person whom Elvira Brown had ever allowed to spend any length of
time with her, and she could remember--alas! how vividly, in spite of the
one great fear forever gnawing at her heart--that an article, no matter
how small, when once given place in this house, held that place always
till broken or in some other way robbed of its usefulness. She looked at
her friend's pet chair standing just in the one spot where she had seen
it eight years before, and her heart swelled, and a tear rose in her eye.
But there was not time for another. A sense of the straits in which she
found herself placed by the death of this dependable friend returned upon
her in full force; the past retired into its old place, and the present,
with its maddening problems, seized upon her nerve and quelled her once
indomitable spirit.

The fate which had pursued her ever since she had left her happy home
in France had not spared her at this crisis. The storm, of so little
consequence to her, had roused the driver's sympathy. This had not only
fixed her image in his mind but given away her destination. All hope of
hiding herself among the mountains was therefore gone. She would have to
move on; but where? If she were but able to leave now, she might before
morning find some covert from which help might be given her for further
escape. But the condition of the roads, as well as her own weakness,
forbade that. She needed food: she needed sleep. Of food she would find
plenty, she was sure; but sleep! How could she sleep, with the promise
of the morrow before her? Yet she must; everything depended upon her
strength. How could she win that rest which alone would secure it.

Pausing in the midst of the hall whither her restless thought had driven
her, she stared in a fruitless inquiry at the wall confronting her. Her
mind, like her feet, was at a standstill. She could neither think nor
act. In fact, she was at the point of a nervous collapse, when slowly
from out the void there rose to her view and pierced its way into her
mind the outline of the door upon which she had been steadily looking but
without seeing it till now. Why did she start as it thus took on shape
before her? There was nothing strange or mysterious about it. It led
nowhere; it hid nothing, unless it was the yard upon which it directly
opened.

But that yard! She remembered it well. It was unlike any other she had
ever seen in this country or her own. It was small and semicircular; it
was shut in by a high board fence except at the extreme end, where it was
met by a swinging bridge topping a forty-foot chasm. That bridge led
through a sparsely wooded forest to a road running in a quite different
direction from the one by which the house was approached. As she strove
to recall her memories of it, she became more and more assured that her
one and only opportunity for a successful flight lay that way. Moved to
joy at the thought, she bowed her head for one wild moment in heartfelt
thankfulness and then quickly drew the bolts of the door which offered
her this happy deliverance.

She did not mean to seek escape to-night, but an irresistible impulse,
which quite robbed her of her judgment, drove her to take a look into the
yard and make sure for herself that the bridge was still there and
everything as she had last seen it.

But when with the help of the wind she pulled open the heavy door and
stood, throbbing under the force of the gale, on the shallow step
outside, she found herself confronted by a darkness so hollow and so
absolute that she felt as though she had stumbled into a pit. But instead
of retreating, if only to procure a lantern, she took the one step down
to the narrow walk which led through grass and flowers to the edge of the
plateau from which the bridge extended. Would she be satisfied now? No,
she must see the bridge, or if she could not see it, must feel it with
her foot or touch it with her hand. Once sure of its presence there, she
would return, take off her clothing and seek refreshment.

But how was she to find her way in such absolute darkness? Alone with the
dying tempest, now moaning in fitful gusts, now shrieking a last protest
in her ear, she stood peering helplessly before her. Already her arms had
gone out like those of a blind person loosed upon an unknown road. She
was conscious of a great fear. All the solitude of her position had
rushed upon her. She felt herself lost, forsaken; yet she had no idea of
turning back. If she could but find some support--something upon which
to lay her fingers. She thought of the fence, and her courage revived. If
she could but reach and follow that!

There were obstacles in her way. She was sure of this, for she remembered
some of them, and Elvira no more changed her garden than her house. But
with care she succeeded in getting around these, and soon she knew by the
lessened force of the wind that she was near, if not directly under, the
high fence upon which she depended for guidance. A few bushes--another
unexpected obstacle, followed by a bad stumble--separated her from the
contact for which she had reached; then by a final effort her fingers
found the boards and she went eagerly on, dragging herself through the
wet without knowing it, and only stopping with a sense of shock, when her
hand, sliding from the boards, fell groping about in midair with nothing
to grasp at. She had come to the end of the fence and was within a foot
of the bridge--if the bridge was still there.

But her fears on this score were few, and she felt about with hand and
foot till the former struck the rail at her side, and the latter the
narrow planking spanning the gorge.

She hesitated now. Who would not? But the impulse which had led her thus
far continued to urge her on. She stepped upon the bridge and proceeded
to cross it, clinging to the rail with a feverish clutch, and feeling
every board with her foot before venturing to trust her full weight upon
it. She found them seemingly firm, and when about halfway across she
stopped to listen for the roar of the mountain stream which she knew to
be rushing over its rocky bed some forty awesome feet below her.

She heard it, but the swish of the trees lining the gorge was in her
straining ears and half drowned its sullen sound. With feelings
impossible to describe, she tossed up her arms to the skies, where a
single brilliant star was looking through the mass of quickly flying,
quickly disintegrating clouds. Then she sought again the safety of the
guiding rail, and clinging desperately to it, took one more step and
stopped with a smothered shriek. The rail had snapped under her hand and
had gone tumbling down into the abyss. She heard it as it struck, or
thought she did, and for a moment stood breathless and fearing to move,
the world and all it held vanishing in semi-unconsciousness from heart
and mind. What was she but a trembling atom floating in an unknown void
on the fathomless sea of eternity! Then, as her mind steadied, she began
to feel once more the boards under her feet, and to hear the smiting
together of the great limbs wrestling in the depths of the forest. She
even caught such a homely sound as the violent slamming of the door she
had left unlatched behind her; and summoning up all her courage, which
was not small when she was released from her first surprise, she stepped
firmly backward till she felt the rail strong again under her clutch.
Then she turned resolutely and retraced her steps along the bridge and so
across the plateau to the house whose light had acted as a beacon to her
whenever the door blew wide enough to let the one inner beam be seen.

When she was inside again, she lingered for a long time in the darkening
hall, her slight form and whitened head leaning against the wall in a
desolation such as few hearts know. Then something within the woman
flared up in a rekindled flame, and she passed quickly into the room
where she had left her lamp burning; and blowing it out, she threw
herself down on a couch and tried to sleep.

An hour later the moon shone in upon her pale features and wild, staring
eyes upturned to meet it. Then it vanished, and she and the whole house
were given up again to darkness.

She had forgotten to eat, though the cupboards, in this well-stored
house, were quite full.




XXVI

THE FACE IN THE WINDOW


"Is this the place?"

"According to our instructions, yes. The first house after the first
turn to the right. We took the first turn, and this is the first house.
Romantic situation, eh? But a bit lonesome for a city chap? Shall I help
you down?"

While talking, Sweetwater, who was already in the road, held up his elbow
to Mr. Gryce, who slowly descended. It was early morning, and the glory
of sunshine was everywhere misleading the eye from the ravages of the
night before; yet neither of these two men wore an air in keeping with
the freshness of renewed life and the joyous aspect of exultant nature.
There seemed to be an oppression upon them both--a hesitation not common
to either, and to all appearance without cause.

To end what he probably considered a weakness, Sweetwater approached
the door staring somewhat blankly from the flat front of the primitive
old house whose privacy they were about to invade, and rapped on its
weather-beaten panels, first gently and then with quick insistence.

There was no response from within; no sound of movement; no token that he
had been so much as heard. Sweetwater turned and consulted his companion
before making another attempt.

"It's early. Perhaps she's not up yet," rejoined the old detective as he
painfully advanced. The storm of the preceding night had got into his
bones.

"I don't know. There's something uncanny about this silence. She ought to
be here; but I'm afraid she isn't." Sweetwater rapped again, this time
with decided vehemence.

Suddenly in one of the uncurtained windows a face appeared. They saw it,
and both drew a deep breath. The eyes were looking their way, but they
were like ghost's eyes. Without sight or speculation in them, they simply
looked; then the face slowly withdrew, growing ghastlier every minute,
and the window stared on, but the woman was gone. Yet the door did not
open.

"I hate to use force," objected Sweetwater.

Before answering, Mr. Gryce stepped to one side and cast a glance around
the corner of the house in the direction of the gorge opening in the
rear.

"There is something like a yard at the back," he announced, "but the
fence which shut it in is so high and so protected by means of prickly
underbrush that you would have difficulty in climbing it."

"Just so at this end," called out Sweetwater after a short run to the
left. "If we get in at all," he remarked on coming back, "it will have to
be by the window you see there with one pane knocked out."

"I don't like that; I don't like any of it. But we can't stay out here
any longer. The looks of the woman herself forbid it. We sha'n't forget
that hollow stare."

"They said the woman who lived here was dead."

"Yes. It's a bad business, Sweetwater. Rap once more, and then if she
doesn't come, throw up the window and climb in."

Sweetwater did as he was bid, and meeting with no more response than
before, thrust his hand through the hole made by the broken pane; and
finding the window had been left unlocked, he pushed it up and entered.
In another moment he appeared at the front door, where Mr. Gryce joined
him, and together they took their first look at the small but
surprisingly well-furnished interior.

The hall in which they stood was without staircase and had many of the
appointments of a room. Doors opened here and there along its length, and
in the rear they saw a closed one evidently leading into the yard. There
was no one within sight. One would have said that with the death and
carrying out of the owner of this little dwelling, all life had departed
from it. Yet these two men knew that life was there; and raising his
voice, Mr. Gryce called out in the least alarming way possible:

"Madame Duclos!" following this utterance of her name with an apology for
the intrusion and a prayer for one minute's interview.

Silence was his answer--no stir anywhere.

Apprehensive of they knew not what, the two detectives started
simultaneously, one for the door on their right, the other for that on
the left. When they met again in the ill-lighted hall, Mr. Gryce was
shaking his head, but Sweetwater had lifted a beckoning finger.
Unconsciously moderating his step, Mr. Gryce followed him through one
room to the door of another which he saw standing partly open.

Through the crack thus made between the hinges, they could get a very
fair glimpse of what was going on inside. They saw a bed, and a woman
kneeling beside this bed, her eyes upraised in prayer. The look which had
awed them at the window was gone, and in its place was one so high and so
full of religious faith that for an instant they were conscious of the
reversal of all their ideas.

But only for an instant; for while they waited, hesitating to break in
upon her evidently sincere devotions, she started to her feet and with a
half-insane look about her, disappeared from their view in the direction
of the hall.

Sweetwater was after her in a twinkling; but by the time he and Mr.
Gryce, each going his separate way, had themselves reached the hall, it
was to see the end door--the one giving upon the plateau--closing behind
her.

"Madame!" called out Sweetwater, bounding briskly in her wake.

Mr. Gryce said nothing but approached with hastening steps the door which
Sweetwater had left open behind him, and took a quick survey of the
fenced-in plateau, the bridge and the towering trees beyond, toward which
she seemed to be making.

"She cannot escape," was his ready conclusion; and he shouted to
Sweetwater to go easy.

Sweetwater, who was in the act of setting foot upon the bridge down which
she was running, slacked up at this command and presently stopped, for
she had stopped herself and was looking back from a spot about halfway
across, with the air of one willing, at last, to hear what they had to
say.

"Who are you?" she cried. "And what do you want of me?"

"Are you not Madame Duclos?"

"Yes, I am Antoinette Duclos."

"Then you must know why you are wanted by the police authorities of New
York. Your daughter--"

Her hand went up.

"I've nothing to say--nothing. Will you take that for your answer and let
me go?"

"Alas, madam, we cannot!" spoke up Mr. Gryce in his calm, benevolent way.
"Miss Duclos' death was of a nature demanding an inquest. Your testimony,
hard as it may be for you to give it, is necessary for a righteous
verdict. That is all we want--"

"It is too much!" she cried. And with a quick glance upward she took
another step or two along the bridge till she had reached the broken
rail; and before Sweetwater in his dismay could more than give a
horrified bound in her direction, she had made the fatal leap and was
gone from their sight into the gorge below.




BOOK IV

NEMESIS




XXVII

FROM LIPS LONG SILENT


"This finishes my usefulness as a detective. I have had my fill of
horrors; all, in fact, that my old age can stand."

Thus, Mr. Gryce, as hours afterward he and Sweetwater turned their faces
back toward New York.

"I appreciate your feelings," responded the latter, who had been
strangely silent all day, speaking only when directly addressed. "I can
assure you that in my way I'm as much cut up as you are. I wish now that
I had made an attempt from the rear to head off this distracted woman,
even if I had been obliged to scratch my hands to pieces tearing a board
from the fence."

"It would have done no good. She was determined to die rather than give
up her secret. I remember the look with which her sister-in-law warned
me that she would never survive a capture. But I thought that mere
exaggeration."

Then after a moment of conscious silence on the part of both, the weary
old man added with bitter emphasis, "Her testimony might--I do not say
would--have cleared away our suspicions of Director Roberts."

Sweetwater, who was acting as chauffeur, slowed down his machine till it
came to a standstill at the side of the road. Then wheeling quietly about
till he faced his surprised companion, he remarked very gravely:

"Mr. Gryce, I hadn't the heart to tell you this before, but the time
has come for you to know that Mr. Roberts' cause is not so favorably
affected, as you seem to think, by this suicidal death of one who without
doubt would have proved to be a leading witness against him. I am sure
you will agree with me in this when I inform you that in pursuing the
task you set me, I came upon _this_."

Thrusting his hand into his pocket, he pulled out a large envelope from
which he proceeded to draw forth first the tattered square of what had
once been a cabinet portrait, and then a freshly printed proof of the
same. Holding them both up, he waited for the word that was sure to
follow.

It came with all the emphasis he expected.

"Roberts! Director Roberts!"

"The same, sir"; and the eyes of the two detectives met in what was
certainly one of the most solemn moments of their lives.

They had paused for this short conference at a point where the road
running for a few yards on a level gave them a view of slope on slope of
varying verdure, with glimpses of the Hudson between. Glancing up, with a
gesture of manifest shrinking from the portrait which Sweetwater still
held, Mr. Gryce allowed his glance to run over the wonderful landscape
laid out to his view, and said with breaks and halts bespeaking his deep
emotion:

"If my death here and now, following fast upon that of this unhappy
Frenchwoman, would avail to wipe out the evidence I have so laboriously
collected against this man, I should welcome it with gratitude. I shrink
from ending my career with the shattering of so fine an image, in the
public eye. What lies back of this crime--what past memories or present
miseries have led to an act which would be called dastardly in the most
uninstructed and basest of our sex, I lack the imagination to conceive.
Would to God I had never tried to find out! But no man standing where
Roberts does to-day among the leaders of a great party can fall into such
a pit of shame without weakening the faith of the young and making a
travesty of virtue and honor."

"Yet, if he is guilty----"

"It is our business to pursue him to the end. Only, I like the man,
Sweetwater. I had a long talk with him yesterday on indifferent matters
and I came away liking him."

This was certainly something Sweetwater had not expected to hear, and
it threw him again into silence as he started up the machine and they
pursued their course home.

Hard as the day had been for Mr. Gryce, its trials were not yet over. He
had left it to Sweetwater to report the case to the New York authorities
and had gone home to rest from the shock of the occurrence and to prepare
for that interview with the Chief Inspector which he was satisfied would
now lead to an even more exacting one with the District Attorney.

He was met by a messenger from downtown who handed him a letter. He
opened it abstractedly and read the following:

"Mrs. Taylor is talking."

He had forgotten Mrs. Taylor. To have her thus brought forcibly back to
mind was a shock heightened, rather than diminished, by a perusal of the
few connected words which the careful nurse had transcribed as falling
from her delirious patient's lips.

They were these:

        I love but thee,
  And thee will I love to eternity.

The exact lines, no more, no less, which Sweetwater had found written on
the back of the Swiss clock cherished by Mr. Roberts.




XXVIII

"ROMANTIC! TOO ROMANTIC!"


Next morning Mr. Gryce left his home an hour earlier than usual. He
wished to have a talk with Mrs. Taylor's nurse before encountering the
Inspector.

It was an inconvenient time for a nurse to leave the sick-bed; but the
matter being so important, she was prevailed upon to give him a few
moments, in the little reception room where he had seated himself. The
result was meagre--that is, from her standpoint. All she had to add to
what she had written him the day before was the fact that the two lines
of verse quoted in the note she had sent him were Mrs. Taylor's first
coherent utterance, and that they had been spoken not only once but many
times, in every kind of tone, and with ever-varying emphasis. That and a
dreamy request for "The papers! the papers!" which had followed some
action of her own this very morning comprised all she had to give in
fulfillment of the promise she had made him at the beginning of this
illness.

Mr. Gryce believed her and rose reluctantly to his feet.

"Then she is still very ill?"

"Very ill, but mending daily; or so the doctor says."

"If she talks again, as she is liable to do at any moment, do not check
her, but remember every word. The importance of this I cannot impress
upon you too fully. But do not by any show of curiosity endanger her
recovery. She seems to be one of the very best sort; I would not have her
body or mind sacrificed on any account."

"You may trust me, sir."

He nodded, giving her his hand.

But as he was turning away, he looked back with the quiet remark: "I
should like to ask a final question. You have been in constant attendance
on this lady for some time and must have seen many of her friends, as
well as taken charge of her mail and of any messages which may have been
left for her. Has there been anything in this experience to settle the
doubt as to whether her talk of a vision in which she saw her absent
husband stricken simultaneously with the poor child lying at that very
moment dead at her feet simply delirium or a striking instance of
telepathy recording an accomplished fact? In other words, do you believe
her husband to be living or not living at the present time?"

"That is a subject upon which I have not been able to form any opinion.
I have heard nothing, seen nothing to influence my mind either way. Some
other people have asked me this same question. If her mail contains any
news, it is still in the hands of the proprietor of the hotel. He has
refrained from sending it up. She has lived here, as you know, for a long
while."

"Has she no relative to share your watch or take such things in charge?"

"I have seen none. Friends she has in plenty, but no one who claims
relationship with her, or who raises the least objection to anything I
do."

He seemed about to ask another question, but refrained and allowed her to
depart after some final injunction as to what she should do in case of
certain emergencies. Then he had a talk with the proprietor, which added
little or nothing to his present knowledge; and these duties off his
mind, he went downtown.

As he expected, he found the Chief Inspector awaiting him. The death of
Madame Duclos had added still another serious complication to the many
with which this difficult affair was already encumbered, and he was
anxious to talk over the matter with one who had been on the spot and
upon whose impressions he consequently could rely.

But when he heard all that Mr. Gryce had to say on the subject, he grew
as serious as the detective himself could wish, even going so far as to
propose an immediate ride over to the District Attorney's office.

Fortunately, they found that gentleman in and ready to listen, though
it was evident he expected little from the conference. But his temper
changed as Mr. Gryce opened up his theory and began to substantiate it
with facts. The looks which he exchanged with the Chief Inspector grew
more and more earnest and inquiring, and when Mr. Gryce reached that
portion of his report which connected Mr. Roberts so indisputably with
the arrow, he called in his assistant and together they listened to what
Mr. Gryce had further to say.

With this addition to his audience, the old man's manner changed and
became a trifle more formal. He related the fact, not generally known, of
Mr. Roberts' engagement to a young girl residing on Long Island, and how
this was broken off immediately after the occurrence at the museum,
seemingly from no other reason than the unhappy condition of mind in
which he found himself, a condition added to if not explained by the
pertinacity with which he had haunted the morgue and dwelt upon the image
of the young girl who had perished under no random shot.

Here the old man paused, shrinking as much from what he had yet to say as
they from the hearing of it. It was not till the Chief Inspector had made
him an encouraging gesture that he found the requisite courage to
proceed. He did so, in these words:

"I know that the evidence I have thus far advanced is of a purely
circumstantial nature, capable, perhaps, of a more or less satisfactory
explanation. But what I have to add cannot be so easily disposed of.
Connections have developed between persons we thought strangers which
have opened up a field of inquiry which brings the doubts and surmises
of an old detective within the scope of this office. I do not know what
to make of them; perhaps their full meaning can only be found out here.
Of this only I am assured. The gentleman whom it seems presumptuous on my
part to connect even in a casual way with crime has not gained but lost
by what I have to tell of Madame Duclos' suicidal death. To those who see
no association between the two, it looks like the opening of a new lead,
but when I tell you that they knew each other, or at all events that she
knew him and in the way of actual hatred, it looks more like a deepening
of the old one. See here, gentlemen."

Opening a package he had hitherto held in hand, he showed them
Fredericks' fifteen-year-old photograph of Mr. Roberts, together with its
mutilated counterpart, and explained how the latter came to be in its
present mutilated condition.

"But this is not all," he continued, as the remarks incident upon this
proof of deadly hatred on the part of the mother of the victim for the
man whom circumstances seemed to point out as her slayer subsided under
the pressure of their interest in what he had further to impart. "As you
will see after a moment's consideration, this token of animosity does not
explain Madame Duclos' flight, and certainly not her death, which, as the
unhappy witness of it, I am ready to declare was not the death of one
driven to extremity from personal fear, but by some exalted feeling which
we have yet to understand. All that I now wish to point out in its
connection is the proof offered by this shattered photograph, that Mr.
Roberts was in some manner and from some cause a party to this crime from
which a superficial observation would completely dissociate him.

"Where is the connecting link? How can we hope to establish it? That is
what it has now become my unfortunate duty to make plain to you. Carleton
Roberts drawing a bow to shoot an innocent schoolgirl is incredible. In
spite of all I have said and shown you, I do not believe him guilty of so
inhuman an act. He drew the bow, he shot the arrow, but----Here allow me
to pause a moment to present another aspect of the case as surprising as
any you have yet heard. You are aware--we all are aware--that the inquest
we await has been held back for the purpose of giving Mrs. Taylor an
opportunity to recover from the illness into which she has been thrown by
what she saw and suffered that day. Gentlemen, this Mrs. Taylor whom we
all--I will not even exclude myself from this category--regarded not only
as a casual visitor to the museum, but a stranger to all concerned, is,
on the contrary, as I think you will soon see, more closely allied to the
seemingly dispassionate director than even Madame Duclos. The shock which
laid her low was not that usually ascribed to her, or even the one she so
fantastically offered to our acceptance; but the recognition of Carleton
Roberts as the author of this tragedy,--Carleton Roberts whom she not
only knew well but had loved in days gone by, as sincerely as he had
loved her. This I now propose to prove to you by what I cannot but regard
as incontestable evidence."

Taking from a small portfolio which he carried another photograph,
unmounted this time and evidently the work of an amateur, he laid it out
before them. The silence with which his last statement had been received,
the kind of silence which covers emotions too deep for audible
expression, remained unbroken save for an involuntary murmur or so, as
the District Attorney and his assistant bent over this crude presentation
of something--they hardly knew what--which this old but long trusted
detective was offering them in substantiation of the well-nigh
unbelievable statement he had just made.

[Illustration]

"This, gentlemen," he went on, as he pointed to the following, "is the
copy of a label pasted on the back of a certain Swiss clock to be seen at
this very moment on the wall of Mr. Roberts' own bedroom in his home in
Belport, Long Island. He prizes this clock. He has been heard to say that
it goes where he goes and stays where he stays, and as it is far from a
valuable one either from intrinsic worth or from any accuracy it displays
in keeping time, the reason for this partiality must lie in old
associations and the memories they invoke. A love token. Can you not see
that it is such from the couplet scrawled across it? If not, just take a
look at the initials appended to that couplet. May I ask you to read
them?"

The District Attorney stooped, adjusted his glasses and slowly read out:

"C. C. R."

"Carleton Clifton Roberts," explained Mr. Gryce. Then slowly, "The other
two if you will be so good."

"E. T."

"Ermentrude Taylor," declared the inexorable voice. "And written by
herself. Here is her signature which I have obtained; and here is his.
Compare them at your leisure with their initials inscribed according to
the date there, sixteen years or more ago. Now where were these two--this
man and this woman--at the time just designated? Alone, or together? Let
us see if we can find out," pursued the detective with a quiet ignoring
of the effect he had produced, which revealed him as the master of a
situation probably as difficult and disconcerting as the three officials
hanging in manifest anxiety upon his words had ever been called upon to
face. "Mr. Roberts was in Switzerland, as his housekeeper will be obliged
to admit on oath, she being an honest woman and a domestic in his
mother's house at the time. And Ermentrude Taylor! I have a witness to
prove where she was also! A witness I should be glad to have you
interrogate. Here is her name and address." And he slipped a small scrap
of paper into the District Attorney's hand. "What she will say is this,
for I think I have very thoroughly sounded her: First, that she is Mrs.
Taylor's most intimate friend. This is conceded by all who know her.
Secondly, that while her intimacy does not extend back to their girlhood
days--Mrs. Taylor being an Englishwoman by birth and remarkably reticent
as to her former life and experiences--she has one story to tell of that
time which answers the question I have given you. She got it from Mrs.
Taylor herself, and in this manner. They were engaged in talking one day
about our Western mountains and the grandeur of scenery generally, when
Mrs. Taylor let fall some remark about the Alps, which led this friend of
hers to ask if she had ever seen them. Mrs. Taylor answered in the
affirmative, but with such embarrassment and abrupt change of subject
that it was plainly apparent she had no wish to discuss it. Indeed, her
abruptness was so marked and her show of trouble so great, she was
herself disturbed by what might very easily give offense, and being of a
kindly, even loving disposition, took occasion when next they met to
explain that it was as a girl she had visited Switzerland, and that her
experiences there had been so unfortunate that any allusion which
recalled those days distressed her. This is all that ever passed between
these two on this subject, but is it not enough when we read this
couplet, and mark the combined initials, and recognize them as those of
Carleton Roberts and Ermentrude Taylor? But lest you should doubt even
this evidence of an old-time friendship so intimate that it has almost
the look of a betrothal, I must add one more item of corroborative fact
which came to me as late as last night. In a moment of partial
consciousness, while the nurse hung over her bed, Mrs. Taylor spoke her
first coherent sentence since she fell into a state demanding medical
assistance. And what was that sentence? A repetition of this couplet,
gentlemen, spoken not once but over and over again, till even the nurse
grew tired of listening to it.

        'I love but thee,
  And thee will I love to eternity.'"

As the last word fell from Mr. Gryce's lips, the District Attorney
muttered a quick exclamation, and sat down heavily in his chair.

"No coincidence that," he cried, with forced vivacity. "The couplet is
too little known."

"Exactly," came from Mr. Gryce in dry confirmation. "Mrs. Taylor, as well
as her friends can judge, is a woman of thirty-five or thirty-eight. If
she went to Switzerland as a girl, this would make her visit coincident,
so far as we can calculate from our present knowledge, with that of
Carleton Roberts. For the surer advancement of our argument, let us say
that it was. What follows? Let the inscription of this label speak for
us. They met; they loved--as was natural when we remember the youth and
good looks of both, and--_they parted_. This we must concede, or how
could the experience have been one she could not recall without a
heart-break. They parted, and he returned home, to marry within the year,
while she--I do not think she married--though I have no doubt she looks
upon herself as a wife and forever bound to the man who deserted her.
Women of her kind think in this way of such matters, and act upon them
too as is shown by the fact that, on following him here, she passed
herself off as a woman separated from her husband. Changing the Miss
before her name to Mrs., she lived under this assumption for twelve years
at her present hotel. In all that time, so far as I can learn, she has
never been visited by anyone of an appearance answering to that of her
former lover; nor have I any reason to think she ever intruded herself on
him, or made herself in any way obnoxious. He was married and settled,
and contrary to the usual course of men who step with one stride into
affluence, was living a life of usefulness which was rapidly making
him a marked man in public esteem. Perhaps she had no right to meddle
with what no longer concerned her. At all events, there is no evidence
of her having done so in all these fourteen years. Even after Mrs.
Roberts' death, all went on as usual; _but_--" Here Mr. Gryce became
emphatic--"when he turned his attention to a second marriage and that
with a very young girl--(I can name her to you, gentlemen, if you wish)
her patient soul may have been roused; she may have troubled him with
importunities; may have threatened him with a scandal which would have
interfered greatly with his political hopes if it had not ended them at
once. I can conceive such an end to her long patience, can't you,
gentlemen? And what is more, if this were so, and the gentleman found the
situation intolerable, it might account for the flight of that arrow as
nothing else ever will."

Both men had started to their feet.

"How! It was not _she_----"

"It was not she who was struck, _but it was she who was aimed at_. The
young girl merely got in the way. But before I enlarge upon this point,"
he continued in lower tones as the two officials slowly reseated
themselves, "allow me to admit that any proof of correspondence between
these old-time lovers would have added much to my present argument. But
while I have no doubt that such an interchange of letters took place, and
that in all probability some one or more of them still exist, Mrs.
Taylor's illness and Mr. Roberts' high position prevent any
substantiation of the same on our part. I must therefore ask you to
assume that it was in obedience to some definite agreement between them
that she came to the museum on that fatal morning and made her appearance
in that especial section of the gallery marked II. If this strikes you as
inconceivable and too presumptuous for belief, you must at least concede
that we have ample proof of his entire readiness for her coming. The bow
brought up so many days before from the cellar was within reach; the
arrow under his coat; and his place of concealment so chosen as to make
his escape feasible the moment that arrow flew from the bow. Had she
entered that section alone--had the arrow found lodgment in her breast
instead of in that of another--nay, I will go even further and say that
had no cry followed his act, an expectation he had every right to count
upon from the lightning-like character of the attack,--he would have
reached the Curator's office and been out of the building before quick
discovery of the deed made his completion of this attempt impossible."

"But the girl did cry out," remarked the Assistant District Attorney.
"How do you account for that, since, as you say, it was not natural for
one pierced to the heart without warning?"

"Ah, you see the big mistake we made,--Correy and all the rest of us. Had
Miss Willetts, or I should say, Mademoiselle Duclos, been the one to let
out that dolorous cry, the man just behind the partition would have been
there almost in time to see her fall. Correy, who started up the stairs
at the first sound, would have been at the gallery entrance before the
man of the arrow could have dropped the hanging over his retreating
figure. But it was not from her lips, poor girl, that this gasping shriek
went up, but from those of the woman who saw the deed and knew from whom
the arrow came and for whom it was meant. How do I know this? Because of
the time which elapsed, the few precious minutes which allowed Mr.
Roberts to get as far away as the court. For she did not voice her agony
immediately. Even she, with her own unwounded heart keeping up its
functions, stood benumbed before this horror. Not till the full meaning
of it all had penetrated her reluctant brain did she move or cry out. How
long this interval was; whether three minutes were consumed by it, or
five, we have no means of telling. She, in her despair, would take no
note of time, nor would Mr. Travis, reeling in the opposite gallery under
the shock of seeing all that he loved taken from him in one awful
minute."

Here the detective turned with great earnestness toward the two
officials.

"This question of time has been, as I have repeatedly said, the greatest
stumbling-block we have encountered in our consideration of this crime.
How could the assassin, by any means possible, have got so far away from
the pedestal, in the infinitesimal lapse of time between the cry that was
heard and the quick alarm which followed. Now we know. Have you anything
to say against this conclusion? Any other explanation to give which will
account for every fact as this does?"

His answer came in a dubious gesture from the District Attorney and a
half-hearted "No" from his Assistant. They were both either too awed by
the circumstance or too fearful of mistake, to accept without a struggle
an accusation of this grave and momentous character against one of Mr.
Roberts' stamp and consequence.

This was no more than Mr. Gryce had expected, and while he realized that
his reputation as a detective of extraordinary insight in cases of an
unusually baffling nature trembled in the balance, he experienced a
sudden distaste of his work which almost drove him into renouncing the
whole affair. But the habits of a lifetime are not parted with so
easily; and when the Chief Inspector observed--evidently with the idea of
goading him on--"This seems to be mainly a matter of conjecture, Gryce,"
his old self reasserted itself, and he answered boldly:

"I acknowledge that; but conjecture is what in nine cases out of ten
smoothes out many of our difficulties. I have here a short statement made
by myself, after the most careful inquiries, of all that Mrs. Taylor and
the untrapped director did and said in the few difficult moments when
they met face to face over the body of his unfortunate victim. I will ask
you to listen to a portion of it.

"'She had not moved. After her one cry of horror which had brought a rush
of witnesses upon the scene, she remained fixed on her knees in the
absorbed introspection common to those brought suddenly face to face with
a life and death crisis. He, finding that his own safety demanded action
suitable to his position as a director, had entered with the crowd and
now stood in her presence, in face of his own diabolical work, in an
attitude of cold courage such as certain strong natures are able to
assume under the pressure of great emergencies.

"'So long as she was deaf to all appeal to rouse and explain the
situation, he stood back, watchful and silent; but when she finally
roused and showed a disposition to speak, his desperation drove him
into questioning her in order to see how much she understood of an attack
which had killed a harmless stranger and let herself go free.

"'He asked her first if she could tell them from which direction came the
arrow which ended this young girl's life.

"'She made no reply in words; but glanced significantly at the opposite
gallery.

"'This called from him the direct inquiry, "Did you see anyone over there
at the moment this young girl fell?"

"'She shook her head. Afterward she explained the denial by saying that
she had been looking down into the court.

"'But he did not cease his inquiries. Turning to the people crowding
about him, he put the like question to them; but receiving no answer, a
silence followed, during which a woman suggested in tones loud enough for
all to hear, that there were no arrows on the other side of the court,
but that the gallery where they stood was full of them.

"'This seemed to alarm Mrs. Taylor. Turning to the director, she asked
whether he was sure that the opposite gallery held no arrows and no bows;
and when he replied that nothing of the kind was to be found along its
entire length, she proceeded to inquire whether any such deed could be
committed in a place so open to view, without attracting the observation
of some one wandering in court or gallery.

"'This, undoubtedly, to ascertain the full extent of his danger, before
bestowing a thought upon herself. But at his answer, given with the cold
precision of a thoroughly selfish man, that if anyone in the whole
building had seen so much as a movement in a spot so under suspicion,
that person would have been heard from by this time, she faltered and was
heard to ask what he had in mind and why the people about her looked at
her so. He did not respond directly, but made some remark about the
police, which increased her alarm to the point of an attempted
justification. She said that it was true about the arrows, as anyone
could see by looking up at the walls. But where was the bow? No one could
shoot an arrow without a bow, and when some one shouted that if an arrow
was used as a dagger, one wouldn't need a bow, a sort of frenzy seized
her and she acted quite insane, falling at the young girl's side and
whispering sentence after sentence in her ear.

"'What more was needed to stamp her as a mad woman in the eyes of the
ordinary observer? Nothing. But to you and me, with the cue just given,
it has another look. She had just seen the man whom she had herself
spared from an accusation which would have been his ruin accept in the
coldest fashion an explanation which left her own innocence in doubt.
What wonder she succumbed to temporary aberration! As will be remembered,
she soon became comparatively calm again, and so remained until in an
interview I had with her a half hour or so later I urged her, possibly
with too much insistence, for some explanation of the extreme agitation
she had shown at the time, when she broke forth with the remarkable
statement that it was not the child, but her husband, she was mourning,
stricken to death, as she would have us believe, simultaneously with the
young and innocent victim then lying dead at her feet.

"'Of course, such a coincidence was much too startling not to be regarded
by us all as the ravings of delirium; nor has anything occurred since in
the way of communication from, or in regard to the absent one, to show
that this so-called warning of death has been followed up by fact. But,
if you test her action by the theory I have just advanced, viz., that the
man she called husband was at that moment in the room with us and that
these words were a plea to him--the last appeal of a broken-hearted woman
for the support she felt to be her due--how the atmosphere of unreason
and mystery clears itself. His suggestion that what was needed there was
an alienist, and the pitiful efforts she made to exonerate herself
without implicating him in the murderous event, fall naturally into
place, as the action of a guilty man and the self-denying conduct of a
devoted woman.'"

"Romantic! too romantic!" objected the District Attorney. "I should think
we were listening to one of Dumas' tales."

"Dumas got his greatest effects from life, or so I have been told,"
remarked the Chief Inspector.

Mr. Gryce sat silent.

Suddenly, the District Attorney observed with the slightest tinge of
irony edging his tone:

"I presume you would find a like explanation for the messages she
professed to be sending to her husband, when engaged in babbling fool
words into the dead girl's ear."

"Certainly. He was there, mark you! He stood where he could both see and
hear her. All she said and all she did was by way of appeal to him for
some token of regret, some sign that he appreciated her reticence; and
when she found that it was bringing her nothing, she fainted away."

"Ingenious, very ingenious, Gryce. Had you failed to give us proofs
connecting this idol of the Republican party with the actual shooting,
it would have been simply ingenious and a quite useless expenditure
of talent. But we have these proofs, and while they are mainly
circumstantial, they undoubtedly call upon us for some recognition, and
so we will hear you out whatever action we may take afterward."

"But first I should like to ask Mr. Gryce one question," interposed his
assistant. Then addressing the detective: "Two mysteries are involved in
this matter. You have given us a clever explanation of one of them, but
how about the other? Will you, before going further, tell us what
connection you find between the theory just advanced and the flight and
ultimate suicide of Madame Duclos under circumstances which point to a
desire to suppress evidence even at the cost of her life? It was not
from consideration for Mr. Roberts, whom you have shown she hated. What
was it then? Have you an equally ingenious explanation for that too?"

"I have an explanation, but I cannot say that it is altogether
satisfactory. She died but yesterday, and my opportunities have been
small for any work since. What I have learned was from her sister-in-law,
whom I saw this morning. Realizing that she will be obliged to give full
testimony at the inevitable inquest, she is at last ready to acknowledge
that she has been aware for a long time of a secret in Madame's life.
That while she knew nothing of its nature, she had always thought that it
was in some manner connected with her prolonged residence abroad. Whether
it would also explain the meaning of her return at this time and the
seemingly inexplicable change made in her daughter's name while _en
route_, must be left to our judgment. Madame had told her nothing. She
had simply made use of their home, coming and going, not once, but twice,
without giving them the least excuse for her inexplicable conduct. A
hundred questions could not elicit more. But to one who like myself has
had the opportunity of observing this wretched woman at the moment of her
supreme distress an insight is given into her character, which suggests
the only plausible explanation of her action. Her sacrifice was one of
devotion! She perished in an exaltation of feeling. Love drove her to
this desperate act. Not the love of woman for a man, but the love which
women of her profound nature sometimes feel for one of their own sex.
Mrs. Taylor was her friend--wait, I hope to prove it--and to save her
from experiencing the extreme misery of seeing the man who was the joy
as well as bane of her life suffer from the consequences of his own
misdeeds, Antoinette Duclos felt willing to die and did. You smile,
gentlemen. You think the old man is approaching senility. Perhaps I am,
but if the contention is raised that no connection has been shown to
exist between Mrs. Taylor and this foreign Madame, save such as was made
by the death of Madame's child, I must retort by asking who warned Madame
Duclos of the fatal occurrence at the museum in time for her to flee
before even our telephone messages reached her hotel? Gentlemen, there is
but one person who could have done this--our chief witness, Ermentrude
Taylor. She alone had not only the incentive, but the necessary
opportunity. Coroner Price as well as myself made a great mistake when we
allowed Mrs. Taylor to go home alone that day."

"Very likely." This from the Chief Inspector. "But if the information I
have received on this point is correct, she seemed at that time to be so
entirely dissociated with a deed whose origin had just been located in
the opposite gallery, that you have no real cause to blame yourselves in
this regard."

"True; our minds were diverted. But you are waiting for me to explain
what I mean by opportunity. Since my attention has been drawn to Mrs.
Taylor again, I have been making inquiries. The chauffeur who drove her
to her hotel has been found, and he admits that she stopped once on her
way home, to buy some coffee. He watched her as she went into the store
and he watched her as she came out; and he smelled the coffee. Happily,
the interest he took in her as a sick woman intrusted to his care was
strong enough for him to remember the store. It was one with two
entrances, front and back; and next door to it there is a public building
with a long row of telephone booths on the ground floor. If I read the
incident aright, she bought her coffee, ordered it ground, slipped out at
the rear door and into the adjoining building, where, unnoticed and
unheard, she called up the Universal and got into communication with
Madame Duclos. When she returned it was by the same route. She did not
forget her coffee nor give way under the great strain to which she had
subjected herself till she reached her own apartment."

"Clever."

"And true, gentlemen; I will stake my reputation on it, unable as I am to
explain every circumstance, and close up every gap. Have you any further
questions to ask or shall I leave you to your deliberations?"




XXIX

A STRONG MAN


An hour later when the Chief Inspector rose to depart, it was with the
understanding that until their way cleared and their duty in this matter
had become inevitable, no word of this business should reach the press,
or even pass beyond the three officials interested.

Strange to say, they were able to keep this compact, and days elapsed
without any public recognition of the new factor which had entered into
the consideration of this complicated crime.

Then a hint of what was seething in the official mind was allowed to
carry its own shock to the person most interested. Mr. Roberts was
summoned to an interview with Coroner Price. No reason was given for this
act, but the time was set with an exactness which gave importance to a
request which they all felt the director would not venture to disregard.

Nor did he. He came at the time appointed, and Coroner Price in welcoming
him with becoming deference could not but notice the great change which
had taken place in him since that night they stood together in the museum
and saw the Indian make the trial with bow and arrow which located the
point of delivery as that of the upper pedestal. In just what this change
lay, the Coroner hardly knew, unless it was in the increased grayness of
his hair. Mr. Roberts' face, handsome as it was, was not an expressive
one. Slight emotions made no impression there; nor did he to-day present
anything but a calm and dignified appearance. Yet he was changed; and
anyone who had not seen him since that night must certainly observe it.

The Coroner, who was also a man of a somewhat stolid cut, proffered him a
seat and at once opened fire.

"You will pardon me any inconvenience I may have put you to, Mr. Roberts,
when I tell you that Coroner D---- of Greene County, is anxious to have a
few words with you. He would have visited you at your home; but I induced
him to see you here."

"Coroner D---- of Greene County!" Mr. Roberts was entirely surprised.
"And what business can he have with me?"

"It is in regard to the suicide of Madame Antoinette Duclos, committed,
as you know, a week since in the Catskills."

"Ah! an extraordinarily sad affair, and of considerable moment I should
judge, from its seeming connection with the one previously occurring at
our museum. The girls' mother, was she not? Grief evidently unseated her
brain. But--" here he changed his position quietly but with evident
effort:--"in what manner am I supposed to be in a position to help the
Coroner in his inquiry into this case? I was a witness, together with
many others, of what happened after the accident which took place at the
museum; but I know nothing of Madame Duclos or of her self-inflicted
death, beyond what has appeared in the papers."

"The papers! An uncertain guide, Mr. Roberts. You may not believe it,"
Coroner Price remarked with a strange sort of smile, "but there are
secrets known to this office, as well as to Police Headquarters, which
never get into the most enterprising journals."

Was this meant to startle the director, and did it succeed in doing so?

It may have startled him, but if so, he made no betrayal of the fact. His
manner continued to be perfectly natural and his voice under full control
as he replied that it would be strange if in a case like this they should
give out all the extraneous facts and possible clues which might be
gathered in by their detectives.

This was carrying the offense into the enemy's camp with a vengeance. But
the Coroner was saved replying by Mr. Roberts remarking:

"But this is not an answer to my question. Why should the Coroner of
Greene County want to see _me_?"

Coroner Price proffered him a cigar, during the lighting of which the
former remarked:

"It's certainly very odd. You say that you didn't know Madame Duclos."

"No; how should I? She was a foreigner, was she not?"

"Yes; a Frenchwoman, both by birth and marriage. Her husband, a professor
of languages, was located some sixteen years ago, in New Orleans."

"I never knew him. Indeed, I find it hard to understand why I should be
expected to show any interest in him or his wife."

"Well, I will tell you. You may not have known the Madame; but it is very
certain that she knew you."

"She?" This certainly unexpected blow seemed to make some impression.
"Will you give me your reasons for such an assertion? Was the name
Duclos a false one? Was her name like that of her daughter, Willetts? If
so, allow me to assure you that I never heard of a Willetts any more than
I have of a Duclos. That a woman of whatever name and nationality should
desert her child fills me with horror. I cannot speak of her, dead though
she be, with any equanimity. A mother and act as she did! She herself was
to blame, and only she for what happened to that beautiful girl--so
young--so sweet--so innocent. I have a weakness for youth. To me a girl
of that type is sacred. Had I been blessed with such a child----But
there, I am straying again from our point. What makes you say Madame
Duclos knew me?"

Before replying, the Coroner rose, and taking a small package from
his desk, opened it, and laid out before the astonished eyes of Mr.
Roberts the freshly printed photograph of himself with which we are
so well acquainted, and then the half-demolished one which for all its
imperfections showed that it had been originally struck off from the same
negative.

"Do you recognize this portrait of yourself as one taken by Fredericks
some dozen years ago?"

"Certainly. But this other? This end and corner of what must have been my
picture too, where was _it_ found?"

"Ah, that is what I have called you here to learn. This remnant of what
you have just admitted to have been your photograph also was found in the
very condition in which you see it now, in the wastebasket of the room
where Madame Duclos lodged previous to her flight to the Catskills."

"This! with the face----"

"Just that! With the face riddled out of it by bullets! She shot six into
it at intervals; waiting for the passing of an elevated train by her
windows, in the hope that the bigger noise would drown the lesser."

"It is nothing," was Mr. Roberts' indignant comment, as he brushed the
picture aside. "That was never my picture, or she wanted a target for her
skill and didn't care what she took. That is all I have to say to you or
to the Coroner of Greene County, on a matter in which I have no concern.
I am sorry to disappoint both of you, but it is so."

He rose, and the Coroner did not seek to detain him. He merely observed,
as the director turned to go:

"Have you heard the latest news about Mrs. Taylor?"

"No."

"She is improving rapidly. Soon she will be able to appear before the
jury already chosen to inquire into the cause and manner of Miss
Willetts' death."

"A fine woman!" came in a burst from the director's lips as he faced
about for a good-bye nod. "I don't know when I have seen one I admired
more."

And Coroner Price had nothing to say, he was stupefied.

But it was not so with Mr. Gryce, who entered immediately upon Mr.
Roberts' departure.

"Not a jarring note," he remarked. Evidently he had heard the whole
conversation. "I never for a moment imagined that he knew Madame Duclos.
Any knowledge we gain of her will have to come from Mrs. Taylor."

"He's a strong man. We shall find it difficult to hold our own against
him if we are brought to an actual struggle."

"Why did he run the forefinger of his right hand so continuously into his
right-hand vest pocket?" was Mr. Gryce's sole comment.

By which it looks as if he had seen as well as heard.

"I didn't notice it. Is the District Attorney prepared to make the next
move? Mine has failed."

"Not yet. The game is too hazardous. We should only make ourselves
ridiculous in the eyes of the whole world if we should fail in an attack
upon a man of such national importance. After the two inquests and a
letter I hope to receive from Switzerland, we may be in a position to
launch our first bomb. I don't anticipate the act with any pleasure;
the explosion will be something frightful."

"If half you think is true, the unexpected confronting of him with Mrs.
Taylor should produce some result. That's what I reckon on now, if the
business falls first to me."

"I reckon on nothing. Chance is going to take this thing out of our
hands."

"Chance! I don't understand you."

"I don't understand myself; but this is a case which will never come into
court."

"I differ with you. I almost saw confession in his face when he turned
upon me at last with that extravagant expression of admiration for the
woman you say he meant to kill."

"Why did his finger go so continuously to his vest pocket? When you
answer that, I will give a name to what I just called _chance_."




XXX

THE CREEPING SHADOW


Mrs. Taylor suffered a relapse, and the inquest which had been held back
in anticipation of her recovery was again delayed. This led to a like
postponement of an inquiry into the death of Madame Duclos; and a
consequent let-up in public interest which thus found itself, for the
nonce, deprived of further food on which to batten.

Meanwhile, Mr. Gryce was not idle. Anxious to determine just how and
where Madame Duclos' story fitted into the deeper and broader one of the
museum crime, he made use of his fast waning strength to probe its
mysteries and master such of its details as bore upon the serious
investigation to which he was so unhappily committed. When he had done
this,--when he had penetrated, as it were, into the very heart of the
matter to the elimination of all doubt and the full establishment of his
own theory, it was felt that the time had come for some sort of positive
action on the part of those interested in the cause of justice.

This they decided should take the form of a personal interview between
certain officials and Mr. Roberts himself. A lesser man would have been
asked to meet the District Attorney in his office; but in a case of such
moment where the honor of one so prominent in many ways was involved it
was thought best for them to visit him in his own home. To do this
without exciting his apprehension while still making sure of his presence
required some management. Various plans were discussed with the result
that a political exigency was brought into play. The District Attorney
asked Mr. Roberts for an interview for the purpose of introducing to him
a man whose influence could not fail to play an important part in his
future candidacy.

He did not name this man; but we will name him. It was the Chief
Inspector.

The appointment was made and the day set. It was the following Monday. On
Tuesday, Coroner Price was to open his inquest.

Did Carleton Roberts see any connection between these two events?

Who can tell? The secrets of such a brain are not to be read lightly. If
we possessed Sweetwater's interest, and were to follow in secret fashion
every action of the director on the evening preceding this date, what
conclusion should we draw in this regard? How would we characterize his
anticipations, or measure in our own mind the possibilities of the
future as felt by him?

He was very quiet. He ate his meal with seeming appetite. Then he took a
look over his whole house. From the carefulness with which he noted
everything, the changes which he had caused to be made in it were not
without their interest for him. Not a young man's interest, but yet an
interest as critical and acute as though he had expected it to be shared
by one whose comfort he sought and in whose happiness he would fain take
part.

This, to Sweetwater, had he our vision, would have been incomprehensible
from any point of view; especially, had he seen what followed when the
owner of all this luxury returned to his library.

There was a picture there; a small framed photograph which occupied the
post of honor on his desk.

It showed a young and pretty face, untouched, as yet, by the cares or
troubles of this world. He spent a minute or so in looking at it; then he
slowly lifted it, and taking the picture from the frame, gave it another
look, during which a smile almost derisive gathered slowly on his lips.
Before this smile had altogether vanished, he had torn the picture in two
and thrown the fragments into the fire he had kindled early in the
evening with his own hands.

If he stopped to watch these fragments burn, it was from abstraction
rather than from interest; for his step grew lighter as he left the
fireplace. Whatever this young girl's face had meant to him in days
gone by was now as completely dissipated as the little puff of smoke
which had marked the end of her picture.

If he read the papers afterward it was mechanically. Night, and the one
great planet sinking in the West, appeared to appeal to him much more
strongly than his books or the more than usually stirring news of the
day.

He must have stood an hour in his unlighted window, gazing out at the
tumbling waves lapping the shore.

But of his thoughts, God wot, he gave no sign.

Later, he slept.

Slept! with his hand under his pillow! Slept, though there were others in
the house awake!--or why this creeping shadow of a man outlined upon the
wall wherever the moon shone in, and disappearing from sight whenever the
way led through darkness.

It came from above; no noise accompanied it. Where the great window
opened upon the sea, lighting up the main staircase, it halted,--halted
for several minutes; then passed stealthily down, a shadowy silhouette,
descending now quickly, now slowly, as tread after tread is left behind
and the great hall is reached.

Here there is no darkness. Open doors admit the light from many windows.
A semi-obscurity is all, and through this the figure passes, but
hesitatingly still, and with pause after pause, till a certain door
is reached--a closed door--the only door which is closed in this part
of the house.

Here it stands--stands with profile to the panels, one ear against the
wood. One minute--two minutes--five minutes pass. Then a hand goes out
and touches the knob. It yields; yields without a sound--and a small gap
is seen between the door and its casing. This gap grows. Still no sound
to disturb the tragic silence. Stop! What was that? A moan? Yes, from
within. Another? Yes. Then all is quiet again. The dream has passed.
Sleep has resumed its sway. The gap can safely be made wider. This is
done, and the figure halting without, passes in.




XXXI

CONFRONTED


Late in the afternoon of the following day, the expected car entered Mr.
Roberts' spacious grounds. It contained, besides the chauffeur, just
two persons, the District Attorney and the Chief Inspector. But it was
followed by another in which could be seen Mr. Gryce and a stenographer
from the District Attorney's office.

The house was finished by this time, and to one approaching through the
driveway presented a very attractive appearance. As the last turn was
made, the sea burst upon the view--a somewhat tumultuous sea, for the
wind was keen that day and whipped the waves into foam and froth from the
horizon to the immediate shore-line. To add to the scene, a low black
cloud with coppery edges hovered at the meeting of sea and sky, between
which and themselves one taut sail could be seen trailing its boom in the
water.

To one of them--to Mr. Gryce, in fact, upon whose age Fancy had begun to
work, this battling craft presented an ominous appearance. It was doomed.
The gale was too much for it. Did he see in this obvious fact a prophecy
of what lay before the man upon whose privacy they were on the point of
intruding?

The house was so arranged that to reach the main entrance it was
necessary to pass a certain window. As they did so, the figure of Mr.
Roberts could be seen in the room beyond moving about in an interested
survey of its new furnishings and present comfortable arrangement. To
these men bent on an errand as far as possible removed from interests of
this kind, this evidence of Mr. Roberts' pleasure in the promise of
future domesticity gave a painful shock, and raised in the minds of more
than one of them a doubt--perhaps the first in days--whether a man so
heavily weighted with a burden of unacknowledged guilt could show this
pleasurable absorption in his new surroundings.

However, when they came to see him nearer, and marked the stiffening of
his body and the slight toss-up of his head, as he noted the number and
the exact character of his guests, their spirits fell again, for he was
certainly a broken man, however much he might seek to disguise it. Yet
there was something in this extraordinary man's personality--a force or
a charm wholly dissociated it may be from worth or the sterling qualities
which insure respect--which appealed to them in spite of their new-found
prejudice, and prevented any dallying with his suspense or the use of any
of the common methods usually employed in an encounter of this kind.

The Chief Inspector to whom the first say had been given faced the
director squarely, as he saw how the hand which had just welcomed the
District Attorney fell at his approach.

"You are surprised, Mr. Roberts, and rightly, to see me here not only in
connection with the Prosecuting Attorney of the City of New York, but
with a member of my own force. This, you will say, is no political
delegation such as you have been led to expect. Nor is it, Mr. Roberts.
But let us hope you will pardon this subterfuge when you learn that it
was resorted to for the sole purpose of sparing you all unnecessary
unpleasantness in an interview which can no longer be avoided or
delayed."

"Let us sit."

It was his only answer.

When they had all complied, the District Attorney took the lead by
saying:

"I am disposed to omit all preliminaries, Mr. Roberts. We have but one
object in this visit and that is to clear up to your satisfaction, as
well as to our own, certain difficulties of an unexpected nature which
have met us in our investigation into the crime in which you, as a
director of the museum in which it occurred, and ourselves as protectors
of the public peace, are all vitally concerned."

"Granted," came in the most courteous manner from their involuntary
host. "Yet I fail to understand why so many are needed for a purpose
so laudable."

"Perhaps this will no longer surprise you, if you will allow me to draw
your attention to this chart," was the answer made to this by the
District Attorney.

Here he took from a portfolio which he carried a square of paper which he
proceeded to lay out on a table standing conveniently near.

Mr. Roberts threw a glance at it and straightened again.

"Explain yourself," said he. "I am quite at your service."

The District Attorney made, perhaps, one of the greatest efforts of his
life.

"I see that you recognize this chart, Mr. Roberts. You know when it was
made and why. But what you may not know is this: that in serving its
original purpose, it has proved to be our guide in another of equal, if
not greater, importance. For instance, it shows us quite plainly who of
all the persons present at the time of first alarm were near enough to
the Curator's office to be in the line of escape from the particularly
secluded spot from which the arrow was delivered. Of these persons, only
one fulfills all other necessary conditions with an exactness which
excuses any special interest we may feel in him. It is he who is
tabulated here as number 3."

It was said. Mr. Roberts was well acquainted with his own number. He did
not have to follow with his eye the point of the District Attorney's
finger to know upon whose name it had settled; and for a moment,
surprise, shock,--the greatest which can befall a man,--struggled with
countless other emotions in his usually impassive countenance. Then he
regained his poise, and with a curiously sarcastic smile such as his lips
had seldom shown, he coldly asked:

"And by what stretch of probability do you pick me out for this attack?
There were other men and women in this court, some very near me if I
remember rightly. In what are their characters superior, or their claims
to respect greater, that you should thus single me out as the fool or
knave who could not only commit so wild and despicable an act, but go so
far in folly--let alone knavery--as to conceal it afterward?"

"No evidence has been found against the others you have named which could
in any way connect them with this folly--or shall we say knavery, since
you yourself have made use of the word. But hard as it is for me to say
this, in a presence so highly esteemed, this is not true of you, Mr.
Roberts, however high are our hopes that you will have such explanations
ready as will relieve our minds from further doubts, and send us home
rejoicing. Shall I be frank in stating the precise reasons which seem
to justify our present presumption?"

The director bowed, the same curious smile giving an unnatural expression
to his mouth.

"Let me begin then," the other continued, "by reading to you a list of
questions made out at Headquarters, as a test by which suspicion might be
conscientiously held or summarily dismissed. They are few in number," he
added, as he unfolded a slip of paper taken from his vest pocket. "But
they are very vital, Mr. Roberts. Here is the first:

"'Whose hand carried the bow from cellar to gallery?'"

The director remained silent; but the oppression of that silence was
difficult for them all to endure.

"This the second:

"'Was it the same that carried the arrow from one gallery to another?'"

Still no word; but Mr. Gryce, who was watching Mr. Roberts' every move
without apparently looking up from the knob of his own cane, turned
resolutely aside; the strain was too great. How long could such
superhuman composure endure? And which word of all that were to come
would break it?

Meanwhile, the District Attorney was reading the third question.

"'Is it possible for an arrow, shot through the loophole made by the
curving in of the vase, to reach the mark set for it by Mr. Travis'
testimony?'

"That question was answered when Mr. La Flèche made his experiments from
behind the two pedestals. It could not have been done from the one behind
which Mr. Travis crouched, but was entirely possible from the rear of the
other."

With a wave of his hand, Mr. Roberts dismissed this, and the District
Attorney proceeded.

"'Which of the men and women known to be in the museum when this arrow
was delivered has enough knowledge of archery to string a bow? A mark can
be reached by chance, but only an accustomed hand can string a bow as
unyielding as this one.'

"I will pause there, Mr. Roberts. You may judge by our presence here to
whose hand and to whose skill we have felt forced to ascribe this wanton
shooting of a young and lovely girl. We wish to be undeceived, and stand
ready to listen to anything you may have to say in contradiction of these
conclusions. That is, if you wish to speak. You know that you will be
well within your rights to remain silent. Likewise that if you decide to
speak, it will be our painful duty to make record of your words for any
use our duty may hereafter suggest."

"I will speak." The words came with difficulty,--but they came. "Ask what
you will. Satisfy my curiosity, as well as your own."

"First then, the bow. It was brought up from the cellar a fortnight or
more before it was used, and placed on end in the Curator's office, where
it was seen more than once by the woman who wipes up the floors. The
person who did this cast a shadow on the cellar wall,--that shadow was
seen. Need I say more? A man's shadow is himself--sometimes."

"I brought up the bow; but I do not see how that implicates me in the
use which was afterward made of it. My reasons for bringing it up were
innocent enough----"

He stopped--not even knowing that he stopped. His eyes had been drawn to
a small article which the District Attorney had dropped from his hand
onto the table. It looked like an end of black tape; but whether it was
this or something quite different, it held the gaze of the man who was
speaking, so completely that he forgot to go on.

The hush which followed paled the cheeks of more than one man there.
To release the tension, the District Attorney resumed his argument,
observing quietly, and as if no interruption had occurred:

"As to the arrow and its means of secret transfer from one side of the
building to the other in the face of a large crowd, let me direct your
attention to this little strip of folded silk. You have seen it before.
Surely, I am quite justified in asking whether indeed you have not
handled it both before and after the lamentable occurrence we are
discussing?"

"I see it for the first time," came from lips so stiff that the words
were with difficulty articulated. "What is its purpose?" he asked after
a short pause.

"I hardly think it necessary to tell you," came in chilling response from
the now thoroughly disenchanted official. "It looks like a loop, and
notwithstanding your assertion that you see it now for the first time,
we have ample evidence that it was once attached to the coat you wore on
that fatal day and later carefully severed from it and dropped on the
museum floor."

The District Attorney waited, they all waited with eyes on the subject of
this attack, for some token of shame or indignation at this scarcely
veiled insinuation. But beyond a certain stillness of expression, still
further masking a countenance naturally cold and irresponsive, no hint
was given that any effect had been produced upon him by these words.
The coal before it falls apart into ash holds itself intact though its
heart of flame has departed; so he--or such was Mr. Gryce's thought as he
waited for the District Attorney's next move.

It was of a sort which recalls that soul-harrowing legend of the man hung
up in an iron cage above a yawning precipice, from under whose madly
shifting feet one plank after another is withdrawn from the cage's
bottom, till no spot is left for him to stand on; and he falls.

"I hear that you are an expert with the bow and arrow, Mr. Roberts, or
rather were at an earlier stage of your career. You have even taken a
prize for the same from an Alpine Club."

Ah! that told. It was such an unexpected blow; and it showed so much
knowledge. But the man who thus beheld his own youth brought up in
accusation against him quickly recovered; and with an entire change of
demeanor, faced them all and spoke up at last quickly and defiantly:

"Gentlemen, I have shown patience up till now, because I saw that you had
something on your minds which it might be better for you and possibly for
me to be rid of. This affair of Miss Willett's death is, as all must
acknowledge, baffling enough to strain even to the point of folly any
effort made to explain it. I had sympathy with your difficulties, and
have still enough of that sympathy left, not to express too much
indignation at what you are pleased to call your suspicions. I will
merely halt for the moment your attempts in my direction, by asking,
what have you or anybody else ever seen in me to think I would practise
my old-time skill on a young and beautiful stranger enjoying herself in
a place so dear to my heart as the museum of which I have been a director
now these many years? Am I a madman, or a destroyer of youth? I love the
young. This inhuman death of one so fair and innocent has whitened my
locks and seared my very heart-strings. I shall never get over it; and
whatever evidence you may have or think you have, of my having handled
bow and arrow in that museum gallery, it must fall before the fact of my
natural incapability to do the thing with which you have charged me. No
act possible to man is more in contradiction to my instincts, than the
wanton or even casual killing of a young girl."

"I believe you."

It was the Inspector who spoke, and the emphasis which he gave to his
words lifted the director's head again into its old self-reliant poise.
But the silence which followed was so weighted with possibilities of
something yet to be said by this portentous holder of secrets, that it
caused the nobly lifted head slowly to droop again and the lips which had
opened impulsively to close.

Were the words coming--the words which might at a stroke pull down the
whole fabric of his life, past, present and to come?

In his excited state of mind he seemed already to hear them. Doom was
in their sound, and the world, once so bright, was growing dark about
him--dark!

Yet how could these men know? And if they did why did they not speak? And
they did not; they did not. There was silence in the air, not words; and
life for him was taking on once more its ancient colors, when sharp and
merry through the heavy quiet there rang out the five clear calls of a
cuckoo clock from some near-by room. One, two, three, four, five! Jolly
reminder of old days! But to the men who listened, the voice of doom
spoke in its gladsome peal, whether the ears which caught it were those
of accuser or accused. Old days were not the days to be rejoiced in at
a moment so perilous to the one and so painful to the others.

With the cessation of the last shrill cry, the Inspector repeated the
phrase:

"I believe you, Mr. Roberts. But how about the woman who was troubling
you with demands you had no wish to grant? Miss Willetts, as you choose
to call her, though you must know that her name is Duclos, was not the
only person in the line of the arrow shot on that day from one gallery to
the other. Perhaps this weapon of destruction was meant for one it failed
to reach. Perhaps--but I have gone far enough. I should not have gone so
far if it had not been my wish to avoid any misunderstanding with one of
such undoubted claims to consideration as yourself. If you have
explanations to offer--if you can in any way relieve our minds from the
responsibilities which are weighing upon us, pray believe in our honest
desire to have you do so. There may be something back of appearances
which has escaped our penetration; but it will have to be something
startlingly clear, for we know facts in your life which are not open to
the world at large, I may even say to your most intimate friends."

"As, for instance?"

"That Mrs. Taylor is no stranger to you, even if Mademoiselle Duclos
was. We have evidence you will find it hard to dispute that you knew
and--liked each other, fifteen years or so ago."

"Evidence?"

"Incontrovertible, Mr. Roberts."

"Attested to by her? I do not believe it. I never shall believe it, and
I deny the charge. The ravings of a sick woman,--if it is such you have
listened to----"

"I advise you to stop there, Mr. Roberts," interjected the District
Attorney. "Mrs. Taylor has said nothing. Neither has Madame Duclos. What
the former may say under oath I do not know. We shall both have an
opportunity to hear to-morrow, when Coroner Price opens his inquest. She
is in sufficiently good health now, I believe, to give her testimony.
Pray, say nothing." Mr. Roberts had started to his feet. "Do nothing. You
will be one of the witnesses called----"

There he stopped, meeting with steady gaze the wild eyes of the man who
was staring at him, staring at them all in an effort to hold them back,
while his finger crept stealthily and ever more stealthily toward his
right-hand vest-pocket.

"You would dare," he shouted, then suddenly dropped his hand and broke
into a low, inarticulate murmur, harrowing and dreadful to hear. To some
it sounded like a presage to absolute confession, but presently this
murmur took on a distinctness, and they heard him say:

"I should be glad to have five minutes' talk with Mrs. Taylor before that
time. In your presence, gentlemen, or in anybody's presence, I do not
care whose."

Did he know--had he felt whose step was in the hall, whose form was at
the door? If he did, then the agitation which in another moment shook his
self-possession into ashes was that of hope realized, not of fear
surprised. Ermentrude Taylor entered the room and at the sight of her he
rose and his arms went out; then he sank back weak and stricken into his
chair, gazing as if he could never have his fill at her noble countenance
luminous with a boundless pity if not with the tenderness of an
unforgotten love.

When she was near enough to speak without effort and had thanked the
gentlemen who had made way for her with every evidence of respect, she
addressed him in quite a natural tone but with strange depths of feeling
in her voice:

"What is it you want to say to me? As I stood at the door, I heard you
tell these gentlemen that you would like to have a few minutes' talk with
me. I was glad to hear that; and I am ready to listen to--_anything_."

The pause she made before uttering the last word caused it to ring with
double force when it fell. All heads drooped at the sound and the lines
came out on Mr. Gryce's face till he looked his eighty-five years and
more. But what Carleton Roberts had to say at this critical moment of his
double life was not at all what they expected to hear.

Rising, for her eyes seemed to draw him to his feet, he cried in the
indescribable tone of suppressed feeling:

"Shadows are falling upon me. My interview with these gentlemen may end
in a way I cannot now foresee. In my uncertainty as to how and when we
may meet again, I should like to make you such amends as opportunity
allows me. Ermentrude, will you marry me--now--to-night, before leaving
this house?"

A low cry escaped her. She was no more prepared for this astounding offer
than were these others. "Carleton!" came in a groan from her lips.
"Carleton! Carleton!" the word rising in intensity as thought followed
thought and her spirits ran the full gamut of what this proposal on his
part meant in past, present and future. Then she fell silent and they saw
the great soul of the woman illumine a countenance always noble, with the
light of a purpose altogether lofty. When she spoke it was to say:

"I recognize your kindness and the impulse which led to this offer. But
I do not wish to add so much as a feather's weight to your difficulties.
Let matters remain as they are till after----"

He took a quick step toward her.

"Not if my heart is full of regret?" he cried. "Not if I recognize in
you now the one influence left in this world which can help me bear the
burden of my own past and the threatening collapse of my whole future?"

"No," she replied, with an access of emotion of so elevated a type it
added to rather than detracted from her dignity. "It is too much or it is
not enough."

His head drooped and he fell back, throwing a glance to right and left
at the two officials who had drawn up on either side of him. It was an
expressive glance; it was as if he said, "You see! she knows as well as
you for whom the arrow was intended--yet she is kind."

But in an instant later he was before her again, with an aspect so
changed that they all marveled.

"I had hoped," he began, then stopped. Passion had supplanted duty in his
disturbed mind; a passion so great it swept everything before it and he
stood bare to the soul before the woman he had wronged and under the eyes
of these men who knew it. "Life is over for us two," said he, "whether
your presence here is a trap in which I have been caught and from which
it is hopeless for me to extricate myself; or whether it is by chance or
an act of Providence that we should meet again with eager ears listening
and eager eyes watching for such tokens of guilt as will make their own
course clear, true it is that they have got what they sought; and
whatever the result, nothing of real comfort or honor is left for either
you or me. Our lives have gone down in shipwreck; but before we yield
utterly to our fate, will you not grant me my prayer if I precede it by
an appeal for forgiveness not only for old wrongs but for my latest and
gravest one? Ermentrude, I entreat."

Ah, then, they were witness to the fascination of the man, hidden
heretofore, but now visible even to the schooled spectators of this
tragedy of human souls. The tone permeated with pathos and charm, the
look, the attitude from which all formality had fled and only the natural
grace remained, all were of the sort which sways without virtue and
rouses in both weak and strong an answering chord of sympathy.

The woman in whom it probably awakened a thousand memories trembled under
it. She drew back, but her whole countenance had softened, revealing
whatever of native charm she also possessed. Would she heed his prayer?
If she did not, they could well be silent. If she did----

But the woman gave no sign of yielding.

"Cease, Carleton," came in stern reply--stern for all the approach to
concession in her manner. "If your life and my life are both over, let us
talk of other things than marriage. When one faces death, whether of body
or spirit, one clings to higher hopes than those of earth or its
remaining interests. If my forgiveness will help you to this end, you
have it. I have had but one aim in life since we parted, and that was to
see your higher self triumph over the material one. If that hour has come
or is coming, my life needs no other consolation. In having that, I
possess all."

The man who listened--the men who listened--stood for a moment in awe of
the nobility with which she thus expressed herself. Then the only person
present whom she seemed to see burst forth with a low cry, saying:

"You shall not be disappointed. I----"

But there she hushed him. "No," said she. And he seemed to understand and
was silent.

What did this mean?

The District Attorney betrayed his doubt; the Chief his, each in a
characteristic way. The former frowned, the latter tapped his breast
absently with his forefinger while looking askance at Mr. Gryce, who in
his turn took up some little object from the desk beside which he was
standing and to it confided whatever surprise he felt at this proof of
some uncommunicated secret shared by these two, of which he had not yet
become possessed. Then he again looked up and the glances of the three
men met. Should they attempt to sound this new mystery of mutual
understanding to which as yet they had received no clue? No, the inquest
would do that. Neither this man nor this woman could stand a close
examination. He would weaken from despair, she from the candor of her
soul. They would wait. But ah, the tragedy of it! Even these men hardened
by years of contact with every species of human suffering and crime were
openly moved. If they needed an excuse, surely they could find it in the
superior abilities and attainment of the man upon whom justice was about
to wreak its vengeance. And yet, what more despicable crime had they ever
encountered in the long line of their duty. The youth and innocence of
the real victim and the worth of the intended one only added to its
wickedness and shame. It was this thought which again steeled their
hearts.

Meantime the two upon whom they now redirected their attention had
attempted no further speech and made no further move. She had said No
to something he was willing to concede, and he had accepted that no as
final. Had this brought him any relief? Possibly. And she? Had it had
a like effect on her? Hardly. Though her aspect was one of calm
resignation, her physical powers were perceptibly failing. This in
itself was alarming, and determined them not to subject her any longer
to an interview which might rob her of all strength for the morrow.
Accordingly, the District Attorney, addressing Mr. Roberts, suggestively
remarked:

"Mrs. Taylor is showing fatigue. Would it not be better for you to say at
once while she is yet in a condition to remain with us, whether you
prefer to make a public statement of your case or leave it to unfold
itself in the ordinary manner through the two impending inquests and the
busy pen of the reporter?"

"First, am I under arrest? Am I to leave this house----?"

"Not to-night. An officer will remain here with you. To-morrow--after the
inquest, perhaps."

"I will make a statement. I will make it now. I wish to be left in peace
to-night, to think and to regret." Then turning to her, "Ermentrude, a
woman who has served me and my family for twenty-five years is at this
very moment in the rear of the house. Go to her and let her care for you.
I have business here,--business of which I am sure you approve."

"Yes, Carleton. And remember that I shall be put upon my oath to-morrow.
The questions I am asked I must answer--and truthfully," she added,
with a look as full of anguish as inquiry.

"I shall be truthful myself," he assured her, and again their eyes met.

After a while she gave a stumble backward, which Mr. Gryce perceiving,
held out his arm and assisted her from the room.

But once in the hall he felt the clinch of her fingers digging into his
arm.

"Is there no hope?" she whispered. "Must I live----"

"Yes," he interrupted kindly, but with the authority given him by his
relations to this case. "You have won his heart at last, and he speaks
truly when he says that to you and to you alone can he look for comfort,
wherever the action of the law may leave him."

She shivered; then glowed again with renewed fire.

"Thank you," she said; and they passed on.




XXXII

"WHY IS THAT HERE?"


They waited while he wrote. A sinister calm quite unlike that which the
victim of his ambition had shown under the stress of equal suffering if
not equal guilt had subdued his expression to one of unmoved gloom, never
to be broken again.

As word after word flowed from the point of his pen upon the paper spread
out before him, the two officials sitting aside in the shadow watched for
the flicker of an eyelash, or a trembling of the fingers so busy over
their task. But no such sign of weakening did they see. Once only did he
pause to look away--was it into the past or into futurity?--with a
steady, self-forgetful gaze which seemed to make a man of him again. Then
he went on with his task with the grimness of one who takes his last step
into ignominy.

We will follow his words as he writes, leaving them for the others to
read on their completion.

  "I, Carleton Roberts, in face of an inquiry which is about to be held
  on the death of her who called herself Angeline Willetts, but whose
  real name is as I have since been told Angeline Duclos, wish to make
  this statement in connection with the same.

  "It was at my hand she died. I strung the bow and let fly the arrow
  which killed this unfortunate child. Not with the intention of finding
  my mark in her innocent bosom. She simply got in the way of the woman
  for whom it was intended--if I really was governed by intent, of which
  I here declare before God I am by no means sure.

  "The child was a stranger to me, but the woman in whose stead she
  inadvertently perished I had known long and well. My wrongs to her had
  been great, but she had kept silence during my whole married life and
  in my blind confidence in the exemption this seemed to afford me, I put
  no curb upon my ambition which had already carried me far beyond my
  deserts. Those who read these lines may know how majestic were my
  hopes, how imminent the honor, to attain which I have employed my best
  energies for years. Life was bright, the future dazzling. Though I had
  neither wife nor child, the promise of activity on the lines which
  appeal to every man of political instinct gave me all I seemed to need
  in the way of compensation. I was happy, arrogantly so, perhaps, when
  without warning the woman I had not seen in years, who,--if I thought
  of her at all, I honestly believed to be dead--wrote me a letter
  recalling her claims and proposing a speedy interview, with a view to
  their immediate settlement. Though couched in courteous terms, the
  whole letter was instinct with a confidence which staggered me. She
  meant to reënter my life, and if I knew her, openly. Nothing short of
  bearing my name and being introduced to the world as my wife would
  satisfy her; and this not only threatened a scandal destructive of my
  hopes, but involved the breaking of a fresh matrimonial engagement into
  which I had lately entered with more ardor I fear than judgment. What
  was I to do? Let her have her way--this woman I had not seen in fifteen
  years,--who if at the age of twenty had seemed to my enthusiastic youth
  little short of a poet's dream, must be far short of any such
  perfection now? I rebelled at the very thought. Yet to deny her meant
  the possible facing of consequences such as the strongest may well
  shrink from. And the time for choice was short. She had limited her
  patience to a fortnight, and one day of that fortnight had already
  passed.

  "I have in my arrogant manhood sometimes credited myself with the
  possession of a mind of more or less superiority; but I have never
  deceived myself as to the meretricious quality of the goodness with
  which many have thoughtlessly endowed me. I have always known it was
  not even up to that of men whose standards fall far short of the
  highest integrity. But never, till that hour came, had I realized
  to what depths of evil my nature could sink under a disappointment
  threatening the fulfillment of my ambitious projects. Had there been
  any prospect of escape from the impending scandal by means usually
  employed by men in my position, I might have given my thoughts less
  rein and been saved at least from crime. But these were not available
  in my case. She was not a woman who could be bought. She was not even
  one I could cajole. Death only would rid me of her; kindly death which
  does not come at call. This is as far as my thoughts went at first. I
  was a gentleman and had some of a gentleman's feelings. But when my
  sleep began to be disturbed by dreams, and this was very soon, I could
  not hide from myself toward what fatal goal my thoughts were tending.
  To be freed from her! To be freed from her! dinned itself in my ears,
  sleeping or waking, at home or abroad. But I saw no plain road to this
  freedom, for our paths never crossed and my honor as well as safety
  demanded that the coveted result should be without any possible danger
  to myself. Cold, heartless villain! you say. Well, so I was; no colder
  nor more heartless villain lives to-day than I was between the
  inception of my purpose and its diabolical fulfillment in the manner
  publicly known.

  "So true is this that, as time went on, my ideas cleared and the plan
  for which I was seeking unfolded itself before me from the day I came
  upon a discarded bow lying open to view in the museum cellar. The
  dreams of which I have spoken had prepared me for this sudden
  knowledge. The woman who blocked my way and against whom I meditated
  this crime was connected in my mind with Alpine scenery and Alpine
  events. It was at Lucerne I had first met her, young and fresh, but
  giving no promise of the woman she has since become; and in the visions
  which came and went before my eyes, it was not herself I saw so much as
  the surroundings of those days, and the feats of prowess by which I had
  hoped to win her approbation. Among these was the shooting at a small
  target with a bow and arrow. I became very proficient in this line. I
  shot as by instinct. I could never tell whether I really took aim or
  not, but the arrow infallibly hit the mark. In my dreams I always saw
  it flying, and when this bow came to hand a thought of what the two
  might accomplish came with it. Yet even then I had no real idea of
  putting into practice this fancy of a distempered brain. I brought the
  bow up from the cellar and hid it unstrung in the Curator's closet,
  more from idle impulse I fondly thought, than from any definite
  purpose. Another day I saw the Curator's keys lying on his desk and
  took them to open a passage to the upper floor. But for all that, I
  felt sure that I would never use the bow even after I had thrust it
  near to hand behind the tapestry masking the secret entrance to this
  passage. One dreams of such things but they do not perpetrate them. I
  might approach the deed, I might even make every preparation for its
  accomplishment, but that did not mean that the day would ever come
  when I should actually loose an arrow from this bow against a human
  breast. More than once I laughed at the mere idea.

  "But the devil knew me better than I knew myself. Impelled by these
  same instincts, I answered the letter sent me with the assurance that I
  would surely see her, but I did not name any day, intuitively knowing
  that what I dreamed of doing but certainly should not do required a
  certain set of circumstances not easily to be met with. Instead, I bade
  her show herself in the second section of the southern gallery, every
  Tuesday and Friday at the exact hour of noon. If at the moment the two
  hands of the clock came together, she saw me on the lower step of the
  main staircase, she was to know that I was free to talk and would soon
  join her. If she did not see me there, she was to return home and come
  another day. She answered that she would come but once, and set the
  day. This was startling to my pride, but in a way it brought me a sense
  of relief. To wait till all was propitious might mean continual delays.
  The very fact of my uncertainty as to whether or not I should have the
  courage of my wishes at the critical moment made an indefinite
  prolongation of my present condition undesirable. Better one straight
  risk and be done with it.

  "I was to wait two weeks. Why she exacted so long and seemingly
  unnecessary a delay, I do not know. Before I saw her, I thought it was
  from a sheer desire to make me suffer; now I know it was not for that.
  However, it did make me suffer, from the alternate weakening and
  strengthening of my resolve. When the day came, the most trivial of
  circumstances would have deterred me from what still had the nature of
  a dream to me. Unhappily, everything worked for its fulfillment. There
  had never been fewer persons in the building at the noon hour; nor had
  there been a time during the past two weeks when the Curator was more
  completely occupied in a spot quite remote from his office. As I tried
  the door leading up the little winding staircase to the one back of the
  tapestry where the bow lay, and found it, just as I had left it,
  unlocked, I had a sense for the first time that the courage concerning
  which I had had so many doubts would hold. At that moment I was a
  murderer in heart and purpose, whatever I was after or have been since.
  As I recognized this fact, I felt my face go pale and my limbs shake
  from sheer horror of myself. But this weakness was short-lived and I
  felt my blood flowing evenly again when having slipped into my place
  behind the upper pedestal I peered through my peep-hole in a search for
  her figure in the spot where I had bidden her await me.

  "She was not there, but then it was not quite twelve, though the noon
  hour was so near she must be somewhere in the gallery and liable at any
  minute to cross my line of vision.

  "It was fifteen years, as I have already said, since I had seen her;
  and I had no other picture of her in my mind than the appearance she
  had made as a girl, coarsened by time and disappointment. Why I should
  have looked for just this sort of change in her, God knows, but I did
  expect it and probably would not have recognized her if I had passed
  her in the court. But I was not worrying about any mistake I might make
  of this kind. All I seemed to fear was that at the critical moment some
  one would pass between us on my side of the gallery. I never thought of
  anyone passing in front of her.

  "I had picked out Section II as the place where she was to show
  herself, because it was in a direct line with the course an arrow would
  take from a sight behind the vase. I had bade her to look for me in the
  court, and that would bring her forward to the balustrade in front. A
  knot of scarlet ribbon at her breast was to distinguish her. But the
  spot I had thus chosen for her, and the spot I had chosen for myself
  had this disadvantage; that while I could see straight to my mark from
  the peep-hole I have mentioned, I could see nothing to right or left of
  that one line of vision. Why I did not realize the hazard involved in
  this fact I do not know. Enough that my whole thought was centered on
  the lookout I was keeping and it was with a shock of surprise I
  suddenly saw the whole scene blotted from my view by the passing by of
  some one on my own side of the gallery. This must have been the
  Englishman who found his vantage-point from behind the other pedestal.
  He went by quickly, and as the opening cleared once more, I beheld the
  woman for whom I was waiting appear in the spot selected. For an
  instant I was dazzled. I had not expected to see so noble a figure; and
  in that instant a cloud came before my eyes, my resolution failed,--I
  was almost saved--she was almost saved--when instinct got the better of
  my judgment, and the arrow flew just as that young creature bounded
  forward in her delight at seeing her steamer admirer watching her from
  my side of the court.

  "The shock of thus beholding a perfect stranger fall under my hand
  benumbed me, but only for an instant. In the two weeks of intolerable
  waiting through which I had just passed, I had so forcibly impressed
  upon my consciousness the exact course I was to pursue from the instant
  the arrow left the bow that I went about the same automatically.
  Pulling out the edge of the tapestry, I slipped behind it, dropping my
  bow in the doorway left open for my passage. This caused me no thought
  and awakened no fears. But what took all the nerve I possessed, and
  gave me in one awful moment a foretaste of the terror and despair
  awaiting me in days to come, was the opening of the second door--the
  one leading into the Curator's office.

  "What might I not be forced to encounter when the knob to this was
  turned! Some strolling guest--Correy the attendant--or even the guard
  who was never where he was needed and always where he was not! For
  anyone to be there of sufficient intelligence to note my face and the
  place from which I came meant the end of all things to me. It was not
  necessary for this imaginary person to be in the room. To be within
  sight of it was enough. But this fear--this horror of impending
  retribution--did not make me hesitate or delay my advance a single
  instant. Everything depended upon my being one of the crowd when the
  first alarm was raised. So with the daring of one who in escaping a
  present danger hurls himself knowingly into another equally perilous,
  I pushed open the door and entered the office.

  "It was empty! Fortune had favored me thus far. Nor was there anyone in
  the court beyond, near enough or interested enough to note my presence
  or observe any effort I might make at immediate departure. With the
  hope riding high within my breast that I should yet reach the street
  before my crime was discovered, I made for the nearest exit. But I was
  not destined to reach it. When I was only some half a dozen paces from
  the great door, Correy's cry rang loudly through the building, with the
  result that all egress was shut off, and I was left, with no other aid
  than my own assurance, to face my hideous deed with all its appalling
  consequences.

  "How it served me, you have seen. Steeled by a sense of my own danger,
  I was able to confront the woman whom I had so deeply wronged,--whom
  I had even endeavored to kill,--and ply her with those questions upon
  whose answers depended not only my honor, but my very life.

  "My cold-blooded absorption in my own security, and her almost
  superhuman devotedness, must have given the Powers cognizant of mortal
  lives a new lesson in human nature. Never has a greater contrast been
  shown between self-seeking man and self-forgetful woman. But deeply as
  I was impressed by the steadfastness and magnanimity of her spirit, nay
  by the woman herself, I have been less oppressed by the great debt I
  owed her than by the thought, growing more intolerable every day, that
  in my frenzied struggle against fate I had cut short the existence of a
  young and lovely girl whose right to live was beyond all comparison
  superior to my own.

  "But now, as the shadows fall thickly about me and the last page of my
  dishonorable existence awaits to be turned, my mortal wound is this:
  that I must leave to loneliness and unspeakable grief the great-souled
  woman who has seen into the heart of my crime and yet has forgiven me.
  All else of anguish or dread is swallowed up in this one over-mastering
  sorrow. To her my heart's thanks are here given; to her my last word is
  due. May she find in it all that her soul calls for in this hour of
  supreme disaster: repentance equal to my sin, and a recognition of her
  worth, which, late as it is for her comfort, may lead to her acceptance
  of the consolation yet to be meted out to her from eternal sources."

That was all. The pen dropped from his hand and he sat inert, almost
pulseless, in the desolation of a despair known only to those who, at a
blow, have sunk from the height of public applause into the depths of
irretrievable ignominy.

The District Attorney, who was a man of more feeling than was usually
supposed, contemplated him in compassionate silence for a moment, then
gently--very gently for him--leaned forward and drew from under the
unresisting hands the scattered sheets which lay in disorder before him,
and passed them on to his stenographer.

"Read," said he; but immediately changed his mind and took them back. "I
will read them myself. Mr. Roberts, I must ask you to listen. It is right
for you to know exactly what you have written before you affix your
signature to it."

Mr. Roberts bowed mechanically, but he looked very weary.

The District Attorney began to read. It is a matter of doubt whether Mr.
Roberts so much as heard him. Yet the reading went on, and when the last
word was reached, the District Attorney, after a pause during which his
eye had consulted that of the Chief Inspector, remarked in a kindly tone
and yet with an emphasis impossible to disregard:

"I see that you have made no mention of Madame Duclos in this relation of
the cause and manner of her young daughter's death. Is it possible that
you are ignorant of the part she played in your affairs or the reasons
she had for the suicide with which she terminated her life?"

"I know nothing of the woman but that she was the mother of the girl
who----" he hesitated, then added with a gesture of despair, "fell under
my hand."

The District Attorney said nothing in reply, he simply waited. But no
denial or further admission came.

"She was a friend of Mrs. Taylor," suggested the Chief Inspector as the
silence grew somewhat oppressive. "An old friend; a friend of her early
days; do you not remember?"

"I do not."

His tormentors went no further. Why harass him for an item of knowledge
which the morrow would certainly bring to light. Instead, they hurried
through the remaining formalities, adding to the reading already made a
capitulation of such answers as he had given to their questions, and
witnessing, while he signed both papers.

This done, he was left for a moment in peace, while the two officials
drew aside into the embrasure of the window for a momentary conference.

He seemed to notice the hush, for he roused from the torpor into which
he was again about to sink, and glanced cautiously about him. The
stenographer was busy with his papers, and the other two stood with their
backs to him. If help was to come it must come now. This he realized,
with a sudden graying of his face which took from it the last vestige
of that youthfulness which had been its distinguishing feature; and the
finger which had fumbled from time to time in his vest-pocket stole
thither once more, bringing forth a little vial which in another moment
he raised to his lips.

Was there no one to see? No one to stop him?

No, the stenographer was closing up his bag; and the two officials deep
in conversation. He could drain the last drop unseen.

But the sound of the little vial crashing upon the hearthstone whither he
had flung it broke the quiet and startled the District Attorney forward
in a doubt bordering upon terror.

"What is that?" he asked, pointing to the fragments that had just missed
the ash heap.

"It contained oblivion," was the answer given him in steady tones. "Do
you wonder that I sought it? Nothing can save me. I have two minutes
before me. I would dedicate them to _her_."

His head fell forward on his hands. The clock on the mantel struck. Could
it be that when the second hand had circled its small disc twice--

This was the thought of the District Attorney, but not of the Chief
Inspector. He had advanced to the desk where Mr. Roberts was still
sitting, and remarked with a gravity exceeding any he had hitherto shown:

"Mr. Roberts, I have a great disappointment for you. This little vial
of yours which held poison yesterday contained nothing but a few drops
of harmless liquid to-day. The change was made in the night, by one
suspicious of your intention. You will have to face the full consequences
of your crime."

Carleton Roberts' arms collapsed and his face fell forward upon them, and
they heard a groan. Then in the short silence which followed, another and
a very different sound broke upon their ears. Seven clear calls from the
cuckoo-clock rang out from the room beyond, followed by a woman's
smothered cry.

It was the one ironic touch the situation had lacked. It pierced the
heart of Carleton Roberts and started him in anguish to his feet.

"O God!" he cried, "that I should have let that thing of evil shriek
out the wicked hours from day to day, only to torment her now with old
remembrances! Why did I not crush it to atoms long ago? Why did I leave
it hanging on my wall----"

With a dash he was in the hall. In another instant he was at the door of
his bedroom, followed by the two officials crowding closely up behind
him.

Would they find her there? Yes; where else should she be, she whom this
call from the past might almost draw from the grave! She was there, but
not in the spot where they had expected to see her, nor in that state of
collapse of which her former weakness had given promise. Apart from Mr.
Gryce, with her form drawn up to its full height she stood, with her
finger pointing not at the cuckoo-clock as would seem most natural, but
at a small newspaper print of the dead girl's face pinned up on another
wall.

"Why is that here?" she cried in a passionate inquiry which ignored every
other presence than that of him who must heed and answer her. "Carleton,
Carleton, why have you pinned that young girl's face up opposite your bed
where you can see it on waking, where it can look at you and you at
it--Or----" here checked by a sudden thought she broke off, and her tone
changed to one of doubt, "perhaps you did not put it there yourself?
Perhaps its presence on your wall is a trick of the police to startle you
into betrayal. Was it? Was it?"

"No, Ermentrude." The words came slowly but firmly. "I put it there
myself. I thought it would haunt me less than if left to my imagination."

Then in a low tone which perhaps reached no other ears than hers:

"I do not know what it does to me; or what I see in it. Something besides
youth and beauty. Something----"

"Hush!" She had him by the arm. "Forget it; these men are listening----"

But with a convulsive movement, he broke from her hold, and in so doing
his eyes fell on a mirror confronting him from the opposite side of the
room. Two faces were visible in it, his own and that of his young victim
pictured in the print hanging on the wall behind him. They seemed alive.
Both of them seemed alive, and as he saw them thus in conjunction, the
sweet, pure countenance of the child he had instinctively mourned,
peering at him over his guilty shoulder--the sweat started on his
forehead and he uttered a great cry. Then he stood still, swaying from
side to side, the eyes starting from his head in a horror transcending
all that had gone before.

"Take him away!" she cried. "Out of the room! Let him remain anywhere but
here. I pray you; I entreat."

But he was not to be moved.

"Ermentrude," he whispered; "they say her name was Duclos. She gave her
name as Willetts. What _was_ her name? You know the truth and can tell
me."




XXXIII

AGAIN THE CUCKOO-CLOCK


Then to the wonder and admiration of all, this extraordinary woman showed
her full strength and the inexhaustible power she possessed over her own
emotions. With a smile piteous in its triumph over a suffering the depths
of which they were just beginning to sound, she held his gaze in hers and
quietly said:

"You have driven me to the wall, Carleton. If I answer, nothing remains
to us of hope or honor; nothing upon which to stay our souls but a
consciousness of truth. Shall we let all go and meet our fate as people
should who stand on a desolate shore and see the whole world roll away
from before them?"

_"What was her name?"_

At his look, at this repetition of his question, she straightened up, and
addressed herself to Mr. Gryce.

"You were astonished and regarded me curiously when at the sound of that
foolish little clock I entered this room. That little clock means
everything to me, gentlemen." Here she surveyed them one after the other
with her proud and candid eye. "It is the one witness I have--is it not,
Carleton?" she asked, turning quickly upon him. "You have not failed me
in this?"

He shook his head.

"A witness to what I am still ready to ignore, if such is your will,
Carleton."

Terror! terror far beyond anything they had seen in him yet, paled his
cheek and made his face almost unrecognizable; but he could still speak,
and in the murmur he let fall she heard no word of protest.

"May I ask one of you to take down that clock?"

In a few minutes it lay on the table to which she had pointed. Mr. Gryce
who had at that moment in his pocket a copy of the inscription pasted on
its back, expected her to turn it over and show them the token of Mr.
Roberts' and her united initials.

But it was not this she had in mind. Though she took up the clock, she
did not turn it round, only looked at it steadily, her trembling lips and
a tear--the first they had seen--testifying to the rush of old memories
which this simple little object brought back to her long suffering heart.
Then she laid it down again and seemed to hesitate.

"I want to get at the works inside," she appealed to them with a helpless
accent. "Can you tear off the back? That would be the quickest way. But
no, I know a quicker," and lifting the clock again she turned it upside
down and shook it.

They heard--what did they hear? No one could say, but when she again
reversed it, there fell out upon the table and rolled to the floor a
small gold circlet. Lifting it, Mr. Gryce held it out to her. Taking it,
she carried it over to the District Attorney and placed it in his hand.

"Read the inscription inside."

He did so, and looking quickly up, said:

"This is a wedding ring! Yours! You believe yourself to have been married
to him."

"I _was_ married to him in Switzerland. The marriage was legal; he knows
it, he acknowledges it, or why should he keep this ring. I have endured
seeing him put another woman in my place. I have kept silence for years;
but when he asks the right name of the child shot down in the museum, and
asks it in a way which compels answer, then I must make known my rightful
claims. For that child was not only mine, but _his_; born after he left
me, and reared without his knowledge, first in this country and then in
France."

And breaking down now utterly, she fell on her knees sobbing out her soul
at the feet of him from whose honor she had torn the last poor, pitiful
shred.

As for him, he said nothing; even his lips refused the smallest cry. Only
his hand which had hung at his side went to his heart; and thus he stood
swaying--swaying, till he finally fell forward into the arms she suddenly
threw out to receive him.

"Carleton! Carleton!" she wailed, searching for consciousness in his fast
glazing eye. "It was to show you your child that I made the appointment
at the museum. Not for myself. Oh, not for myself, but for your sake,
that you might have----"

Useless; all useless.

He was dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

Would she have had it otherwise? Would any of them? When they were quite
sure of the fact, she placed the ring in his still warm hand; then she
solemnly put it on her finger, and turning, faced them all.

"Do not blame me too much for this final blow I gave him. He had already
seen the truth in that mirror over there. His face--look at it and then
at this picture of her taken after death, and see the resemblance! It is
showing plainer every minute. It was the something which had worried and
eluded him. Nothing could have kept back the truth from him after that
one glimpse he caught of himself and her in the mirror. I loved him. Mine
is the grief; you will let me stay here with him to-night. To-morrow I
will answer all questions."




XXXIV

THE BUD--THEN THE DEADLY FLOWER


You who have read thus far will care little for the legalities which
followed the events just related, but you may wish to know to a fuller
extent some of the facts in Ermentrude Taylor's life which led to this
tragic end of all her hopes.

Her story is twofold, the portion connecting her with Carleton Roberts
being entirely dissociated from that which made her the debtor of
Antoinette Duclos. Let me tell the latter first, as it preceded the
other, and tell it in episodes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two girls stood at one end of a long walk of immemorial yews. At
the other could be seen the advancing figure of a man, young, alert,
English-clad but unmistakably foreign. They were school girls and bosom
friends; he their instructor in French; the walk one attached to a
well-known seminary. When they had entered this walk, it had been empty.
Now it held for one of them--and possibly for the other, too--a world of
joy and promise;--the world of seventeen. Innocent and unthinking,
neither of them had known her own heart, much less that of her fellow.
But when in face of that approach, eye met eye with an askance look of
eager question, revelation came, crimsoning the cheeks of both, and
marking an epoch in either life.

Noble of heart and tender each toward the other, they were yet human. Arm
fell from arm, and with an equally spontaneous movement, they turned to
search each the other's countenance, not for betrayal,--for that had
already been made--but for those physical charms or marks of mental
superiority which might attract the eye or win the heart of a man of the
ideality of this one.

Alas! these gifts, for gifts they are, were much too unequally
distributed between these two to render the balance at all even.

Ermentrude was handsome; Antoinette was not.

Ermentrude had besides, what even without beauty would have made her
conspicuous to the eye, the figure of a goddess and the air of a queen.
But Antoinette was small and had to feel secure and in a happy mood to
show the excellence of her mind and the airy quality of her wit.

Then, Ermentrude had money and could dress, while Antoinette, who was
dependent upon an English uncle for everything she possessed, wore
clothes so plain that but for their exquisite neatness, one would never
dream that she came from French ancestry, and that ancestry noble.

Yes, she had that advantage; rank was hers, but not the graces which
should accompany it. More than that, she had nothing with which to
support it. Better be of the yeoman class like Ermentrude, and smile like
a duchess granting favors. Or so she thought, poor girl, as her meek
regard passed from the friend whose attractions she had thus acknowledged
to the man whose approbation would make a goddess of her too.

He was coming--not with his usual indifferent swing, but eagerly,
joyously, as though this moment meant something to him too. She knew it
did. Small memories rushing upon her, made no doubt of that. But why?
Because of Ermentrude or because of herself? Alas! she could recall
nothing which would answer that. They were much together; he had scarcely
ever seen them separate. It might be either----Hardly alive from
suspense, she watched him coming--coming. In a moment he would be upon
them. On which would his eyes linger?

That would tell the tale.

In an anguish of ungovernable shyness, she slipped behind the ample
figure of her friend till only her fluttering skirt betrayed her
presence. Perhaps she was saved something by this move; perhaps not.
She did not see the beam of joy sparkling in his eye as he greeted
Ermentrude; but she could not but mark the heaviness of his step as he
passed them by and wandered away into the shadows.

And that she understood. Ermentrude had not smiled upon him. To him, the
moment had brought pain.

It was enough. Now she knew.

But why had not Ermentrude smiled?

       *       *       *       *       *

A dormitory lighted only by the moon! Two beds close together; in one a
form of noble proportions, and in the other the meagre figure of a girl
almost buried from sight among pillows and huddled-up blankets. Both are
quiet save for an occasional shudder which shakes the bed of the latter.
Ermentrude lies like the dead, though the moonlight falls full upon her
face blanching it to the aspect of marble. Even her lashes rest moveless
on her cheek.

But she is not sleeping; she is listening--listening to the sobs, almost
inaudible, which now and then escape from the beloved one at her side. As
they grow fainter and fainter and gradually die away altogether till
stillness reigns through the whole dormitory, she rouses and bending
forward on her elbow, looks long and lovingly at the wet brow of her
sleeping mate. She then sinks back again into rigidity, with a low moan,
ending in the whispered words:

"He does not love,--not yet. A slight thing will turn him. Did I not see
him glance back twice, and both times at her? The look with which she
greeted him was so wonderful."

       *       *       *       *       *

A village street in Britanny; a parish church in the distance; two women
bidding each other farewell amid a group of wedding-guests, gay as the
heavens are blue.

"_Au revoir!_" was the whisper breathed by the bride into the ear of
the other. "_Au revoir_, my Ermentrude. May you have a happy year in
Switzerland!"

"_Au revoir_! little Madame. _You_ will be happy I know in those United
States to which you are going."

And the tears stood in the eyes of both.

"You will write?"

"I will write."

But the bride did not seem quite satisfied. Glancing about and finding
her young husband busy with his adieux, she drew her friend apart and
softly murmured:

"There is something I must say,--something I must know, before the sea
divides us. You remember the day we all left school and you went home
and I came to Britanny? Ermentrude, Achille tells me that on that day he
sought the whole house over for you till he came upon you in one of the
classrooms; and that you whom I had sometimes seen so sad were very gay
and told him between laughing and crying that you were bidding a solemn
farewell to all the nooks and corners of the old seminary, because your
fiancé awaited you at home, and there would be no coming back."

"I meant my music."

"He did not know that, Ermentrude," and here she laid her hands upon the
other's shoulders, drawing back as she did so to look earnestly up into
her face. "Was that done for me?"

They were too near for anything but the truth to pass from eye to eye.
Ermentrude tried to laugh and utter a quick _No, no!_ but the little
bride was not deceived. Again upon her face there appeared that wonderful
look of hers, which made her face for the moment verily beautiful, and
unclasping her hands, she threw them about the other's neck, whispering
in awed tones:

"Yet you loved him! loved him too!"

Then after a moment of silence dear to both their hearts, she drew back
to give her friend one other look, and quietly said:

"His heart is mine now, Ermentrude, wholly and truly mine. And so you
would have it be, I am sure. Life looks fair to me and very sweet; but
however fair, however sweet, that life is yours if ever you want it and
when you want it. The time may come--one never knows--when I can pay you
back this debt. Till then, let there be perfect trust and perfect love
between us. Give me your hand upon it--not just your lips--for I speak as
men speak when they mean to keep their word."

Their eyes met, their hands clasped; then the bridegroom drew away his
bride, and Ermentrude turned with bowed head and glistening eyes, to
enter upon the new life awaiting her in ways she had yet to tread.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second series of episodes opens with the meeting of a man and woman
on a rustic bridge spanning a Swiss chasm. They are strangers to each
other, yet both instinctively pause and a flush of intuitive feeling dyes
the cheek of each.

The eternal, ever-recurring miracle has happened. He sees Woman for the
first time, though he had thought himself in love before and had wandered
thus far in an effort to forget. So, likewise, with her. She had had her
fancies, or rather her one fancy; but when in strolling along this road
ahead of her party she saw rising between her and the glorious landscape
which had hitherto filled her eye the fine masculine head and perfect
figure of Carleton Roberts, this fancy floated from her mind like the
veriest thistledown, leaving it free to expand in fuller hopes and deeper
joys than visit many women even when they think they love.

Alas! why in that instant of mutual revelation had not the further grace
been given them of quick catastrophe shutting the door upon a future of
which neither could then dream or sense the coming doom.

It was not to be.

He passed, she passed, and for the time the look they gave each other was
all; but the world had been glorified for them both--and Destiny waited.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Good looks? Yes; but nothing else; very ordinary connections, very. A
little money, true. Her uncle, whom by the way I judge you have not seen,
will leave her a few thousands; but meanwhile he is a fixture--will not
leave her or let her leave him, which is a misfortune since in a social
way he is simply impossible. No sort of match for you, Roberts. Cut and
run while there is time; that's my advice to you, given in the most
friendly spirit."

"Thank you. As I have but just met Miss Taylor, don't you think such
advice is a little premature?"

"No, I don't. She is a woman who must be loved or left; that's all.
You've heard me."

Did Carleton Roberts heed these words? No. What man in the thrall of his
first romance ever did.

"You love me, Ermentrude?"

"I love you, Carleton."

"For a day, for a month or for a year?" he smiled.

"Forever," she answered.

"That's a long time," he murmured, with his eyes on a little clock
hanging in the shop window before which they had stopped in one of their
infrequent walks together. "A long time! That foolish little clock will
beat out the hours of its short life and go the way of all things, before
we shall hardly have entered upon the soul's 'forever.'"

"That clock will last our lifetime, Carleton. Afterward, love will not be
counted by hours."

As she said this she turned her face his way and he saw it in its full
flower with the light of heaven upon it. In later years he may have
forgotten the emotions of that moment, but they were the purest, the
freest from earthly stain that he was ever destined to know.

"I will love you _forever_," he whispered. "That little clock shall be my
witness." And he drew her into the shop.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Cuckoo!"

Ermentrude glanced up; the clock hung on her wall.

"Oh," she murmured, "each hour it will speak to me of him and his words,"
then softly, like one adream in Paradise:

        "I love but thee,
   And thee will I love to eternity."

Such was the event to her. What was it to him? Let us see:

A hotel room--a view of Pilatus, but with its top lost in enveloping
clouds.

Seated before it with pen in hand above a sheet of paper, Carleton
Roberts eyes these clouds but does not see them; he is hunting in his
brain for words and they do not come. Why? His mother's name is on the
page and he has only to write that she has been quite correct in her
judgment as to the unfitness of the marriage he had had in mind:--that
youth should mate with youth and that if she could see the glorious young
girl whose acquaintance he had made here, she would be satisfied with
his new choice which promised him the fullest happiness. Why then a sheet
yet blank and a hesitating hand, when all it had to do was to write?

Who can tell? Man knows little of himself or of the conflicting passions
which sway him this way or that, even when to the outward eye, and
possibly to the inner one as well, action looks easy.

Did he feel, without its reaching the point of knowledge, that this
mother of keenest expectation and highest hope would not be satisfied
with what this charming but undeveloped girl of middle class parentage
would bring him? Or was there, deep down in his own undeveloped nature, a
secret nerve alive to ambitions yet unnamed, to hopes not yet formulated,
which warned him to think well before he spoke the irrevocable word
linking a chain which, though twined with roses, was nevertheless a chain
which nothing on earth should have power to break.

He never sounded his soul for an answer to this question; but when he
rose, the paper was still blank. The letter had not been written.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I do not like secrecy."

"Only for a little while, Ermentrude. My mother is difficult. I would
prepare her."

"And Uncle!"

"What of Uncle?"

"He made me take an oath to-day."

"An oath?"

"That I would not leave him while he lived."

"And you could do that?"

"I could do nothing else. He's a sick man, Carleton. The doctors shake
their heads when they leave him. He will not live a year."

"A year? But that's an eternity! Can you wait, can I wait a year?"

"He loves me and I owe everything to him. Next week we go to Nice. These
are days of parting for you and me, Carleton."

Parting! What word more cruel. She saw that it shook him, and held her
breath for his promise that she should not be long alone. But it did not
come. He was taking time to think. She hardly understood his doing this.
Surely, his mother must be very difficult and he a most considerate son.
She knew he loved her; perhaps never with a more controlling passion than
at this moment of palpitating silence.

As she smiled, he caught her to his breast.

"We have yet a week," he cried, and left her hurriedly, precipitately.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was their last ride and they had gone far--too far, Ermentrude
thought, for a day so chilly and a sky so threatening. They had entered
gorges; they had skirted mountain streams, had passed a village, left a
ruined tower behind, and were still facing eastward, as if Lucerne had no
further claims upon them and the world was all their own.

As the snows of the higher peaks burst upon their view, she made an
attempt to stop this seeming flight.

"My uncle," she said. "He will be counting the hours. Let us go back."

Then Carleton Roberts spoke.

"Another mile," he whispered, not because he feared being overheard by
their driver, but because Love's note is instinctively low. "You are
cold; we shall find there a fire, and dinner--and--Listen, Ermentrude,--a
minister ready to unite us. We are going back, man and wife."

"Carleton!"

"Yes, dear, it is quite understood. Letters are urging my return to New
York. Your uncle is holding you here. I cannot face an uncertain
separation. I must feel that you are mine beyond all peradventure--must
be able to think of you as my wife, and that will hold us both and make
it proper for you to come to me if I cannot come to you, the moment
you are free to go where you will."

"But why this long ride, this far-away spot? Why couldn't a minister be
found in Lucerne? Is our marriage to be as secret as our engagement?
Is that what you wish, Carleton?"

"Yes, dear; for a little while, just for a little while, till I have seen
my mother, and rid our way of every obstacle to complete happiness. It
will be better. When one has promised to love _forever_, what are a few
weeks or months. Make me happy, dear. You have it in your power to do so.
Happy! When once I can whisper 'wife,' the world will not hold a happier
man than I."

Did she yield because of her own great longing? No, it was by that phrase
he caught her: _The world will not hold a happier man than I_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mountains! Icy peaks, with sides heavy with snow! And so near! Almost
they seemed to meet across the narrow valley. She gave them one quick
glance, then her eyes and her heart became absorbed in what she could see
of this Alpine village, holding up its head in the eternal snows like an
edelweiss on the edge of a glacier.

It was to be the scene of her one great act in life; the spot she was
entering as a maiden and would leave as a wife. What other spot would
ever be so interesting! To note its every detail of house and church
would not take long--it was such a little village, and the streets were
so few; and the people--why she could count them.

Afterward, she found that the exact number and the difference in color of
the short line of timbered houses stretching between them and the church
were imprinted on her brain; but she did not know it at the time for her
attention was mainly fixed upon the people when once she had seen them,
for there was a strangeness in their looks and actions she did not
understand, all the more that it seemed to have nothing to do either with
Carleton or herself.

It was not fear they showed, not exactly, though consternation was not
lacking in their aspect, so strangely similar in all, whether they were
men or women, or whether they stood in groups in the street or came out
singly on the doorstep to glance about and listen, though there seemed to
be nothing to listen to, for the air was preternaturally still.

"Carleton, Carleton," she asked as he came to lift her to the ground,
"see those people how oddly they act. The whole town is in the street.
What is the matter?"

"Nothing, except that if we do not hasten we shall have to return
unmarried. The minister is waiting for us."

"What, in the church?"

"Yes, dear. We are a little late."

She took his arm, and though they were a fine couple and the event was
almost an unprecedented one in that remote village, only a few followed
them; the rest hung round their homes or gazed with indecision at the
mountains or up and down along the empty roads.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Wilt thou have this woman...."

The ceremony had proceeded thus far and all seemed well, when with a rush
and a cry a dozen people burst into the building.

"The snows are moving!" rang up the aisles in accents of mad terror.
"Save yourselves!"

Then came the silence of emptiness. Every soul had left the church save
the three before the pulpit.

An avalanche! and the ceremony was as yet incomplete! Ermentrude never
forgot Carleton Roberts' look. Doubtless he never forgot hers. Meanwhile
the minister spoke.

"There is a chance for escape. Take it; the good God will pardon you."

But the bridegroom stood firm and the bride shook her head.

"Not till the words are said which make us man and wife," declared
Carleton Roberts. "Unless"--and here his perfect courtesy manifested
itself even in this crisis of life and death--"you feel it your duty to
carry what assistance you can to the saving of your frightened flock."

"God must save my flock," said the minister with a solemn glance upward.
"I am where my duty places me." And calmly as though the pews were
filled with guests and joy attended the ceremony instead of apprehended
doom, he proceeded with the rite.

"Wilt thou have this man...."

The glad "I will" leaped bravely from Ermentrude's lips; but it was lost
in loud calls and shrieks from without, mingled with that sound--terrible
to all who hear--impossible to describe--of the might of the hills made
audible in this down-rushing mass, now halting, now gathering fresh
momentum, but coming--always coming, till its voice, but now a threat,
swells into thunder in which all human cries are lost, and only from the
movement of the minister's lips can this couple see that the words which
make them one are being spoken.

Then comes the benediction, and with the falling of those holy hands, a
headlong rush into the open air--a vision of flying forms here, there,
and everywhere--men staggering under foolish burdens--women on their
knees with arms lifted to heaven or flung around their babes--hope lost
under the bowing mountain; and in the midst of it all, plain to the view
of all, the stranger's horse and carriage which, standing there, stamped
with undying honor these terrified villagers, who had seen and not
touched them though Death had them by the hair.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Quick! quick! You mother there with the child, get in, get in; there is
room here for one more."

But another got the place. The driver, reeling as he ran, sprang for the
empty seat and hung there between the wheels as the horses plunged and
tore away to safety just as the great mass with its weight of gathered
boulders and uprooted forests crashed in final doom upon that devoted
village, burying it from sight as though it had never been.

To safety? Yes, for two of them; the other, struck by a flying stone,
fell in the road and was covered in a trice. So close were they to
destruction's edge at this moment of headlong flight.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not till the painted towers encircling Lucerne had come again into sight
did the newly wedded pair find words or make the least attempt to speak.
Then Carleton kissed his bride and for a moment love was triumphant. Was
it triumphant enough to lead him to acknowledge their marriage? She
looked anxiously in his face to see and finally she asked:

"How much of this are we to tell, Carleton?"

"All about the catastrophe; but nothing more," he answered.

And while her heart retained its homage, the light in her eyes was
veiled.

Married but not acknowledged! Would it not have been better if the
avalanche had overwhelmed them? She almost thought so, till bending, he
murmured in her ear:

"I shall follow you soon. Did you think I could go on living without
you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Why so thoughtful, Ermentrude? You are not quite yourself to-day?"

"Uncle is very ill. The doctors say that he may not live a month."

"And does that grieve you?"

A yes was on her lips, but she did not utter it. Instead, she drew a
little ribbon from her breast, on which hung a plain gold ring, and
gazing earnestly at this token she remarked very quietly:

"Carleton, have you ever thought that but for this ring no proof remains
in all this world of our ever having been married?"

"But our hearts know it. Is that not enough?" he asked.

"For to-day, yes. But when uncle goes...."

His kisses finished the sentence for her, and love resumed its sway; but
when alone and wakeful on her pillow, she recalled his look, the sting of
her first doubt darted through her uneasy heart, and feeling eagerly
after the ring she tore it from its ribbon and put it on her finger.

"It is my right," she whispered. "Henceforth I shall wear it. He loves me
too well to quarrel with my decision. Now am I really his wife."

       *       *       *       *       *

Did she see a change in him? Did he come less frequently? Did he stay
less long? Was there uneasiness in his eye--coolness--languor? No, no.
It was her exacting heart which thus interpreted his look--which counted
the days--forgot his many engagements--saw impatience in the quickness
with which he corrected her faults in manner or language instead of the
old indulgence which met each error with a smile. Love cannot always keep
at fever-heat. He, the cynosure of the whole foreign element, had the
world at his feet here as in Lucerne. It needed no jealous eye to see
this; while she--well, she had her attractions too, as had been often
proved, and with God's help she would yet be a fit mate for him. What she
now lacked, she would acquire. She would watch these fine ladies who
blushed with pleasure at his approach, and when her time of mourning was
over she would astonish him with her graces and her appearance. For she
knew how to dress, yes, with the best of them, and hold her head and walk
like the queen she would feel herself to be when once she bore his name.
Patience then, till she had stored her mind and learned the ways he was
accustomed to in others. She had money enough now that her uncle was
dead, and she could do things....

Yes, but something had gone out of her face, and the ring hung loose on
her finger.

       *       *       *       *       *

And he? Had her fears read him aright? Had he grown indifferent or was
he simply perplexed? Let us watch him as he paces his hotel room one
glorious afternoon, now stopping to re-read a letter he held in his hand,
and now to gaze out with unseeing eyes to where the blue of the sea melts
into the blue of the sky on the far horizon.

Love had been sweet; but man has other passions, and he is in the grip of
the one mightiest in men of his stamp--the all-engrossing, all-demanding
one of personal ambition.

Without solicitation, without expectation even, a hand had been held out
to him whose least grasp meant success in the one field most to his
mind,--a political career under auspices which had never been known to
fail. But there were conditions attached--conditions which a year before
would have filled him with joy, but which now stood like a barrier
between him and his goal, unless.... But he was not yet ready to disavow
his wife, trample upon her heart, nay on his own as well;--that is,
without a struggle.

For the third time he read the letter which you will see was from his
mother.

  My Son:--I have an apology to make and a bit of news to give you. When
  I urged you to give up Lucie and to seek distraction abroad, I felt
  that I was doing justice to your immaturity and saving you from ties
  which might very easily jeopardize your future happiness.

  But I have lately changed my mind. In seeing more of her I have not
  only learned her worth but the advantage such a woman would be to one
  of your tastes and promise. And she loves you more devotedly, perhaps,
  than you have loved her. How do I know this? Let me tell you of an
  interview I had with a certain relative of hers last night. I allude to
  her brother, and for a recognized boss buried out of sight in politics,
  he has more heart in his breast than I have ever given him credit for.
  Not having children of his own, he has centered his affections on this
  choice little sister of his, and finding her far from happy, came to
  see me yesterday evening with this proposition: If I would consent to
  your union with Lucie, and withdraw my opposition to your immediate
  marriage, he would take your future in charge and put you in the way of
  political advancement only to be limited, as he says, by your talents,
  which he is good enough to rate very high.

  After this, how can I do otherwise than bid you follow your impulses
  and marry Lucie in spite of the disparity of years to which I have
  hitherto taken exception. Were she as poor as she is accounted rich,
  I should say the same, now that I have sounded the depths of her lovely
  disposition and the rare culture of a mind which those seven years have
  enriched beyond what is usual even in women of intellect. Her money
  does not influence me in her favor, nor does it weigh with me in my
  present opinion of her complete fitness for the position you are so
  eager to give her. That this will make you happy I know. Let it hasten
  your return which cannot be too speedy.

This was the bombshell which had disturbed Carleton Roberts' complacency,
bared his own soul to his horrified view, and revealed to him the
weakness of his moral nature which he had hitherto considered strong. For
his first impulse was one of recoil, not only from the secret marriage
which shut him off from these new hopes, but from his youthful bride as
well. He found himself weary of his flowery bonds and eager for a man's
life in his native city. Oh, why had he urged this immature girl to take
the ride which had led him into slavery to one who could not advance him
in life, however queen-like she moved and talked and smiled upon the
world from the heights of her physical perfections. It was brain that was
needed--an understanding like Lucie's, tempered, like hers, by years, not
months, of culture and refined association.

It was at this point he paused in his restless walk and looked for
inspiration to the far-off waters of the bluest of all seas.

Suddenly he resumed his walk; then quickly stopping again sat down at his
desk and with an air of desperate haste began a letter to his mother with
the announcement:

  It is too late. Unfortunately for your scheme, I am already....

He never got any further. A fresh impulse drove him into the street. He
could not thus summarily settle his future fate. It meant too much to
him. He must take time to think. His heart clamors loudly for its rights;
he is only twenty-six--and in a rush of feeling which should have been
his salvation, he turned toward that nest among the flowers where help
was to be had if help was to come at all in this crisis of conflicting
passions.

       *       *       *       *       *

The hour was noon, one which he had never chosen before for a visit to
Ermentrude. Would he find her in? Would she be in spirits to meet him?
Would she look beautiful--worthy of his name, worthy of the greatest
sacrifice a man can make for a woman? He half hoped that she would;
that he would find his chains riveted and secure beyond the power of any
force to break.

As his musings faltered, he turned the knob of the little side door and
went in. As he did so a shower of rose-leaves fell upon him from the
vines enveloping the balcony.

He shuddered slightly and passed down the hall. Everything was very
still.

She was asleep. Lying on a couch in utter weariness or pain, she had
drifted off into the land of dreams, and he felt that he had a moment of
respite. He could look and weigh the question: Love or a quick success? A
weakling's paradise or the goal of the strong man?

Meanwhile, she was not as beautiful as he thought. But she was more
touching--less robust, less bounteous of aspect, more child-like, more
appealing,--a woman who, if he were no more of a man than he appeared to
be in this hurly-burly of pleasure and fashion, might in time do him
credit and hold him back from follies.

But he was not just the man these casual friends and admirers considered
him. There was much more to him than that. He knew this better than Lucie
did or her powerful brother, or even his adoring mother. Great
opportunities awaited him and a large space in the affairs of men if not
of nations. Such confidence did he feel in himself at this fevered moment
that he never doubted that eventually he would gain all this, even with
the handicap of a good-looking but unsophisticated wife.

But not quickly;... step by step perhaps ... and he was longing to take
it all at a bound.

Poor girl! and she lay there under his eyes all unmindful of his conflict
or of the fact that her fate as well as his was trembling in the balance;
unmindful, though her dreams were far from joyous--or why the tear
welling from between her lashes as he gazed.

She was alone in the house; he knew it by the complete silence. He could
look and look and study her every feature, without fear of interruption;
wait for her waking and be ready to meet her first glance of tender
astonishment which might restore him to his better self.

Drawing up a chair, he sat down; then started upright again with dilating
eyes and a strange shadow on his brow. One of her arms lay uppermost
and on the hand--almost as fine as Lucie's, but not quite,--he saw the
ring--his ring, and it hung loosely. The poor child was growing thin,
very thin. "If she were to hold her hand downward," he muttered to
himself, "I believe that ring would fall off." Did some stray glimpse of
his own features, wearing a look never seen on them before, confront him
from some near-by mirror that he started so guiltily as this heart murmur
rose to his lips? Or was it at a thought, hideous but tempting, which
held him, gained upon him and soon absolutely possessed him, till his own
hand went out stealthily and with hesitations toward those helpless
fingers of hers, now approaching, now withdrawing, and now approaching
them again but not touching them, great as his impulse was to do so,
for fear she should wake, while yet the devil gripped his arm and lit up
baleful fires in his eyes.

He had remembered those words of hers: "Have you ever thought that with
the exception of this ring no proof exists in all the world of our ever
having been married?" Remember them? He had not remembered them; he had
heard them, sounding and resounding in his ears till the whole room
seemed to palpitate with them. Then the devil made his final move.
Ermentrude shuddered, and her position changing, the hand which had
been uppermost fell down at her side and the ring slipped--left her
finger--paused on the edge of the couch--then came to rest in his palm
held out to receive it.

He had not drawn it from her hand. Fate had restored it. As he forced
himself to look at it lying in his grasp, a faintness as of death seized
and held him for a moment; then this passed and he slowly rose and step
by step with sidelong looks and hair starting upright on his forehead,
like one who has walked in blood and sees the trail of guilt following
him along the floor, he left her side--he left the room--he left the
house--and the rose-leaves fell about him once more, maddening him with
their color, maddening him with the memories inseparable from their
sweetness--a sweetness which spoke of her, of love, and the attachment
of a true heart destined to grieve for a little while at least, for he
was never going back, never, never.

There was no eye to see, and no tongue to tell him that the seed,
destined to flower into awful crime some dozen or more years later, put
forth its first bud at this fatal hour.

       *       *       *       *       *

He wrote her a letter. He had the grace to do that. Addressing her simply
as Ermentrude, he told her that he had been called home to enter upon the
serious business of life. That he was not likely to come back, and as she
was not really his wife, however pleasing the fiction had been in which
they had both indulged, it seemed to him wiser to end their happy romance
thus suddenly and while much of its glamour remained, than to linger on
and see it decay day by day before their eyes till nothing but bitterness
remained. He loved her and felt the wrench more than she did, but duty
and his obligations as a man, etc., etc., till it ended in his signature
limited to initials like his love.

Despicable! the work of a man without conscience or heart! Yes, and he
knew it, and for weeks his sleep was broken by visions and his waking
hours rendered dreadful by fears. How had she taken this cool assumption
that the ceremony performed in the path of the snow was voided by lack of
proof? To whom had she ascribed the loss of her ring, and what must she
think of him? He had left Nice almost immediately, but wherever he went,
in whatever hotel he stayed, or through whatever street he passed, he was
always expecting to see her figure rise up before him in the majesty of
innocence and outraged love.

Thus several weeks passed, and seeing nothing of her, hearing nothing
from her, a different apprehension darkened his days and despoiled him of
rest at night. Grief if not shame had killed her; and the weight of her
fancied doom lay heavy on his heart. At last he could bear it no longer,
and stealing back to Nice he entered it one dark night and prepared to
learn for himself what he feared to trust to the discretion of another.
Alone, with hidden face and heavily throbbing heart, he trod the familiar
ways and encircled the familiar walls. Had she been there----

But the windows were blank and the place desolate, and he fled the spot
and the town, with his questions unasked and his fears unallayed. In two
days he had sailed for home. With the ocean between them he might forget;
and in time he did. As week followed week, and the silence he had half
trusted, half feared, remained unbroken, his equanimity gradually
returned, and he prepared to face the prospect of his new marriage much
as a man who watches for a dreaded door to open moves with restored
confidence about his affairs, when at last convinced that the door is
padlocked and the key lost.

One precaution and one only he was wise enough to take. He told his story
to Lucie's brother, and left it to him to say whether or not he should
marry his sister. And the answer was yes; that if trouble came he would
see him through it. A marriage which could not be proved was no marriage,
and as for anything else, Lucie's happiness must not be sacrificed to a
boy's peccadillos. What were a few wild oats sown by a man of his
promise?

And was this the end? Did Ermentrude accept her doom without a struggle?

Let us see.

       *       *       *       *       *

One afternoon in June, there entered the parlor of the old-fashioned
mansion of the Roberts family a lady who had asked to see Mrs. Roberts on
business of an important nature. Though plainly clad, her appearance
possessed an elegance which insured respect; but when alone and seated in
the darkest corner of the great drawing room she put up a trembling hand
to thrust back her veil, the countenance thus revealed betrayed an
emotion hardly in keeping with the quiet bearing with which she had
advanced under the servant's eye.

His home! and these the surroundings amid which he had grown to manhood!
Why should the sight of all this rouse emotions she believed eliminated
by a treachery most cruel in face of promises most sacred? Why, as she
looked about, and noted object after object which must have been there
previous to his birth, did she see him as a child and boy and not as the
man who had first won and then deserted her? She would not have had it so
at this hour when strength was needed rather than tenderness. But she
could not help her nature, or still the wild surging of her rebellious
heart, as his portrait seen upon the wall challenged her constancy and
whispered of the hour when his "forever" echoed her "forever" and the
compact for eternity was sealed.

He had broken this compact--broken it soon--broken it before the
honeymoon had passed. But she! Was she to show no firmer spirit whose
love was of the soul and took no note of time? She was his wife, and
acknowledged or unacknowledged, must yet prove to be his blessing though
he--he----

But this would not do. The interview before her called for calmness. She
would not add to the turbulence of her spirits by another glance at what
brought back too much of the past to fortify her for the impending
struggle. She had to do credit to his choice, to impress a difficult
woman with her dignity as a wife. She must not shake nor weep.

Yet when she heard a step at the door, instinct told her to pull down her
veil till the first greetings were over--a precaution for which she was
deeply grateful when in another moment a young woman entered instead of
her husband's mother for whom she had asked and whom she naturally
expected to see.

In the humiliation of the moment, her disappointment took words and she
muttered within herself:

"A companion or possibly a relative. I am to be put off with kindly
excuses; begged to state my errand--rehearse my claims and my hopes to
some gentle go-between! I have not strength for that. I must see the
mother--the mother. God give me wisdom and keep me calm--calm."

Meanwhile the young woman she had instinctively called gentle advanced
into the center of the room. Mechanically, Ermentrude rose to meet her,
and thus stepped into a better light. Tragedy came with her. This it was
impossible not to see--not to feel. But the warning which her aspect gave
passed as she spoke and said in tones a little tremulous, perhaps, but
with an air of perfect courtesy:

"I had hoped to see Mrs. Roberts herself."

The smile with which this was greeted, the flush of pride and the joy of
possession which lit the other's pleasing features as she replied, "I am
Mrs. Roberts," should have carried the truth to Ermentrude.

But they did not. She looked surprised--baffled, and after the briefest
hesitation, observed:

"I am a stranger in this city and have doubtless made some mistake. The
Mrs. Roberts I have called to see--and I was told she lived here--is the
mother of a gentleman of the name of----"

She could not speak it.

But the other could.

"Carleton?" she asked; and at Ermentrude's agitated nod, added with
friendly interest: "This is her home; but she has left it for a while to
us. I am Mr. Carleton Roberts' wife."

       *       *       *       *       *

There are blows which prostrate; there are others which sear but leave
the body intact--feet still supporting it--eyes still gazing ahead
unmoved--lips moving with mechanical exactness and sometimes still
retaining their smile. Only the soul which gave life to all of this is
dead. The image is there but the spirit is gone; and if sufficiently
preoccupied, the one who struck the blow sees no change. So was it with
Ermentrude and Lucie.

"We are looking for mother to return next week," added the latter as
Ermentrude stood stark and silent before her. "Would you like to leave a
message for her?"

At these words uttered with the sweetness of a rich and sympathetic
nature, the soul returned to Ermentrude's body. With a long and earnest
look which took in the full measure of the other's personality, radiant
with happiness and the consciousness of an assured wifedom, she answered
softly:

"No, I will leave no message," and turned as if to go.

"Nor any name?" queried Lucie, eying with admiration the noble lines of
a figure with whose perfect proportions her own could never hope to
compete.

"Nor any name," came back in indescribable accents from the doorway.

Lucie paused, and gazing in vague trouble after her rapidly disappearing
visitor, murmured to herself, "Who is she?"

But the one who could have answered her was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Carleton, you seldom see such a woman. Younger than I, she had the poise
of a woman of thirty. Who could she have been?"

"Describe her."

"I wish I could; I hardly saw her face; it was her figure, her voice, her
way of moving and holding herself. I felt as small and quiet as a little
mouse beside her. Only I was happy and she was not. That much I feel now
that I recall her look in leaving."

"Was she American or--or foreign?" he asked, hiding his trouble, for a
great fear had seized him.

"She had an English accent which added very much to her charm."

"Forget her." For a moment his accent was almost fierce, then he laughed
the matter off, assuring this bride of a month that she made him cross
with her self-depreciation, that there was no one of finer mien and
manner than herself, the chosen of his heart upon whom he always looked
with pride. Which subtle tribute to what was her greatest charm
accomplished its end; she did forget the stranger.

But he did not; he knew what was before him and prepared himself for the
inevitable meeting which would be followed by--what?

Not by what he had every right to expect and evidently did. Ermentrude
had learned all she would both of this marriage and of the woman who had
supplanted her, and had made her resolve. This he saw as they came
together in the isolation of a quiet corner of the Park, and so was not
greatly surprised, though a little moved, as after the first few words,
and with an earnest look, she said:

"I am your wife, I, Ermentrude Roberts, married to you in the sight of
God and man. I cannot prove it, but as you once said, our hearts know it
and will continue to know it as long as either of us lives. But I am not
going to obtrude my claims upon you, Carleton, or stand like a specter in
your path. Had this woman you have deceived been weak or foolish or
unloving, or indeed anything but what she is, I might have held to my
rights and insisted upon a recognition which would have profited you in
the end. But I cannot shame that woman--I can neither shame her nor bring
her to grief. You have broken one heart, but you shall be saved the
remorse of breaking two. I had rather suffer myself. I am alone in the
world. I have means. I can ultimately be useful and face good men and
women without fear. Why then should I drag down to the dust one as
innocent as myself, or take from you what may make you the man I once
thought you and hope to see you again. But that I may have strength for
this and for all the sacrifices it involves, you must declare here, now,
in this open park where we stand, with no one within sight much less
within hearing, that I am your wife."

"You are my wife."

"It is enough. Now I can say what otherwise could never have left my
lips. I love you, Carleton, love you to eternity as I promised; but I
shall never seek you again, and you can go on your way unperturbed. I
have consolations here," laying her hand on her breast. "It will no
longer be my portion to watch your face for signs of a failing regard.
What I have is mine, and that is the undying memory of two months of
perfect happiness."

She would have said more, but she saw that he had been greatly shaken.
She feared the renewal of a flame not yet altogether extinct in a heart
which once beat for her alone, and so contenting herself with a low
farewell, she was turning swiftly away, when one last thought made her
pause and say:

"I cannot return you your ring. It is lost. I was careless with it and it
fell unnoticed from my hand. But to-night I will send you back the little
clock which unites our initials. Destroy it if you will, but if some
sentiment bids you keep it, let it be this one and no other: 'I recall
Ermentrude only that I may be faithful to Lucie.'"

With a low cry his head fell upon his breast in extreme self-abasement,
then he slowly lifted his eyes and seeing in her face a full knowledge of
his sin, murmured in overwhelming shame and contrition:

"You know me for the wretch I am. I have the ring; it fell from your hand
into mine one day while you lay asleep. I do not ask for forgiveness,
but this I promise you, Ermentrude:--if the little clock comes back, I
will make a place in it for this ring, and neither clock nor ring shall
leave me again while I live."

Instinctively her hands went out to him, then they fell back on her
breast.

"God will hold you to that promise," she said; and melted away from his
sight in the mist which had been gradually enveloping them without being
seen by either.

Thus the struggle ended for him, which for her had simply begun.

Not till she found herself in the South with her girl friend, Antoinette
Duclos, did she discover that the closest bond which can unite man and
woman held her in spite of her late compact with Carleton Roberts. Should
she reassert her rights and demand that the father should recognize his
child? Her generous heart said No. The old arguments held good. She
appealed to Antoinette for advice.

The result we know. When Antoinette's own child died at birth, she took
Ermentrude's to her heart and brought it up as her own. There was little
difficulty in this, as the Professor had already yielded to a Southern
fever and lay at rest in a New Orleans cemetery.

And this brings us to another episode.

       *       *       *       *       *

The widow in fact and the widow in heart stood face to face above a
sleeping infant. They were both dressed for traveling and so was the
babe. The dismantled rooms showed why. Young still, for the years of
either's romance had been few, each face, as the other contemplated it,
told the story of sorrow which Time, for all its kindliness, would
never efface. But the charm of either remained--perceptible at this hour
as perhaps it would never be again to the same extent. Antoinette basked
in the light of Ermentrude's beauty ennobled by renunciation, and
Ermentrude in that wonderful look in her friend's plain face which came
at great crises and made her for the moment the equal of the best.

They had said little; and they said little now, as is the way of the
strong amongst us when an act is to be performed which wrings the heart
but satisfies the conscience.

The child was legitimate. It must not grow up under a shadow. To insure
its welfare and raise no doubt in its own mind as it grew in knowledge
and feeling, the two women must separate. No paltering with this duty,
and no delay. A month of baby cries and baby touches might weaken the
real mother. It should be now. It should be to-day.

But first, a final word--a parting question. It was uttered by
Ermentrude.

"You will go back to France?"

"Yes. I can easily live there. And you, Ermentrude?"

"To New York. I shall never go far from him. But he and I will never
meet. My world will not be his world. I shall make my own place."

"As Ermentrude Taylor?"

"As Mrs. Ermentrude Taylor. I am a wife. I shall never forget that fact."

"And the child? Will you never come to see it?"

Ermentrude's head fell and she stood a long time without answering. Then
with a steady look she calmly said:

"I can think of but one contingency which might shake my resolution
to leave her yours without the least interruption from me. If
_he_--Antoinette, if he were left alone and childless, I might see
my duty differently from now. You must be prepared for that."

"Ermentrude, when you send me this little shoe--See, I will leave one on
and give you the other, I shall know that you are coming, or that you
want the child. My life is yours as I once promised, and do you think I
would hold back the child?"

And again their hands met as once before, in that strong clasp, which
means:

"Trust me to the death and beyond it."

       *       *       *       *       *

With Antoinette it was to the death, as we have seen. Warned by
Ermentrude of the appalling results of their plan to bring father and
child together, and entreated to fly lest her story should imperil
the secret upon the preservation of which his very life now hung, she
answered to the call as she had promised, and thus acquitted her debt
though she failed to save him.

Of her previous act in disfiguring his photograph in her temporary
lodging-place, we shall never know the full story. The picture had been
hers for years, given her by Ermentrude on their parting, so that the
child should not be without some semblance of her father even if she
should not know him as such, and it was to secure this clue to their now
doubly dangerous secret that Madame Duclos ransacked her baggage previous
to her flight from the New York hotel. But whether its destruction in the
peculiar manner we know was the result of simple precaution, or of a
feeling of antagonism so strong against this destroyer of her beloved's
peace, that it had to be expended in some way before she felt strong
enough for that supreme sacrifice in his favor toward which events seemed
hurrying her, may be known in _Eternity_ but will never be told in
_Time_.

       *       *       *       *       *

And Ermentrude? What of her? Alone, robbed of husband and child and
friend--where shall we look for her in this world of extreme tribulation?
Search the hospitals of France where they press closest to the trenches.
There will you find the woman who losing all has found much. Blessing
and blest! the angel of the battlefield whom the bullets spare since her
work on earth is not yet accomplished!

